Dr Abiy Ahmed went Wolkit and discussed with the public.
In his speech, he pointed out that the people should live in harmony.
Peace is important as the environment has many graces.
Young people should respect the elders.
No problem should arise in future.
As some commentators have pointed out, it is often politicians who cause problems in the place.
If everyone at the leadership level is checked from top to bottom, there will be a change in the environment.
This issue should be closely monitored.
The Commercial Bank of Ethiopia is a testament to Ethiopia’s capacity in building institutions and passing them on to future generations.
It is delighting to see that the bank, on its 80th anniversary completed this state-of-the-art building.
There is the need to build institutions that continue to learn from the past and redeem seasons. 
In order for our banks to compete with international banks, they need far more modernization in terms of manpower and operation aside erecting such magnificent buildings.
Our stabilization efforts.
Have been successful.
Today, I’m quite pleased to have been among the peace loving people of Dembidolo in Qellem Wellega where we launched the 50km Dembidolo- Gambela road project. 
Qellem Wellega remains one of the high potential growth corridors in the country. 
By being guardians of our collective peace, we can realize the productive potential of this area together.
After a two year interruption due to COVID-19, Ethiopia welcomes the resumption of the AU Summit in its capital city Addis Ababa which has been gearing up to warmly receive our fellow brothers and sisters.
Thank you to all those that have joined us in Addis Ababa for the AU Summit. #Ethiopia welcomes you always.
My greatest appreciation to my brother His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan for the warm welcome accorded to my delegation and I. 
We discussed bilateral and regional issues as well as explored ways of further strengthening our ties.
We visited Kabribayah this morning, which is one of many host communities in the Somali Regional State supporting drought affected displaced persons.
In the interim, we will scale the provision of water trucks, food, animal feed and essential medicines.
while we accelerate the small dams projects we have embarked upon to support water management in lowland areas,as a pathway to circumventing future droughts.
As we celebrate brave members of our National Defense Forces today, we also inaugurate the new Headquarters befitting our heroic force
I commend President Erdogan for sustaining a platform that continues to advance and promote mutually beneficial cooperation between Turkey and African countries. 
This Summit is an important mechanism for development cooperation.
My delegation and I met with President Erdogan today in a bilateral meeting on the sidelines of the #TurkeyAfricaSummit. 
The historical relations between our two countries have always been rooted in mutual respect. 
Our partnership continues based on constructive engagement.
My appreciation to President Macky Sall of Senegal, President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa and President Felix Tshisekedi of the DRC for the constructive phone discussions. 
We will continue working on strengthening bilateral and continental relations.
As a founding member of both the United Nations and the African Union, #Ethiopia has been a proponent of multilateralism rooted in respect for national sovereignty. 
I have held productive phone discussions on current issues with UNSG Antonio Guterres and AUC Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat.
Ethiopia continues to prioritize strengthening relations with our neighboring countries.
I’ve held extensive phone discussions today with the leaders of Djibouti, Kenya, Uganda, Somalia, Eritrea and South Sudan. 
We will continue working together on bilateral and regional issues.
In reiterating that a continent of around 1.3 billion people needs a permanent voice and seat at the UNSC, represented through a bloc.
I also join other African leaders.
Issues and decisions that concern the continent cannot continue being addressed without continental representation.
Congratulations!
Victory always with Ethiopia 
My appreciation to all high school students and teachers that are taking this week to support our farming communities with harvest. 
In unity, we will continue persevering as a nation!
Ethiopians and friends of Ethiopia around the world, join the #GreatEthiopianHomeComing Challenge.
1 million by January 7, 2022
The People of Southwestern Ethiopia have joined the federation as the eleventh region.
This is a testament to the journey of reform we have taken in the exercise of political rights. 
Diversity is one of the pillars of unity. 
A federal system is a system in which the people govern themselves and build their country.
We have demonstrated this in practice. 
Congratulations to the people of Southwest Ethiopia for exercising your constitutional rights in a peaceful, legal and democratic manner to establish the 11th region
Medemer is about coming together beyond lines of division. 
In the regional integration efforts we have been undertaking the past 3 years, the people to people ties have been critical. 
My appreciation to Ethiopians & Horn Region Diaspora who are emulating Medemer by coming together. 
NoMore
While there are many struggles and discomforts we may have to face as the nation confronts both external and internal threats.
I ask all Ethiopians to stand in unity and ride this passing momentary wave. 
Standing together we CAN overcome! 
We have done it before. 
And we will do it now.
Resilience.
My fellow Ethiopians, let us not forget that we are also engaged in a sophisticated narrative war waged against the nation with many using disinformation as a pathway for their sinister moves. 
Each Ethiopian must play a role in pushing back and reversing the distorted narrative.
In unity we can write our own story.
Nation building is a collective effort. 
Each one of us plays a critical role in #Ethiopia’s success.
Let’s continue building on these efforts.
I welcome my dear brother President Uhuru Kenyatta to his second home.
The beautiful #Ethiopia one is rarely told about.
The #Ethiopia that her children will continue striving for as a united force. 
ResilientlyOnwards
Productive phone call with Prime Minister of Canada @JustinTrudeau on bilateral issues.
I would like to thank Prime Minister Justin for his sincere friendship and support to Ethiopia.
Some may continue trying to strip us off truth.
Context and recent realities, yet none can snatch away our collective dignity.
We are proud Ethiopians. 
We are proud Africans. 
Stand tall, stand firm and stand together for #Ethiopia!
The democratically elected sovereign government of Ethiopia stands ready to work constructively with friends of Ethiopia.
In addressing temporal challenges & realizing dev’t goals per the reforms journey started. 
We remain committed to progress albeit the obstacles encountered.
Held a fruitful call discussion with Prime Minister Stefan Löfven on various bilateral and regional issues of mutual interest.
I greatly appreciate Sweden for the lasting contribution to Ethiopia's reform journey.
Overcoming a turbulent period is a mark of national resilience. 
While we are being tested on many fronts, our collective will to realize the path we have embarked upon has strengthened us.
Despite all attempting to hold us back, let’s continue moving forward in unity #Ethiopia.
Diligence in being faithful exhibits concern for generations and dedication to uplift our country. 
Ethiopia thanks trustworthy and transparent taxpayers. 
Last year on the same platform, I called upon the business community to fight corruption alongside your work.
Today, we have given special recognition to those who responded to that call. 
In the years to come, I entrust you to continue in being role models who envision and prioritize Ethiopia and future generations.
Banana cluster farming productivity
This season’s crop production in the Somali region is very promising. 
Our focus throughout the country will continue to be on food security and on strengthening our capacity for self reliance.
As Ministers and State Ministers comprising the new government undergo induction this week, I wish them well in dispensing their duties through a servant leader disposition. 
The people of this great country deserve nothing short of this.
Welcome to #Ethiopia Brother Muhammadu Buhari, President of Nigeria.
Pleased to welcome to #Ethiopia my brother Macky Sall, President of Senegal.
The National Security Council has undertaken an evaluation of peace and security issues throughout the country.
And set direction for subsequent tasks to carry out.
The holidays give us the opportunity to extend our giving with others.
Sharing hope and good wishes with those in our amidst and afar.
As we welcome the New Year, let’s include the less fortunate in our giving.
A united Africa is the foundation for our continent’s growth.
Our natural resources and human capital are sufficient to catapult Africa into greatnesses if we commit to working together. 
The time for #Africa is now!
My appreciation to President @NakufoAddo for receiving my delegation and I at the Presidential Palace in Accra for a discussion on a wide range of issues. 
Ethiopia and Ghana will work closely on bilateral and African issues of common interest.
Thank you to President Macky Sall for the warm reception today in Dakar. 
The relations between our two countries is founded on the spirit of pan-Africanism which enabled the establishment of the OAU/AU. 
We have agreed to further build on this foundation and work together on African issues.
Congratulations to all Ethiopians in all corners of the country for finalizing a successful #GreenLegacy season this year.
With 6.7bil seedlings planted, surpassing our set target.
We will struggle for Ethiopia in every aspect.
Ethiopia wil succeed!
Success is an outcome of diligence. 
We launched #GreenLegacy in 2019 aiming for 20bil seedlings in 4 years. 
As we wind down 2021 planting season, our 3 year total achievement is 18bil planted. 
At each juncture we have exceeded annual set targets.
#Ethiopia will continue on this success trajectory in other areas building on the unity and positive goodwill of its people!
The time for #Africa is now! 
Together we can climb faster out of the pit of poverty.
Together we can climb insecurity and begging for dignity. 
Through economic integration, pooling our resources and knowledge.
We can collectively realise Agenda 2063.
Well done and congratulations to #Ethiopia’s daughter Yalemzerf Yehualaw for winning and setting world record in the women's half marathon. 
Congratulations.
Such excellence and unique achievement is a source of national pride and inspiring for many!
Thank you to President @PaulKagame for warm welcome afforded to me and my delegation. 
We held good discussions on bilateral and regional issues of mutual significance
My appreciation to President @kagutamuseveni for a warm welcome to Uganda and important deliberations on various bilateral and regional issues. 
I look forward to meeting again soon.
Congratulations to Tigist Gezahagn Menigstu for winning the Women’s 1,500m and becoming #Ethiopia’s first Paralympic Games gold medalist. 
#Ethiopia is proud of you!
About five weeks ago we launched the annual house renovations in the Aware area. 
This morning we handed over the completed houses to elderly who were living in dilapidated houses. 
I continue calling upon all citizens to join these efforts in bringing respite to affected communities.
Despite the tremendous challenges Ethiopia has been faced with in the domestic political environment, as well as the unprecedented effects of COVID-19.
I shared at today’s G20 Compact with Africa that the government is committed to continue with its economic reforms. 
The achievements in the past years are indications of our commitment and potential. 
Ethiopia is committed to continue to implement macro-financial and investment climate reforms to improve the framework for private investment in the country.
Thank you to President Salva Kiir for the commitment to strengthen ties between our two countries.
In our discussions, we have also explored the necessity to build on economic ties through infrastructure development. 
All-weather friends like South Sudan are essential in our time of need.
Salva Kiir and his delegation for an official working visit to Ethiopia.
I warmly welcome President
Our future is green and food secure if we double down on our agricultural productivity milestones of the past three years.
By intensifying our agricultural productivity, we move closer to self sufficiency.
#Ethiopia united, we can do plenty!
My appreciation to all guardians of Ethiopia throughout the country that have shown their support to the Ethiopian National Defense Forces and stand in solidarity with national efforts being undertaken to protect this victorious nation!
May god protect Ethiopia and its people!
Back home after having a precious time with His Excellency, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.
#Ethiopia will never forget the critical time cooperation the people and government of Turkey extended to us.
Thank you to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan for warmly receiving my delegation and I to Turkey today.
The agreements we have signed are a strengthening of our relations.
I appreciate Turkey’s support in #Ethiopia’s development and stability.
An ‘I can do’ attitude is a victory attitude! 
Yeabsera Shiferaw, a young woman of 21 years, is the embodiment of such a winning attitude and resilience. 
Pleased to meet such young people who are determined against any odds.
#Ethiopia: Donate blood for the armed forces.
Renovate the homes of those in need. 
Plant your #GreenLegacy print. 
Double down on agriculture productivity. 
When we each do our part, the whole comes together!
The Council of Ministers are presenting annual progress and milestones this morning.
In our review of performance of the EC 2013 budget year has been reviewed.
Still we need more effort to utilize the full potencial of our country.
#ResilientlyOnwards
We have continued planting our #GreenLegacy.
#Ethiopia’s climate resilient and food security ambitions will be realized through her children.
I am deeply saddened by the passsing of Abebech Gobena who has been Ethiopia’s icon of compassion. 
My heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and the many whose lives she impacted.
I met with political party heads this morning, a week after the 6th National Elections, to express my gratitude for their contribution in enabling a peaceful election in which #Ethiopia came out a winner. 
We also discussed their assessment of challenges and gaps that surfaced in the electoral process as lessons learnt to strengthen our nascent democracy.
African Leadership Excellence Academy.
Today we inaugurated the African Leadership Excellence Academy.
Last week we had announced that this Saturday will be a working day in lieu of Government Offices closing on Monday for the 6th National Elections. 
Therefore, i would like to remind all Government Offices to remain open tomorrow and provide services.
This morning I visited with impoverished households in the Aware area to participate in our annual house renovations program.
In this area we will renovate up to 15 households. 
I encourage all with the means to pool resources and engage in supporting fellow Ethiopians live a dignified life.
The Council of Ministers today endorsed the renaming of the ‘Meles Zenawi Leadership Academy’ to the ‘African Leadership Excellence Academy’.
 Together with the name change, the academy aims to position itself as a premiere learning institution nurturing growth oriented mindsets with the capacity meet the demands of 21st century leadership.
June 21, 2021 is a historic day for #Ethiopia.
All sections of society have gone out to cast their voice in our nation’s first free and fair election.
Pictures are worth a thousand words and they show the earnestness, commitment to peace and the democratic process by our people. 
Ethiopia won yesterday. 
Ethiopia will keep on winning!
Constructed with the purpose of providing for the needy, I reviewed the progress of a bread factory being constructed through the First Lady’s Office and through the generous support of @MohamedBinZayed. 
With a 1 million per day output capacity when fully operational, the goal is to have up to 10 bread factories in each major city through government initiative and private sector support.
This morning I inspected one of the city’s mega projects- the Pushkin-Gotera road project that has been under construction in the past few months. 
Built at a cost of Birr 1.5billion, the 3.8km road currently at 70% completion rate will tremendously ease traffic congestion once completed. 
Together with the inspection, as citizens go out to vote, we’ve also planted our #GreenLegacy print.
Ahead of the 6th National Elections tomorrow June 21 - 2021, the National Election Security Strategic Command met this morning to assesses final preparedness in ensuring the citizens can go out to cast their vote peacefully. 
Extensive work has been undertaken to ensure that the security sector is deployed nationally as well as through the aid of technology to respond effectively to identified and emerging threats. 
I encourage all citizens to be vigilant of their surroundings as they go out to cast their vote tomorrow. 
And also be assured that the Government has made adequate investments and preparations for a peaceful and democratic Election Day.
Thank you to MIND Ethiopia for the initiative to bring all political parties together this evening in a well wishing ceremony. 
Indeed Ethiopia will win!
#Ethiopia, how can we not marvel at our abundance natural resources? 
Nature has gifted us with plenty.
Let's work hard in unity to turn plenty into productivity.
In laying a cornerstone for the construction of the Mizan Aman airport in the South Region.
We are laying a foundation for catalyzing prosperity in the region.
A look at #Ethiopia’s tea production potential.
Our unity is our beauty. 
It is our strength. 
Today, from Jimma to Agaro to Beshaha, the peaceful energy and resilient spirit exhibited is a catalyst for us to serve our people even more.
Jimma thank you for your love and solidarity!
The challenge I have put forth for all Ethiopians is to go out June 21st.
To cast your vote.
The effort to adorn Ethiopia by planting your #GreenLegacy print. 
All Government offices will be closed on this day.
To enable us to exercise our democratic right to vote and to impart our civic duty in greening #Ethiopia. 
We will make up for work by going in full day the Saturday that follows.
A week from today, Ethiopians we will cast our vote in the 6th National Elections.
Which will be the nation's first attempt at free and fair elections. 
As we go to the polls to exercise our democratic rights, i ask all Ethiopians to use the day to exercise our civic duty and leave a generational print. 
Go out and Vote next Monday. 
Go out and plant your #GreenLegacy too.
Let's make it a positively historic day together!
All sections of our society have a significant role to play in strengthening national unity.
In 2018, my administration announced our commitment to liberalize the telecommunication sector and open it up to both domestic and foreign investment.
A major policy shift in Ethiopia!
Today, we signed a historic agreement with the Global Partnership for Ethiopia, which will position us to catalyze inclusive prosperity.
I welcome to Ethiopia my brother Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya who joins today in a monumental moment for Ethiopia as we sign the telecom licensing agreement. 
As #Ethiopia goes regional with our #GreenLegacy initiative to plant 6bil nationally and 1bil prepared for our neighbors.
We also took time to plant seedlings.
Private sector investments in various sectors, capitalizing on resources nationally, contribute to import substitution of items we can produce domestically. 
The inauguration of W.A Industrial Edible Oil Complex is one such opportunity.
For engagement in production of basic consumer products.
Following the launch of the 3rd year #GreenLegacy initiative nationally, we are in Debre Markos this morning as the regional administration initiates its program to plant throughout the region. 
The call to adorn #Ethiopia is a call to unite at all levels in protecting our nation and committing to fulfill Ethiopia’s #VisionForProsperity.
Inaugurating Tana Beles -1 Sugar Factory is key to building a competitive sugar industry in our country. 
Delayed for over 8 years, the #VisionForProsperity we embarked upon 3 yrs ago has enabled us to fast track projects to completion.
I joined my partner in life First Lady Zinash Tayachew this morning in laying a foundation stone for the construction of the Dejazmach Bere Zegeye Memorial Secondary School in Mehal Armacho Woreda Masero Denb town.
To be constructed in memory of her late grandfather.
who played a significant and heroic role in warding of foreign aggression in the 1930s.
It has been over eight years since the Megech dam construction began. 
It has been a point of contention for people of the area given the delay induced resource wastage. 
In the past year especially the construction has accelerated.
It is at 70% at the moment. 
Within the next five months, it will be finalized.
And available for drinking water and irrigation development.
The Council of Ministers today approved a 561.7 billion draft budget for the 2014 Ethiopian Fiscal year.
Due attention is given to enhancing our productive capacity in line with the 10 year perspective plan.
Laying the foundation for Ethiopia's inevitable prosperity!
My extreme pleasure to welcome to Ethiopia Dr. Akinwumi Adesina @akin_adesina, African Development Bank President, Africa’s true son and #Ethiopia’s partner.
We recognise that streamlining our transportation and logistics industry is imperative to national development and economic growth. Hence, 
why we have made focused investments in this area as part of our #VisionForProsperity. 
Here’s a snapshot of our three year milesto 
I welcome Senator Jim Inhofe, a friend to Ethiopians, to his second home #Ethiopia.
Today we launched the Adama - Awash 60km expressway which is part of the Ethiopia-Djibouti Transport Corridor. 
Congratulations to all who are part of realizing this.
We concluded our executive committee meeting with a renewed commitment to #Ethiopia’s peace and prosperity.
Our executive committee meeting commences today pegged to cover many critical issues.
The road to a new prosperous nation is bound to have its own rough patches. 
But just as the great Abebe Bekila demonstrated, even the smoothest of roads will give blisters to the barefoot. 
what matters is the clarity of vision and “barefooted” determination to stay on the course.
I am impressed by the work the Ethiopian Standards Agency is undertaking in its new compound to promote urban agriculture.
 Their vertical farming sample is a good model for uptake by other institutions and households to contribute to food security through urban agriculture. 
Our cities need to be able to at least partially feed themselves.
Our #VisionForProsperity milestones of the past three years in the water, irrigation and energy sector is aimed at enabling a dignified life to our citizens by meeting basic needs.
Today we have made meeting with the business community, academic and religious leaders from the Tigray and Amhara regions. 
It aimed bridging divides for a common goal of rehabilitating our people displaced in the Tigray region before the onset of the rainy season. 
A 15 person committee comprising Federal & regional officials plus representatives from both groups will undertake work to facilitate the process.
The Council of Ministers has unanimously made a historic decision today.
Allowing Ethiopian Communications Authority to grant a new nationwide telecom license to the Global Partnership for Ethiopia which offered the highest licensing fee and a very solid investment case. 
With over USD 8 billion total investment, this will be the single largest FDI into Ethiopia to date. 
Our desire to take Ethiopia fully digital is on track.
 I would like to thank all that have taken part in this and for pulling off a very transparent and effective process!
We make Fast-tracking to completion stalled mega projects.
That were draining national resources, and implementing new ones in short time frames has been the hallmark of this administration’s.
#VisionForProsperity
National development through efficient projects management.
The Ethiopian Communications Authority provided a very detailed review of the new telecom license bidding process.
They briefy it in our discussion with the telecom privatisation advisory council this morning. 
Today’s meeting provided a transparent account of the process and solicited inputs for the Council of Ministers to weigh in making a decision that puts Ethiopia’s #VisionForProsperity and growth aspirations at the forefront.
Ethiopia Week- a showcase of cultural diversity, history and national assets - is open to the public at Sheger Park - Friendship Square. 
I encourage all to visit and learn of our national wealth.
As Ethiopians, our lives are strongly intertwined with trees and forests.
Today as we launch the 2021 edition of #GreenLegacy initiative. 
We refer to the four year challenge we set in 2019, aimed at addressing the consequences of environmental degradation and climate change. 
Preventing flooding, food insecurity, environment related conflicts and other adverse effects is in our hands. 
 I call upon all Ethiopians to “Adorn Ethiopia”.
The call is to cover our nation Green; to see beyond lines of division - regional, ethnic, religious, sex - and in unity dress Ethiopia with the prosperity and dignity the people of this great nation deserve.
In the past three years, one of the key areas of institutional reform has focused on ensuring that the National Electoral Board operates independently and is equipped with capable leadership, free of political affiliations. 
This has been one of our key national successes.
In our follow up meeting with Regional leadership and NEBE Chair today, we deferred to the rational provided by the electoral board for short delay, despite our interest and readiness as a government to proceed with the originally scheduled dates. 
The government remains committed to support NEBE in the coming short weeks to undertake the anticipated 6th national elections, which contrary to speculations has shown a great number of voter registration. 
Considering that some of the challenges experienced in the process of preparedness lend themselves to the lack of a culture of holding free and democratic elections, I would like to assure all Ethiopians that we will do our very best to hold a better, free and fair election than previous years, setting the foundation for future elections.
Agriculture is the backbone of our economy and central to our #VisionForProsperity. 
A few of the milestones we have achieved in the past three years:-
Two day meeting with Regional leadership has commenced today covering national and regional geopolitical issues. 
With the aim of discussing and planning for activities to be undertaken as a government within the next three months.
The inauguration of Semera Industry Park in the Afar region is a catalyst for accelerated trade along a key import/ export corridor for the country. 
Completed in 10 months, the park aims to attract investments in textiles, apparel & leather manufacturing, among many other.
I would like to once again congratulate President Ismail Omar Guelleh of Djibouti on the occasion of his inaugural ceremony.
Well done to everyone that went out over the past weeks and registered to vote for the 6th National Elections. 
The number of registered has exceeded that of the 5th National Elections.
A few more days still remain.
For those that have not registered to use this window has time.
#Ethiopia today launched ‘Telebirr’ - a mobile money service.
That allows Ethio Telecom mobile customers to send, store and receive money by just using their telephone number. 
‘Telebirr’ aims to extend mobile services to our financially excluded sections of society.
I commend Ethio Telecom and all other stakeholders that enabled the realisation of this project within a very short time period. 
By launching the service a mere short week after receiving the operational license, Ethio Telecom has demonstrated early preparedness.
Pleased to welcome my brother President Felix Tshisekedi @FelixUdps to #Ethiopia. 
I greatly appreciate the positive role he is playing in bringing about positive outcomes in #GERD negotiations.
#Ethiopia remains committed to the African Union led process for an agreement that is desirable and works for all.
Ergonomics is central to creating a conducive work environment. 
Part of our #VisionForProsperity institutional reforms over the past three years have entailed revisiting Federal institution work spaces by making them fit for purpose and responsive for effective service delivery.
Modernizing our agricultural capabilities is further enhanced through the development of agro industries.
Today we inaugurate the Bulbula Integrated Agro Industry Park.
It is a demonstration of our #VisionForProsperity for the agriculture sector, for our farmers and our consumers
Today, Ethiopia inaugurated the Mojo-Meki-Batu 92 km road.
Completing the first phase of the country's contribution to Trans-Africa Highway. 
Farmers can now create market linkages easily.
And transportation services will be more efficient. 
With the finalization of the project, will come increase in the flow of tourism and strengthening of our industrial parks.
Completion of the highway will pave the way for our country's economic, social and political integration across the continent.
A snapshot of core milestones achieved in fiscal policy, state owned enterprise reforms and financial sector as part of our #VisionForProsperity goals.
The weekly evaluation of electoral preparations with Regional Presidents and NEBE has continued. 
Voter registration is progressing well.
And I encourage citizens that have not registered yet to utilise the extended period and get their voters card. 
Security assignment to polling stations are also being and will be deployed in the coming weeks.
Ethiopians are ultimately the builders and guardians of democracy.
The owners decide the outsider helps.
We must strive towards peacefull election.
Green Development for Food Security is Ethiopia’s #VisionForProsperity
Legal reforms have been the linchpin of Ethiopia’s #VisionForProsperity over the past three years.
We are committed to holding a free, fair, democratic and peaceful 6th National Election.
Our follow up meeting today with regions and NEBE evaluated progress made since the last meeting in which direction was set to enable remaining stations.
To be opened and address pending matters.
Elections are a demonstration of building a democratic culture in which differences are addressed through the ballot and not by the bullet. 
Through the voting process, citizens exercise agency and actively participate in the building of a democratic process. 
The current elections are consequential in transitioning Ethiopia and hence collectively dispensing our citizen duties is essential. 
Register to vote today!
Rebuilding the Tigray Region requires the concerted efforts of various actors, especially those from the region.
I met this morning with business owners and scholars from the Tigray Region living in Addis Ababa, to discuss current issues and the situation in Tigray.
Ethiopia, in developing Abbay River for its needs, has no intention of causing harm to lower riparian countries. 
Heavy rains last year enabled successful first filling of the GERD while the presence of the GERD itself has undoubtedly prevented severe flooding in neighboring Sudan. 
Ahead of the second filling, Ethiopia is releasing more water from last year storage through newly completed outlets & sharing information. 
The next filling takes place only during heavy rainfall months of July/August, ensuring benefits in reducing floods in Sudan.
Ten years ago the INSA headquarters construction project was initiated and launched.
Following multiple delays and stalled progress, the construction resumed three years ago with vigor and commitment towards finalization. 
Containing six blocks of 14 to 17 story buildings and resting on 7,550 meters square area, the new INSA headquarters also houses the Ministry of Peace, Artificial Intelligence Center and Financial Intelligence Center offices. 
Beyond infrastructure, the INSA headquarters carries the vision of enabling the realization a leading African cyber institution.
All of counries institution has to follow its legacy.
Nothing will stop us from prosperity.
Pleased to see the progress of the Federal Housing Corporation’s efforts in addressing urban housing shortages.
 In six months 500 houses have been built in 16 blocks on 3 hectares of land at a cost of Birr 3 billion.
 The government will continue developing such facilities to meet urban housing needs.
Following our February virtual meeting with regional presidents and the head of the National Elections Board of Ethiopia, we convened again today to review progress and challenges.
 Direction has been set to ensure preparedness at polling stations is finalized and voters registered within the remaining timeframe. 
I encourage all to register for their voting card in the coming days. 
Ensuring a democratic 6th national election is a responsibility for all.
Advancing healthcare for citizens is a critical priority. 
The Roha Medical center mega project construction launch this morning demonstrates commitment to this priority. 
With 5 hospitals of more 1,200 beds, when completed the medical center will enable Ethiopia to become a medical tourism hotspot as well.
We demonstrate cloud-seeding successfuly.
It implies that our country's efforts in hydropower generation and irrigation will be supported by more rain. 
All Ethiopians are expected to work with law enforcement agencies to thwart the plans of criminals who want us to give up our dreams of modernizing our country. 
The growth of our Ethiopia is the growth of our continent. 
Thank you all who took part in the successful trial.
Pleased to witness with the Council of Ministers the transformation taking place within Bole International Airport by the Ethiopian Airlines Group. 
A modern aviation infrastructure has taken shape featuring a new terminal, VIP terminal section, business lounge and other facilities with an overall focus on biosafety and biosecurity.
It is known that the Ethiopian National Defense Forces have begun to reform and strengthen their production capacity to maintain our country's sovereignty in a sustainable manner. 
We witnessed that today as we visited Homicho Ammunition Engineering Industry. 
The ENDF’s capacity to manufacture international standard products and strengthen its readiness based on adequate research is evident. 
We will continue to build on these efforts.
The agenda of the the 53rd session of the UNECA Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is timely and appropriate.
In pressing for innovative responses as natural and man-made disruptions are increasing throughout the globe. 
Africa's demonstration of capability in facing the COVID19 crisis, and its readiness to help formulate and implement solutions is commendable. 
Going forward, we need to focus on digital transformation, climate smart economy and capable institutional frameworks. 
The reforms we have started in our country in these regards show that change is inevitable. 
Our continent is bound to be the pillar of the global economy!
In my meeting this morning with the leadership of the Ethiopian National Defense Forces, I expressed pride in our forces as guardians of peace and protectors of sovereignty.
I also cautioned them on the need to strengthen discipline and professionalism, holding accountable those that undertake deeds in any operation which do not represent the ENDF values and rewarding those that do. 
Accountability and disciplinary gaps will be addressed through the appropriate channels.
The pristine volcanic lakes of Wenchi and Dendi have finally been given the attention they deserve. 
Today we launched the third ‘DineForEthiopia’ project in Wenchi.
Which will bring in roads, electricity.
And enhance telecom services to enable private sector investments in eco tourism.
The Medemer path is one that embodies support to one another to coexistence and to strength in unity. 
Nature shows us that.
The birds of Lake Tana and the source of the Abay River show us that through supporting each other and soaring together in unity, they can surpass what seems miles ahead of them.
Mechanizing our agriculture is key to achieving the crop yields we are capable of nationally. 
I was pleased to witness the tractor and combiner assembly plant in Shashemene that aims to enhance farmers’ productivity.
Summer wheat cluster farming in Heben Arsi woreda of Oromia region. 
Our aspirations to substitute wheat import can make remarkable progress if we scale up such successes.
Today we inaugurate the Yirgalem Integrated Agro-Industrial Park in the Sidama region. 
Sitting on 294.5 hectares, the industry park’s potential value chain includes fruits and vegetables, dairy, meat, poultry, coffee, cereal and pulses, using produce from local farmers as input.
The inauguration of this park indicates Ethiopia’s onward direction.
Pleased to preside over the signing ceremony of an MOU between the Federal Government and the Abu Dhabi Future Energy Company PJSC-Masdar. 
The MOU enables us to jointly develop 500MW PV projects in Ethiopia. 
With #Ethiopia’s vast experience in energy generation and distribution, Masdar’s investments are a demonstration of enhancing public-private partnerships in the country.
In August 2019, we launched the construction of a 380m bridge that connects Gojjam to Gonder.
We checked today the progress.
Upon completion in a year, this will enhance the productivity of the export corridor by providing an alternate and modern transport route.
Two weeks after ‘Dine for Ethiopia’ we officially launch the construction of the Gorgora project.
Which will serve as a hub for the development of Gondar and Bahir Dar. 
A place of many treasures, the site has immense tourism, agro-processing and manufacturing potential.
In South Achefer woreda of Amhara region we launched the Durbete-Kunzela-Golgola-Metema road projects, totaling 260km in length and to be built at a cost of Birr 5.3bil. 
Upon completion, this corridor will facilitate trade for farming communities in the area and beyond.
In South Achefer woreda of Amhara region we launched the Durbete-Kunzela-Golgola-Metema road projects, totaling 260km in length and to be built at a cost of Birr 5.3bil. 
Upon completion, this corridor will facilitate trade for farming communities in the area and beyond.
Mecha Woreda in the Amhara region has been successful in cultivating 3,590 hectares of wheat through the Qoga irrigation scheme in 15 clusters. 
Similarly, small holder farmers have been producing avocados through the same irrigation scheme, demonstrating success in productivity.
If our farmers goes in this way “our food from our land” vision will be.
I would like to thank the scholars who presented your reflections, the children who sang songs and all those who participated in organising the launch of the book ‘Yemedemer Menged’ (Path to Medemer). 
In addition to gaining from the content of the book, every time you buy each book, you are contributing to the expansion of schools in rural Ethiopia.
Service to country and people is a source of pride. 
I extend my warmest congratulations to the first graduating batch of 10,000 national youth volunteers that have been undertaking extensive training in preparedness to provide social services throughout the country. 
Our country is graced with rich history; it is a source of abundant natural endowments. 
If we nurture the value of service in youth, we can reach our potential of transformation. 
The youth graduating today who have committed to voluntary service are a demonstration of our national aspirations to work together and rise into prosperity. 
While all eyes are on Ethiopia from every direction.
No one can take away our dreams of developing and rising to our rightful place as a nation. 
This takes the dedication of our youth to take #Ethiopia forward.
Rainwater harvesting at household level is increasing and is a critical gateway for our national agricultural productivity aspirations.
I encourage all regions to further enhance this practice.
My admiration and appreciation to all those involved in organising a memorial concert in honour of Tilahun Gessesse and contributing the proceeds collected thus far towards the ‘Dine for Ethiopia’ initiative. 
To all those that contributed towards the Birr 80mil plus as well, your are leaving an indelible print on #Ethiopia’s development.
Grateful to World Food Program Executive Director David Beasley for constructive engagement and tangible support in addressing humanitarian needs in #Ethiopia. 
The work of #WFP in the country is commendable and needs to be augmented.
Held a review meeting this afternoon with the Tigray Region State of Emergency Taskforce and the Provisional Administration to discuss activities and progress in the region. 
As of March 3, 2021, the State of Emergency Task Force will continue its stabilisation and rebuilding efforts under the leadership of General Yohannes Gebremeskel Tesfariam.
Good talking to Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven on our bilateral relations, #Covid19 equitable vaccine distribution as well as national and regional security.
 Ethio-Swedish ties have persevered since the 1940s and will continue strengthened.
In a virtual meeting with regional presidents and the head of the National Elections Board of Ethiopia.
We assessed the preparedness level of the regions for the upcoming elections in ensuring peace and security, as well as availing other necessary logistical elements.
Productive call with Prime Minister of Canada Justin Trudeau on national and regional security issues. 
Canada has always been a strong partner of #Ethiopia.
We will continue to build on the existing partnership. 
Thank you for the constructive conversation.
We continue our performance evaluation.
This morning we conducted a review of Addis Ababa City administration’s six month projects and work performance against set goals.
This morning I held discussions with federal and regional leadership on the upcoming elections.
Where we established a defining line to not mix government and party work. 
The clear role of government is to ensure that peaceful, free and fair elections take place in this highly anticipated round. 
It is with that spirit that regional governments have also made commitments to support competing political parties in effective participation.
Summer wheat in Eastern Gojjam, Baso Liben woreda. 
Another demonstration of potential for import substitution if we continue working hard.
This morning we launched the construction of the 80km Chida - Jimma road which crosses through Jimma zone and ends in Konta special woreda. 
Budgeted at 2.4bil birr through cooperation of the federal government, JICA and AfDB, this road will greatly support our development efforts initiated through ‘Dine for Ethiopia.
Together with the Council of Ministers, we are undertaking our six-month performance evaluation of each ministry.
 Through such continuous performance evaluations against endorsed annual plans, we are able to address emerging gaps and hold accountable implementing bodies in ensuring adequate delivery for our citizens.
In Konta special woreda, today we lay a foundation stone for the Konta field hospital.
Which is an integral part of the development project we have envisioned as part of the ‘Dine For Ethiopia’ initiative. 
The field hospital, which will be completed in two months and equipped with modern medical equipment, is intended to make health services accessible to the community and to visitors to the area.
I was fortunate to have visited Koysha for the first time last year where I witnessed its immense untapped potential. 
Following a year of extensive studies and fundraising to develop the area, I am quite pleased to be back in the area on the fortnight of ‘Dine For Ethiopia’ to launch the Halala Kela cluster of the project in Dawuro Zone.
To all Ethiopians in the country and abroad that have enabled a successful #DineForEthiopia through their contribution, I thank you deeply. 
Our target was Birr 3billion. 
You helped raise 4.2bil to develop Koysha, Wenchi and Gorgora.
 In unity we shall reach our aspired destination.
As we mark the long awaited ‘Dine for Ethiopia’ today, my appreciation to those involved in showcasing the attributes of the three sites in an exhibition. 
Our diversity, cultural, historical and natural assets are the untapped potential to lift our nation to prosperity.
During our virtual meeting with regional presidents and city administrators. 
We agreed to mobilise support for the Tigray Region in national solidarity with our people, as the region rebuilds. 
In this gesture of solidarity, I have donated my one month salary, 200,000 birr from the sale of the Medemer book and three water tanker trucks through the Office of the Prime Minister. 
I call upon all to join the #RebuildTigray solidarity initiative.
We held Discussions with leaders of the Tigray Provisional Administration this morning. 
Thoroughly evaluated humanitarian, security, infrastructure and public services.
We also discuss milestones achieved so far and challenges in the region. 
The assessment with the administration identified critical areas of intervention and set a direction for requisite actions.
Thank you Prime Minister Mark Rutte @MinPres for a good call discussing our bilateral relations and regional peace and security issues.
 #Ethiopia’s long standing relationship with the Netherlands through diplomacy, trade and investments is a strong basis for further cooperation.
In the town of Ambo that is the symbol of freedom, we launched the Ambo - Guder and the Guder - Seyo - Shenen road projects. 
It is my hope that the people of Ambo, and especially the youth, utilize these endeavors and capitalize on it for sustainable and meaningful development.
We inaugurated the Shambu - Bako 60.2km road project and launched the Shambo - Agamsa 95km concrete asphalt road project in Horo Guduru, Wellega.
Among the community for whom these roads and related development projects will open a new chapter in the lives of the communities that will make use of these roads and what it brings.
Our stabilization efforts have been successful. 
Today, I’m quite pleased to have been among the peace loving people of Dembidolo in Qellem Wellega where we launched the 50km Dembidolo- Gambela road project. 
Qellem Wellega remains one of the high potential growth corridors in the country. 
By being guardians of our collective peace, we can realize the productive potential of this area together.
Our lands are abundant with great potential.
they enable decent livelihoods if we work to develop them. 
Awash Falls and Lake Beseka are are untapped resources to uplift surrounding communities.
Irrigation based summer wheat cultivation in Afar region has been well.
It showing us great potential for import substitution. 
Self reliance is key to our growth, development and prosperity aspirations.
Congratulations and best of luck to President Felix Tshisekedi of the DRC as you commence your role as Chairperson of our African Union. 
#Ethiopia will support and work with you in carrying out the responsibilities entrusted upon you.
The Israeli Air Force launches an attack against tunnels leading from Gaza into Israel in response to missile attacks and mortar fire.
Atheist Ireland purposefully publishes the words of Jesus Christ, Muhammad, Salman Rushdie, Mark Twain and Pope Benedict XVI on its website despite a new law banning them on grounds of blasphemy.
Egyptian archaeologists discover the largest tomb yet discovered in the ancient Saqqara necropolis.
A diesel fuel leak in Shaanxi, China reaches the Yellow River, a water source for millions of people.
Slovakia admits responsibility for a major bomb alert on Dorset Street in Dublin, Ireland, after planting explosives on a civilian as a test.
A weekend killing in Australia has prompted the Indian government to issue an advisory for its college students studying in that country.
Sékouba Konaté, the interim head of the junta in Guinea, is flown to Senegal after falling ill.
South African President Jacob Zuma urges party unity and warns economic recovery will be slow at a gathering celebrating the 98th anniversary of the African National Congress.
The Confederation of African Football announces that football matches will continue to be played in Cabinda Province where the attack took place.
Wolfgang Wodarg, the Council of Europe's head of health affairs, claims that the 2009 flu pandemic was a "false pandemic" orchestrated by the pharmaceutical industry to sell vaccines.
Thousands of supporters of former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra gather outside the home of a royal adviser accused of involvement in the 2006 coup that ousted the Prime Minister.
Tombs discovered near Egypt's pyramids reinforce the theory they were built by free workers rather than slaves.
Australia experiences its hottest night since 1902, as a heat wave grips the country.
Turkish police arrest at least 14 military officers, including four generals, accused of a 2003 coup plot.
Al-Qaeda's top leader in Afghanistan, and Osama bin Laden's third in command, Mustafa Abu al-Yazid, is reported killed.
Poland publishes the transcript of flight data recorders from the fatal 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash which killed 96 officials and intellectuals on 10 April.
America's Obama administration warns that BP's oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico could continue until August.
Three Namibian women sue the state after they are sterilised without their informed consent after being diagnosed as HIV positive.
Two North Koreans are jailed in South Korea over an assassination plot on a high-ranking North Korean defector, Hwang Jang-yop.
An estimated 52,000 people took part in anti-government protests in the former British colony of Hong Kong.
The Parliament of Finland approves the construction of two nuclear power stations.
Fossils discovered at the Franceville site in Gabon are claimed to be evidence that multicellular life on Earth began at least 1.5 billion years earlier than currently reckoned.
Astronomers confirm the first-ever direct picture of an extrasolar planet orbiting its star.
Politicians in Nepal fail to elect a new Prime Minister for the third time after no candidate secured a majority.
A Greek truck drivers strike ends with the situation expected to get back to normal quickly.
President of Mexico Felipe Calderón calls for a debate on the legalization of drugs.
Elena Kagan is sworn in as the fourth woman to sit on the Supreme Court of the United States.
Wendy Chapman, the doctor at the centre of the Bloodgate rugby union scandal, is summoned to a disciplinary hearing on 23 August.
Turkey sets up a commission of Turkish officials and bureaucrats to investigate May's Gaza flotilla raid.
President of the United States Barack Obama signs a bill increasing security along his country's border with Mexico.
The Independent Democrats and Democratic Alliance opposition parties in South Africa agree to merge against the ruling African National Congress.
Mexico City legalises the fining of shops which give away free plastic bags in an environmental initiative.
Former Australian swimmer Dawn Fraser is criticised for controversial remarks during which she called for the boycott of the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi.
Carworkers in South Africa end their eight-day strike with a 10% pay deal.
More than half of politicians in Benin call for impeachment proceedings against President Boni Yayi over his involvement in a Ponzi scheme.
Hurricane Danielle strengthens to Category 4, becoming the first major hurricane of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season.
A trade agreement between Australia and the European Union comes into effect stopping Australian wine being marketed using terms such as champagne and port.
Mozambique announces it will reverse a rise in the price of bread that led to riots last week.
Japan detains a Chinese fishing boat found near the disputed Pinnacle Islands in the East China Sea.
The United States and Australia issue travel warnings for India following the shooting of two Taiwanese tourists outside the Jama Masjid mosque in Delhi.
Jupiter becomes the brightest object in the night sky after the Moon as it makes its closest approach to Earth since 1963.
Italian authorities seize 23 million euro (approximately US$30 million) from a Vatican bank account in a money laundering probe.
The Commonwealth Games Federation demands that India improve conditions at the athletes' village in Delhi.
The Minnesota Twins win the American League Central in Major League Baseball and become the first team to qualify for postseason play in 2010.
The Beano is to feature a President of the United States for the first time in its history.
Gun battle between security forces and Taliban fighters leave four militants including their commander dead in Wardak province 40 km west of Afghanistan capital Kabul.
A suspected U.S. drone fired missiles at a house in northwestern Pakistan in Khushali, a village near Mir Ali, killing four people.
Los Angeles experiences all-time record high temperature day at 45°C or 113F.
6 sailors taken hostage off the coast of Cameroon on September 12 by the Africa Marine Commando are released.
Researchers identify a new, though threatened, language known as Koro.
Greenpeace sends Facebook a letter containing half a million signatures asking the company to cut its ties to coal based electricity.
A prolonged drought in the Amazon region forces Brazil to declare a state of emergency in 25 towns.
Canada declares BPA toxic, prompting curbs or bans on the widely used chemical.
The death toll from Typhoon Megi in the Philippines rises to three as heavy rain falls on the island of Luzon for a second consecutive day.
Jewish settlers have started building more than 600 homes in the West Bank since a building freeze expired last month.
A magnitude 7.5 earthquake strikes near the Mentawai Islands, but tsunami warnings for western Sumatra proved unwarranted. ,
The Emperor of Exmoor, a red deer believed to be Britain's largest wild animal, is shot and killed.
A suicide bomber wearing an explosives belt kills at least 21 people, mostly Shiites, in Balad Ruz, the town north of Baghdad.
A large oil field is discovered off the coast of Brazil that could contain between 8 and 15 billion barrels.
Three time surfing world champion Andy Irons dies from suspected dengue fever, one of five people on the ASP World Tour to suffer from the illness in the past three weeks.
The United States Border Patrol finds a sophisticated tunnel between Tijuana in Mexico and Otay Mesa, California, used by drug smugglers.
Facebook inadvertently disabled some users' accounts when a system designed to detect fake accounts malfunctioned.
A study published by The Lancet medical journal describes how short blasts of radio waves to the kidney may help regulate blood pressure.
US health insurers gave over $86.2million to the Chamber of Commerce last year for the purpose of opposing the health-care overhaul.
A new species of ancient crocodile, Khoratosuchus jintasakuli, is identified from a fossil in Thailand.
A World Health Organization study estimates that 600,000 deaths a year are attributable to second hand smoking.
Côte d'Ivoire President Laurent Gbagbo declares a curfew, amid clashes that killed three people ahead of the second round of the presidential election on Sunday.
Ireland is hit by snow and record low November temperatures that disrupt the nation.
Dozens of Easter Islanders are injured in conflict over ownership as riot police evict islanders from their ancestral home.
Association football team FC Barcelona ends its 111-year history of refusing commercial shirt sponsorship as it signs a record £125 million deal with the Qatar Foundation.
Oklahoma becomes the first U.S. state to carry out an execution with pentobarbital, a lethal injection drug used for euthanizing animals.
The United Kingdom government announces plans to make prisoners serving less than four years eligible to vote.
1,200 new species and varieties of sea creatures discovered during the first world survey of marine life are presented at a conference in Jerusalem, Israel.
Four people are killed and around 40 injured after a passenger plane explodes in Surgut in eastern Russia.
In another event not far way from the bird dieoff, scientists are investigating a fish kill of nearly 100,000 drum in the Arkansas River.
A Tunisian protester who set himself alight in unrest that sparked further protests across the country dies of his injuries.
Mohamed bin Hammam announce that Australia will host the 2015 AFC Asian Cup; this will be the first time Australia has hosted the competition.
The Algerian government cuts food prices amid unrest, and vows to punish those responsible for rioting in recent days.
Lionel Messi of Argentina wins the FIFA Ballon d'Or as world football player for the second successive year.
The Jamaican Coast Guard intercepts a Honduran vessel fishing near Pedro Cays, killing the captain and wounding two crewmen.
The World Health Organization launches a plan to prevent the global spread of an artemisinin-resistant malaria.
Researchers discover prions spreading through airborne transmission on aerosol particles, in an animal testing experiment focusing on scrapie infection in laboratory mice.
Rescue work is carried out to attempt to locate survivors in remote areas of south-eastern Brazil.
Delta Air Lines says that it expects sharp fuel cost increases in 2011, perhaps to $2.60 a gallon from $2.47 last year.
American Samoa bans smoking in all public and private enclosed spaces.
An Australian internal review finds that the fatal Christmas Island boat disaster was responded to appropriately.
The BBC World Service is to close five of its language services with the loss of 650 jobs.
Sky Sports presenter Richard Keys resigns following his comments about female referee Sian Massey.
Ireland upgrades its relations with Palestine to a diplomatic mission, short of recognition, though the Palestinian representative is now officially an ambassador.
It emerges that police locked international ticket-holders out of Khalifa Stadium in Qatar ahead of the final of the 2011 Asian Cup between Australia and Japan.
Researchers report that fishing rates in the Arctic are 75 times higher than those reported by the U.N., suggesting future increased exploitation is less possible than previously thought.
Police on Easter Island evict indigenous protesters battling for ancestral lands and a larger share of tourist revenues from the grounds of a luxury hotel.
Using Google Maps, an archaeologist finds nearly 2,000 potential archaeological sites in Saudi Arabia.
Human Rights Watch claims that government-controlled health services in Egypt have been 'told to downplay protest deaths'.
George Osborne, the United Kingdom Chancellor of the Exchequer, announces that the tax on bank profits will become permanent.
Two small planes (took off from Langley Regional Airport) collide mid-air near Mission, British Columbia, in western Canada, with at least one person dead.
South Korea agrees in principle to resume discussions with North Korea on humanitarian issues including reuniting families separated by the Korean War.
Ahmadinejad said that the new Middle East will be formed soon where there will be no room for the United States and Israel.
The inquiry into the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is released finding that the accident was entirely preventable.
Oil prices reach a two-year high due to uncertainty in the Middle East most notably in Libya.
Clashes take place at a demonstration calling for the resignation of former members of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali's regime in the interim government.
Demonstrations calling for economic and political change continue for a third day, amid reports of looting.
Jared Lee Loughner has been indicted on 49 counts in relation to the 2011 Tucson shooting in the US state of Arizona.
The United States Department of State warns U.S. citizens of a high security threat level in Yemen due to what it describes as "terrorist activities and civil unrest". ,
The United States Food and Drug Administration approves the use of the drug Belimumab (Benlysta) to treat lupus, the first drug to be approved for this purpose in 56 years.
The Bank of Korea increases the main interest rate in South Korea by a quarter percentage point to 3% due to concerns over inflation.
The New York Times newspaper announces it is to start charging people who access content on its website.
Vitali Klitschko defeats Odlanier Solís via a controversial first-round technical knockout to retain the WBC Heavyweight Championship in Cologne, Germany.
A US judge blocks an agreement between Google and publishers about efforts to digitize books online at Google Books.
Tokyo Electric Power Co. resumes its policy of rolling electricity blackouts following ongoing problems caused by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.
Mathematician John Milnor wins the 2011 Abel Prize for his contributions to topology, geometry and algebra.
Microsoft lodged an antitrust complaint against Google with the European Commission.
The US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration reports that the number of traffic deaths has fallen to 32,788 in 2010, the lowest level since 1949.
Almost half of China's dairies are to close after failing to obtain new licenses following a safety audit.
The World Meteorological Organisation reports that the ozone layer is damaged to its worst extent ever in the Arctic.
Basketball star LeBron James buys a minority interest in Premier League team Liverpool Football Club.
The Assad regime grants nationality to thousands of Kurds in al-Hasaka in a bid to appease protesters.
Leaders of Canada's major political parties hold an English language debate for the Canadian federal election.
The United States requests the release of one of its citizens detained in North Korea.
Fourteen people claimed to be responsible for shooting 52 protestors in Sana’a in March are referred to the state prosecutor.
British prime minister David Cameron sets out to block his predecessor Gordon Brown's attempt to take the £270,000 per year role of head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
New Jersey's Secretary of State rejects former Olympic medallist Carl Lewis's bid to run for the state Senate due to eligibility requirements.
The Vatican brings Pope John Paul II's coffin out from below St. Peter's Basilica in Rome in preparation for his beatification.
Gaddafi has supplied Viagra to his forces to encourage them to commit mass rape, Susan Rice, United States Ambassador to the United Nations, has alleged.
American basketball player Derrick Rose of the Chicago Bulls wins the NBA Most Valuable Player Award Award for the 2010-11 NBA season, the youngest player to do so.
Workers enter one of the buildings at Japan's Fukushima I Nuclear Power Plant for the first time since an explosion in the days following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.
Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Tavish Scott resigns after a collapse of his party's support at the Scottish Parliament election.
There is a near riot in the Beijing Apple Store as the Apple iPad 2 goes on sale in the People's Republic of China.
Floods in Mississippi worsen, with the Army Corps of Engineers saying an area between Simmesport, Louisiana and Baton Rouge may be inundated under 20-30 feet of water.
Former Football Association chairman David Triesman alleges that four members of FIFA sought "bribes" in return for backing England's failed bid to host the 2018 World Cup.
Police in South London launch a murder hunt after a 15-year-old schoolboy is stabbed to death in the street.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il's youngest son Kim Jong-un reportedly lifts restrictions on women's fashion, while cosmetic surgery–though illegal–takes place in return for bribes.
President of the United States Barack Obama uses his weekly address to vow to seek oil in Alaska and in the Gulf of Mexico.
The Morganza Spillway on the Mississippi River has been opened for the first time in 37 years, deliberately flooding 3,000 square miles of rural Louisiana to save most of Baton Rouge and New Orleans.
Protesting indigenous people take over half of the city of Puno in south-eastern Peru, demanding an end to a Canadian mining project.
Iran denies a plane carrying the Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel access to its airspace for two hours en route to India.
The Dallas Mavericks beat the Miami Heat 95-93 in the second game of the 2011 NBA Finals to tie the series.
Cheaper new meningitis vaccinations reduce cases in Africa, with Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger recording the lowest number of cases.
Ash clouds from the erupting Puyehue-Cordon Caulle in Chile disrupt and cancel international flights, leaving thousands stranded.
A series of moderate magnitude 4-5 earthquakes hit eastern Eritrea, preceding reports of a possible volcanic eruption.
Liberia suspends diplomatic ties with Libya, after United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called on countries to sever ties with Libya.
Some Saudi Arabian women challenge a ban on female drivers, posting accounts and pictures of themselves driving automobiles.
The International Monetary Fund calls on eurozone countries to provide more money for Greece and to stop what the IMF regards as "unproductive" arguments about burning bondholders.
A Syrian military spokesman says more than 400 members of security forces have been killed in the months-long unrest as videos surface allegedly showing children killed in the violence.
Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu says that Israel is "fully entitled to work against" attempts by the Gaza-bound "provocation flotilla" to smuggle arms into the Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip.
The Chosunilbo newspaper in South Korea reports that Kim Pyong-il, the half-brother of current North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, is under house arrest in Pyongyang.
Northern Province of Sri Lanka, severely affected by the civil war, is opened to foreigners and journalists who hold passports.
Christine Lagarde officially starts as managing director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The Space Shuttle Atlantis lifts off for the final mission of the US Space Shuttle program.
Two studies show that antiretroviral drugs taken to treat AIDS can also be used to prevent infection with HIV.
Former News International Chief Executive Rebekah Brooks is arrested by police investigating phone hacking and corruption at the organisation.
The Japan women's national football team returns home to be greeted by thousands of fans after winning the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup.
Nepalese officials say monsoon rains have swollen two major rivers in the country and have increased the threat of widespread flooding.
A tropical storm watch is issued for Tropical Storm Don in the US state of Texas between Port Mansfield north to San Luis Pass. ,
At least 57 people are dead and 12 are confirmed missing in the Seoul and Siheung region of South Korea due to landslides caused by heavy rain.
The United States Senate passes legislation to raise the debt ceiling in order to avert the 2011 US debt ceiling crisis and President Barack Obama signs it into law.
Sky News reports new evidence that North Korean officials have been involved in the illegal drugs trade.
In American football, players in the US National Football League ratify a new collective bargaining agreement including provisions for tests for human growth hormone.
The Cambridgeshire Guided Busway, the longest guided busway in the world, opens after years of delays.
Former Brazilian football star Zico signs a contract to manage the Iraq national football team.
An Egyptian protester removes the flag from the Israeli embassy as thousands protest outside following the death of five policemen near the border.
In athletics, Lamine Diack of Senegal is elected unopposed to another term as President of the International Association of Athletics Federations.
The RAF gives the Red Arrows clearance to fly again following Saturday's fatal crash at the Bournemouth Air Festival, but cannot confirm if they will fly at similar events this year.
Dozens of dead bodies are found at the Abu Salim Hospital in Tripoli which had been abandoned by medical staff earlier in the week when it came under heavy gunfire.
At least four people, including a high-ranking security service officer, are killed in a series of bombings and shootings across Russia's North Caucasus.
Four bodies are recovered from the ocean after an airplane of the Chilean Air Force crashed near Robinson Crusoe Island on Friday.
The Swiss National Bank introduces a minimum exchange rate of 1.20 CHF/EUR to prevent the overvaluation of the Swiss franc.
Over 5,000 people have reportedly been infected by an outbreak of dengue fever in Pakistan.
Robert Zoellick, the President of the World Bank, claims that the world economy has entered the "danger zone", with the United States, European Union and Japan having to make tough decisions.
Tanzanian authorities charge four people with negligence in relation to the Zanzibar ferry sinking that cost at least 240 lives on September 10.
Voters in the German capital of Berlin go to the polls for a state election, with current mayor Klaus Wowereit and his Social Democrats doing well.
The Anniston Chemical Activity destroys its last mustard gas shells, becoming the fifth of nine US chemical weapons depots to close under terms of the Chemical Weapons Treaty.
Former television journalist Shelly Yachimovich is elected as the head of the Israeli Labor Party.
Oswald Grübel, chief executive of Swiss bank UBS, resigns in the wake of a rogue trading scandal.
A US court sentences two more Somali pirates to life in prison for capturing a yacht off the coast of Africa in February.
At least 25 people are killed and many more injured after protesters and security forces clash in the Egyptian capital of Cairo, during a protest in response to an attack on a Coptic church.
A measure to support expansion of the eurozone bailout fund is halted due to its failure to pass in the Parliament of Slovakia.
The Netherlands becomes the first European country to win a professional world baseball championship since 1938, after defeating Cuba 2-1 in the 2011 Baseball World Cup final in Panama City, Panama.
Egypt's ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces announces a law banning all forms of discrimination, in the wake of recent violence between Coptic protesters and security forces.
Year-over-year GDP growth in the People's Republic of China slows to 9.1% for the third quarter of 2011, following government efforts to curb inflation.
North Korea agrees, for the first time in 6 years, to let the United States search for the remains of American soldiers killed during the Korean War.
24-year-old Italian motorcycle racer Marco Simoncelli dies after crashing and being hit by two other riders at the Malaysian MotoGP, leading to the cancellation of the race. ,
The corpses of 53 pro-Muammar Gaddafi fighters are found in Sirte, all having apparently been summarily executed by NTC troops.
Hurricane Rina strengthens to Category 2 strength as it advances towards Cancun and other resorts on the Mexican Riviera.
In California, Oakland police disperse Occupy Oakland protesters, using tear gas and rubber bullets and making numerous arrests.
Iranian actress Marzieh Vafamehr is released from jail after her sentence for acting in the banned film My Tehran for Sale is reduced.
A rogue member of the Afghan National Army opens fire on Australian Army soldiers in Kandahar Province killing three and an Afghan interpreter.
The Australian airline Qantas grounds its entire fleet due to an ongoing industrial dispute with a lockout to start on Monday.
Almazbek Atambayev, the newly elected President of Kyrgyzstan, states that a lease for a United States air base in Manas will not be renewed when it expires in 2014.
The Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram claims responsibility for a series of bomb and gun attacks in the north-eastern Nigerian town of Damaturu that have killed at least 63 people.
Flooding in Thailand reaches the residence of the Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra in Bangkok, forcing her to withdraw from the Hawaii APEC summit to deal with the crisis.
A Scottish-designed bionic leg exoskeleton, designed to allow handicapped people to walk, is approved for sale in the United Kingdom.
London in the United Kingdom wins the rights to host the 2017 World Athletics Championships ahead of Doha, Qatar.
In Major League Baseball, the Florida Marlins officially change their name to the Miami Marlins.
Former South African rugby union player Solly Tyibilika is shot dead in a bar in Cape Town.
Uzbek midfielder Server Djeparov is named Asian Footballer of the Year for the second time, in a ceremony held at the Asian Football Confederation headquarters.
India's government decides to relax rules concerning the operation of foreign-owned retailers such as Wal-Mart and Tesco within India.
NBA team owners and players reach an agreement to end the 149-day NBA lockout and to begin the current NBA season on Christmas Day.
David Cameron, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, refuses to join a European Union financial crisis accord after negotiations in Brussels.
The United States Senate votes in favor of extending the payroll tax cut for two months.
The Arab League threatens to take Syria to the United Nations within two weeks if the country does not accept its proposals to end the crackdown on the uprising.
The Buddha Memorial Center of Fo Guang Shan in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, housing a tooth relic of Gautama Buddha, is consecrated.
The Washington-based organisation Human Rights Watch accuses Syria of hiding hundreds of political detainees during a visit by Arab League monitors.
At least two people are killed in attacks on bars in northern Kenya near the border with Somalia, with Islamist al-Shabaab militants possibly responsible.
Up to 50,000 people flee their homes in a border area of South Sudan amid ethnic violence.
Armed commandos will be ordered to protect endangered tigers in India's Bandipur and Nagarhole national parks.
Alabama defeats LSU 21-0 to win the 2012 BCS National Championship, their second championship in three years, in the first shutout in BCS bowl history.
The English Wikipedia will be shut down on Wednesday in protest against anti-piracy legislation proposed by the United States Congress.
Twitter alters technology to enable country-specific censorship of messages.
Archbishop of York Dr. John Sentamu calls on the Church of England not to permit same-sex marriage.
The People's Republic of China asks for assistance from South Sudan to obtain the release of 29 Chinese workers held captive in Sudan for five days.
The Daily Mail reports that the world record for the number of water skiers pulled by a single boat (145) has been broken.
A Libyan starts court proceedings against 41 people accused of helping Muammar Gaddafi to attempt to suppress the opposition in the Libyan Civil War.
The United States Congress votes to pass legislation allowing for greater use of drone aircraft in the United States.
Azerbaijan rejects a claim by Iran that it has been helping Israeli spies in the killing of an Iranian nuclear scientist.
The President of Honduras Porfirio Lobo pledges a "full and transparent inquiry" into the events and suspends local and national prison officials.
United States Capitol Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested Amine El Khalifi, a man from Morocco who allegedly planned a suicide attack on the United States Capitol.
A fight amongst inmates leads to a prison riot in the Mexican city of Apodaca, Nuevo León, with 44 people dead.
Treasure from the Spanish Navy frigate Nuestra Señora de las Mercedes returns to Spain after being recovered by Odyssey Marine Exploration in 2007.
Meta-analysis of 42 previous studies concludes chocolate may be good for the heart.
The United States files an application in New Zealand to extradite Kim Dotcom and three of his associates in MegaUpload to face charges of breaching copyright.
A study finds a correlation between snoring as a toddler and behavior problems later in childhood.
Turkish Airlines begins a service to Somalia, the first regular service to the capital Mogadishu except regional East African flights to operate in twenty years.
A gunman kills one person and injures seven others before himself being shot dead at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's Western Psychiatric Institute & Clinic in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Chinese politician Bo Xilai speaks out for the first time since his aide attempted to defect at the American consulate.
India's Kingfisher Airlines cancels at least 40 flights due to pilots not turning up for work due to unpaid salaries.
Pakistani villagers find 13 bodies with bullet wounds in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas near Afghanistan as security forces step up an offensive.
Rebelling government troops in Mali storm the state broadcaster in the capital Bamako.
Iraq is terrorised by unconfirmed reports of extremists crushing the skulls of emos with blocks of cement.
The Los Angeles County Coroner's Office says that Whitney Houston's official cause of death was drowning as a result of cocaine use.
Nine top officials are jailed for their role in the near-bankruptcy of one of Vietnam's largest state-owned companies.
Turkish prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan accuses the United Nations Security Council of standing by with its "hands and arms tied" while the Syrian people are killed every day.
University of Arkansas head football coach Bobby Petrino is fired because of misconduct involving an inappropriate relationship with a female employee.
Vessels from the Philippine Navy and Chinese maritime surveillance are at a standoff after the Philippines attempted to arrest Chinese fishermen in the South China Sea.
Former Malian President Amadou Toumani Toure arrives in Senegal after being ousted in a military coup.
Police fire tear gas at demonstrators outside the capital Manama ahead of the Grand Prix.
In response to an outbreak of an unidentified fatal disease in Quang Ngai province, Vietnam, the Vietnamese government asks for help from the World Health Organization.
A 30-year-old woman collapses and dies while running in the London Marathon.
Burma's parliament opens without the party of Aung San Suu Kyi who boycotted the legislature over a disagreement on the wording of the oath of office.
South Korean retailers cease selling beef from the United States after a case of mad cow disease is reported.
Malaysian police use tear gas and water cannon to disperse thousands of protesters gathered in Kuala Lumpur calling for free and fair elections.
The as of yet unfinished One World Trade Center becomes the tallest building in New York City, overtaking the Empire State Building.
Tens of thousands of people march in Asia, Europe and North America, protesting against job cuts, inequality, and austerity measures.
United States President Barack Obama officially states that he supports the right for same-sex partners to marry.
Atlético Madrid defeat Athletic Bilbao in the 2012 UEFA Europa League Final in Bucharest to win the competition for the second time in three years.
Chinese tour companies suspend tourist flights to the Philippines amid rising tensions between the two countries over territorial disputes in the South China Sea.
A man sets himself on fire outside the Oslo courthouse where mass murderer Anders Behring Breivik is on trial for the 2011 Norway attacks.
China Central Television Headquarters in Beijing is completed, a decade after its design by OMA.
Taoiseach Enda Kenny makes a televised address on the European Fiscal Compact ahead of Thursday's referendum.
The mother of Assange arrives in London ahead of his final legal bid against extradition to Sweden.
Viswanathan Anand defeats Boris Gelfand to win the World Chess Championship for the fourth consecutive time, and the fifth time overall.
A plane carrying 153 people on board crashes in a residential neighborhood in Lagos, Nigeria, killing everyone on board and 10 people on the ground.
Controversy is stoked after a video emerges of a U.S. religious minister outlining his plan to imprison the country's gay and lesbian population behind an electric fence until they die.
The Solar Impulse, a solar plane, lands in Morocco, completing the world's first intercontinental flight powered by the Sun.
U.S. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta makes an unannounced trip to Kabul and warns that his country is "reaching the limits of our patience here" with regard to Pakistan.
Dangote Cement opens a new line of production at its Obajana facility in the Kogi State, making the plant the largest in Sub-Sahara Africa and one of the largest in the world.
A day after the arrest of opposition politicians, a mass anti-Putin protest takes place in central Moscow.
The World Health Organization (WHO) concludes that diesel exhaust causes cancer.
Scientists announce creation of a new chemical compound, NOTT-202, capable of selectively absorbing carbon dioxide.
Czech Republic goalkeeper Petr Čech drops a clanger in his country's game against 2004 champions Greece in a match that had the fewest shots in the European Championship since 1980.
Bulgarian remains believed by some to be John The Baptist are scientifically dated to the first century AD.
In Afghanistan, Taliban soldiers invade a hotel in Kabul, kill guests, and hold some hostages.
The Syrian military shoots down a Turkish F-4 Phantom fighter jet after it had entered Syrian airpsace over the Mediterranean Sea.
A United States judge dismisses an injunction from Apple Inc. against Motorola for patent infringement.
Canadian-American game show personality Alex Trebek suffers a mild heart attack, but is expected to "fully recover".
The University of Virginia reinstates President Teresa Sullivan after she was ousted without a formal vote earlier this month.
Former Pennsylvania State Representative Stephen Stetler is convicted of all six counts in his corruption case.
Colombia evacuates towns near the Nevado del Ruiz volcano over concerns about a possible eruption.
GlaxoSmithKline settles the largest healthcare fraud case in US history for $3 billion dollars.
Syrian President Bashar al Assad accuses neighboring Turkey of supporting "terrorists" and contributing to the bloodshed in Syria.
Cambodian health officials identify Enterovirus 71 as a possible cause for an outbreak in which at least 64 children have died.
South Africa cricket player Mark Boucher ends his career after sustaining an eye injury during the tour of England.
Italian and French rescue crews recover the bodies of two climbers on Mont Blanc in the Alps, two days following an avalanche that swept away nine climbers.
A surfer is killed by a shark off near Wedge Island, about 160km (100 miles) north of Perth in Australia.
The African Union choose Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma of South Africa as its leader, making her the first woman to occupy the post, in a hard fought battle with incumbent Jean Ping of Gabon.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves Truvada as the first drug shown to reduce the risk of HIV infection.
Bradley Wiggins becomes the first British cyclist to win the Tour de France after coming first in this year's race.
The UK's Manchester Airport launches an inquiry after an 11-year-old boy boarded a plane to Rome unaccompanied, and without passport, tickets or boarding pass.
Mali's interim President Diouncounda Traore returns to the country after a two-month absence.
The opening ceremony for the 2012 Summer Olympics takes place at the London Olympic Stadium with Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom declaring the Games open. ,
The sudden death of writer Maeve Binchy, who sold more than 40 million books worldwide, is announced on Irish television by Vincent Browne.
Advertiser accuses Facebook of fraud after discovering that 80% of the clicks they're paying for are from bots, and not actual potential customers.
In athletics, Oscar Pistorius of South Africa becomes the first amputee to compete at the Olympic Games in the 400 meters.
NASA's Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover lands safely on the surface of Mars.
A welding fire breaks out but is soon extinguished, with no injuries, on the 88th floor of One World Trade Center in New York City.
German footballer Robert Huth is hospitalised with suspected meningitis.
Qatar is to deposit US$2bn at the Egyptian Central Bank in an effort to help support an economy battered by a year and a half of political turmoil, an Egyptian presidency statement reports.
In Somalia, a new parliament is formed, with the new task of electing the country's president.
At least 20 people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo die from the Ebola virus disease.
A South Korean court rules that Apple Inc. and Samsung Electronics infringed each other's patents on mobile computing technology.
An outbreak of Legionellosis (Legionnaires' disease) in Quebec City, Canada, kills 8 people and infects 104.
Leslie Buckley, a close associate of Denis O'Brien, is elected chairman of Independent News & Media.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan Raja Pervez Ashraf appears in the Pakistani Supreme Court over his failure to reopen investigations of corruption against President Asif Ali Zardari.
The banana spider venom is found by Brazilian researchers in some cases to relieve erectile dysfunctions in less than 20 minutes.
The Belgian Army assigns 16 sapping instructors to a train-the-trainer program in Katanga, DR Congo, from Saturday until year's end.
The ruling People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola wins the Angolan general election with a preliminary 74.46% of the vote.
Lebanon bans smoking in closed public places like restaurants and cafés.
The Hong Kong government backs down on plans to introduce Chinese patriotism classes in its schools after weeks of protests.
Mexican police officers discover 16 corpses with signs of torture inside a vehicle in the southern state of Guerrero.
At least 21 passengers on board an Indonesian ferry that sank last night on the Mahakam River in East Kalimantan are missing and presumed dead.
Four people are injured and 85,000 households lose power as Sanba moves across Okinawa and Kagoshima Prefectures.
Mei Xiang, the Washington, D.C. National Zoo's adult female giant panda, gives birth to a cub, her second there, via artificial insemination.
The National Hockey League locks out its players after the expiry of the collective bargaining agreement.
A three-man crew lands safely after four months in the International Space Station.
People in over 180 cities of China attend protests sparked by Japan's nationalization of the Senkaku Islands and the 81st anniversary of the Mukden Incident.
The Czech Republic temporarily imposes a ban on hard liquor after a spate of deaths related to bootleg hard alcohol poisoning.
Edwin P. Wilson, a former Central Intelligence Agency operative and arms trafficker, has died on September 10th.
Police in Italy arrest a man at Turin Caselle Airport on charges of impersonating a pilot.
The World Health Organization says the novel coronavirus that originated from Saudi Arabia is not highly contagious.
Singer George Michael cancels the Australian leg of his tour due to "major anxiety", resulting from his recovery from life-threatening pneumonia last November.
At least 47 people throughout the United States are infected with fungal meningitis from contaminated medicine, with five people dying.
A court in the Vatican finds Pope Benedict XVI's former butler Paolo Gabriele guilty of theft for stealing and leaking confidential documents and sentences Gabriele to 18 months' imprisonment.
Antisa Khvichava, a woman regarded as the oldest person of all time, dies.
Serge Haroche and David Wineland win the 2012 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on quantum optics.
The Marie Stopes organisation is to open the first private clinic to offer abortions to women in Northern Ireland from 18 October.
Seven prisoners from Amasya Prison in Turkey say that they began "indefinite and irreversible" hunger strikes on October 5, and their health is at serious risk.
Chinese author Mo Yan, famous for working in the style of writing known as hallucinatory realism, wins the Nobel Prize in Literature.
An Africa Cup of Nations qualification match between Senegal and Ivory Coast is abandoned due to rioting at the Stade Leopold Senghor in Dakar.
Senegal are disqualified from the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations after last Saturday's stadium riot in the game with Ivory Coast.
Big Tex, a 52-foot statue and cultural icon in Dallas, Texas, is destroyed by fire during the final weekend of the 2012 State Fair of Texas.
The SpaceX Dragon capsule on a re-supply mission to the International Space Station returns to Earth.
Five thousand people are evacuated from low-lying areas off the coast of Tamil Nadu state in India and two sailors die in heavy seas before Cyclone Nilam hits the coast.
Former British Labour Party minister Denis MacShane resigns his House of Commons seat after he wrongfully claimed at least £7,500 in expenses.
Bishop Tawadros is selected as the new 118th pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church.
The UK's Secretary of State for International Development Justine Greening confirms Britain will cease giving financial aid to India by 2015.
BP announces it will plead guilty to charges of manslaughter and obstruction of Congress, and will pay a total of US$4.5 billion to the US Department of Justice and Securities and Exchange Commission.
A bronze statue of Sir Alex Ferguson, a most successful manager in Manchester United’s history, was unveiled outside Old Trafford.
The music video for South Korean pop singer Psy's "Gangnam Style" surpasses 808 million views, making it the most viewed video in the history of YouTube.
The UK government is to create a new wave of universities both in the private and public sector, the first new universities in the country for two decades.
M23 rebels announce their withdrawal from territory captured from government troops after a pullout deal was reached in Uganda.
New data from the NASA space probe MESSENGER indicate that Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun, almost surely has water ice buried beneath the surface at its north pole.
NASA debunks rumors of new evidence of life on Mars, but its Curiosity rover continues to make many smaller discoveries.
NASA's twin GRAIL probes have revealed the surface of the Moon in unprecedented detail, showing unexpectedly-deep cracks, craters and tectonic structures.
The President of the Philippines Benigno Aquino declares a state of national calamity in the country following Typhoon Bopha, which has claimed over 450 lives.
Police in Vietnam break up anti-China protests over gas and oil claims in the South China Sea.
Finance Ministers from the European Union agree to giving the European Central Bank new powers to supervise euro zone banks.
An inquest into the death of nurse Jacintha Saldanha hears that she died as a result of self-inflicted hanging.
Ephraim Mirvis is announced as the next Chief Rabbi of the United Kingdom, replacing Dr. Jonathan Sacks who will step down from the role in 2013.
The New York Stock Exchange, the largest stock exchange in the United States and the world, is sold to Atlanta-based IntercontinentalExchange.
Vladimir Putin, the President of Russia, grants Russian citizenship to Gérard Depardieu who has renounced his French citizenship due to high taxes.
Police in India charge five men with the murder of a 23-year-old woman who was gang-raped on a bus in Delhi on December 16, 2012.
The Church of England drops its prohibition on gay clergy in civil partnerships becoming bishops, so long as they promise to be celibate.
Beijing's air pollution reaches levels judged as hazardous to human health.
Boeing 787 aircraft are grounded worldwide over concerns about the safety of their lithium-ion batteries.
NASA’s Curiosity rover finds calcium deposits on Mars similar to those seen on Earth when water circulates in cracks and rock fractures.
The United States Department of State issues a travel warning to United States citizens for the country of Algeria in response to the In Aménas hostage crisis.
Rescuers from New Zealand and McMurdo Station looking for three Canadians aboard an airplane presumed to have gone down in Antarctica were grappling with bad weather conditions.
A Ukrainian court sentences a former police chief Olexiy Pukach to life imprisonment for murdering journalist Georgiy Gongadze in 2000.
A.C. Milan says it has reached an agreement with Manchester City F.C. to sign Italian striker Mario Balotelli.
South Korean media reports claim that North Korea has been placed under martial law with another nuclear test considered to be imminent.
The Kremlin announces that Russia will hold the 2014 G8 summit in its southern Black Sea resort of Sochi, the host of the 2014 Winter Olympics.
Afzal Guru is hanged at Tihar Jail in New Delhi, India, for his role in the 2001 Indian Parliament attack.
Tens of millions of Hindus bathe in the Ganges River in the Indian city of Allahabad during the Maha Kumbh Mela festival.
In motorsport, Danica Patrick becomes the first woman to win pole position at the Daytona 500 and the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series.
North Korea threatens the "final destruction" of South Korea during a United Nations conference on disarmament.
The Canadian Security Intelligence Service warns of possible attacks within Canada due to the presence of Al-Qaeda affiliated groups in the country.
A new study finds that chimpanzees will solve puzzles for the fun of it.
A study concludes that continuous standing and walking reduces the risk of type II diabetes better than either sitting/lying or exercise.
Following treatment, a 2-year-old Mississippi girl born with the HIV/AIDS virus is pronounced to be HIV negative.
Eddie Maher, who spent almost 20 years as a fugitive in the United States, is jailed for five years for stealing a security van containing £1.2m in Suffolk, England.
Manchester United player Rio Ferdinand may face a disciplinary procedure after his sarcastic hand-clapping gesture before Cüneyt Çakır at the end of the game.
The United Nations Security Council approves unanimously new sanctions against North Korea for its recent nuclear test.
Six people, including multiple elected officials, are arrested on charges of fraud for allegedly attempting to rig the 2013 New York City mayoral election.
Writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, the only person to have won both an Academy Award and a Booker Prize, dies at the age of 85.
A new study suggests that common cholesterol reducing drugs may also prevent macular degeneration.
Pope Francis appoints a panel of nine high-ranking prelates from around the world to advise him of the running of the Catholic Church and advise him on the reform of the Vatican bureaucracy.
U.S. President Barack Obama visits the city of Boston in the wake of the recent marathon bombings.
A study finds that men who wear kilts and no underwear have higher sperm counts than men who sport underwear.
In tennis, Russia and Italy advance to the final of the 2013 Fed Cup World Group defeating Slovakia and Czech Republic respectively.
After being missing for over a week, the body of Sunil Tripathi is found in the Providence River.
Seven-time Prime Minister of Italy Giulio Andreotti dies in Rome at the age of 94 years.
Indian National Congress won legislative assembly election of Indian state Karnataka with clear majority.
Gunmen break into the home of an anti-terrorism police officer in the Baghdad suburbs, killing him and his family.
Star Trek Into Darkness earns an estimated US$70.6 million during its opening weekend in the US and Canada.
A study of more than 10,000 people finds a correlation between cesarean section birth and childhood obesity.
Thousands of people attend the beatification of Pino Puglisi, a Roman Catholic priest murdered by the Sicilian Mafia for speaking out against crime. ,
In tennis, Venus Williams loses in the first round of the French Open for the first time since 2001.
France reports its first death from the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus as Saudi Arabia advises of five new cases.
Italy announces its first case of novel coronavirus.
U.S. President Barack Obama lifts a trade embargo of communications equipment and software to non-government Iranians.
Taliban insurgents attack two checkpoints in the Kamdesh District in eastern Afghanistan killing four Afghan police officers
Wildfires in Southern California, USA, lead to hundreds of evacuations.
The Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt rules that the country's Islamist dominated Parliament and Constituent Assembly of Egypt were illegally elected.
In rugby league, the New Zealand Warriors are fined AU$15,000 for Russell Packer urinating on the field before a game.
More than 150 scientists urge the Australian Government to slow development near the Great Barrier Reef.
Researchers describe the recently rediscovered Hula painted frog, long thought to be extinct, as a "living fossil".
A second case of Legionnaires' Disease in less than a week is confirmed in Australia, leading to fears of a possible outbreak of the rare disease.
The United States and China agree to work together to reduce the use of hydrofluorocarbons which are thought to contribute significantly to global warming.
A new study suggests that altitude plays a role in language evolution, explaining why ejective sounds are more popular in languages of high-altitude regions.
Pope Francis blesses thousands of Harley Davidson motorcycle enthusiasts on the company's 110th anniversary.
The Prime Minister of the Czech Republic, Petr Nečas, submits his resignation following a corruption scandal.
President of Nigeria Goodluck Jonathan announces a N3 billion fund to "intervene" in Nollywood.
Taiwan reports the first human case of the H6N1 virus.
French anti-terror police arrest six people in Paris who were said to have been planning a terrorist attack on well known figures.
The Australian Dollar falls to its lowest level against the US Dollar since 2010.
Pakistan condemns the latest deadly U.S. drone strike to violate its "sovereignty and territorial integrity".
Abu Qatada, a Palestinian Muslim cleric allegedly affiliated with al-Qaeda, is deported from the United Kingdom to Jordan to face charges of terrorism.
Prominent Russian opposition figure Alexei Navalny registers himself to stand in September's vote for Moscow mayor.
British Prime Minister David Cameron announces plans for every household in the UK to automatically have pornography blocked by their internet service provider, unless they choose otherwise.
Hercules 264, a Gulf of Mexico natural gas drilling rig, partially collapses off the coast of Louisiana after catching fire.
Wells Fargo of the United States becomes the world's largest bank by market capitalisation, replacing the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China amid an economic slowdown in China.
The Oxford English Dictionary confirms that it will change the definition of the word "marriage" to include the LGBT community.
A mass funeral is held near the southern Italian town of Pozzuoli for the 38 victims of Sunday's bus crash.
The United States closes 22 embassies in the Middle East and North Africa due to intelligence of an Al-Qaeda attack.
A gas explosion in an apartment block kills five people and injures a dozen in the Argentine city of Rosario.
A hot Air Balloon carrying an American family crashes killing one person and injures four in the Swiss town of Montbovon.
Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Leader of the Opposition Tony Abbott participate in the first of three televised leaders debates ahead of September's federal election.
Ali Akbar Salehi, former Iranian foreign minister, is appointed as head of Atomic Energy Organization of Iran.
The UK government's independent reviewer of terrorism laws is to probe the arrest of David Miranda.
Real estate developers are reported to have severely damaged the UNESCO world heritage site of Cyrene, Libya.
The African Diaspora Maritime Corp. withdraws from the America's Cup amid controversy over being denied an opportunity to be the American defender in the competition based on ethnicity.
All 25,000 applicants to the University of Liberia fail their entrance exams.
French President François Hollande says France is "ready to punish" those responsible for the chemical attacks.
Syrians in the capital Damascus race against time to prepare for a foreign strike, with many hoarding supplies and others scrambling to find accommodation further away from potential military targets.
Scientists discover an 800km long canyon that is up to 800m deep in places beneath the ice sheet that covers Greenland.
Diana Nyad successfully completes a swim from Cuba to Florida, the first person to do so without a shark cage.
Rochus Misch, the last witness to Adolf Hitler’s suicide in the Führerbunker dies at the age of 96.
The elusive Australian Central Rock Rat, not seen since 1960, is rediscovered in Central Australia.
South Korea bans all fishery imports from eight Japanese prefectures, amid concern over leaks of radioactive water from the crippled Fukushima nuclear plant.
Results indicate that Sergei Sobyanin will be elected as Mayor of Moscow with over 50 per cent of the vote.
Mahmoud Badr, the founder of the Tamarod grassroots movement that helped spark the July 2013 Egyptian protests, reportedly survives an assassination attempt.
The Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam identifies a new Vincent Van Gogh painting, Sunset at Montmajour.
The legislature of the US state of California passes a bill banning new sales of semi-automatic rifles with removable magazines.
Nigel Evans resigns as Deputy Speaker of the British House of Commons after being charged with eight sexual offences.
The announcement, while confirmed by external research, is still met in some quarters by skepticism.
Naegleria fowleri is found in tap water near New Orleans, marking the first time the pathogenic amoeba has been detected in U.S. public water supply.
The head of a United Nations war crimes tribunal states that it is investigating 14 alleged instances of chemical weapons attacks.
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons reports that Syria has handed over data on its chemical weapons program.
President Barack Obama reveals he talked with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani, marking the first time leaders from the U.S. and Iran have directly communicated since the Iranian revolution.
In golf, Tiger Woods is named as the PGA Tour's Player of the Year for a record 11th time.
A Buddhist mob torches more than 70 Muslim homes and stabs a 94-year-old woman to death in Rakhine State, Myanmar.
The government of Venezuela expels three United States diplomats after accusing them of "economic sabotage".
Scott Carpenter, Mercury 7 astronaut and second American to orbit the earth, dies at 88 following complications from a stroke.
The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant is accused by Human Rights Watch of killing at least 190 villagers in pro-government areas and kidnapping hundreds more.
The World Health Organization reports that a polio outbreak has begun in the war-torn city of Deir Ezzor, Syria.
Tunisian government and opposition leaders are deadlocked during talks over the determination of a new PM tasked with steering the country out of a months-long political crisis.
A solar eclipse sweeps across Africa, Europe and the Eastern United States.
A 14.82-carat orange diamond sets a world record after it is sold at a Christie's auction in Geneva for $35.5 million.
NASA successfully launches its MAVEN space probe on a mission to study Mars' atmosphere.
Indonesian protesters gather outside the Australian embassy in Jakarta and protesters burn Australian flags to protest alleged bugging of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's phone.
Vietnam passes a new Constitution that reaffirms the dominant position of the Communist Party.
LAM Mozambique Airlines Flight 470 carrying 27 passengers and six crew members disappears in Namibia.
Australia and South Korea successfully negotiate a free trade agreement.
A record level of smog is reported in Shanghai causing officials to issue the highest level health warning and delaying of hundreds of flights.
Barack Obama and Raul Castro exchange handshakes despite a United States embargo against Cuba.
Prince Harry and his "Walking with the Wounded" team reach the South Pole after three weeks trekking in the Antarctic.
Tunisian politicians select Mehdi Jomaa as the acting Prime Minister of Tunisia until new elections are called.
Four buildings are evacuated on the Harvard University campus after unconfirmed claims that bombs were planted in them.
Several prominent Turkish businessmen and the sons of three cabinet ministers are arrested as part of an investigation into alleged bribery and corruption.
American businessman Jacob Ostreicher escapes Bolivia two years after being imprisoned without charge.
The United Nations says that they have discovered a mass grave containing 75 bodies in Unity State, and two other mass graves have been reported in Juba.
Seven-time Formula One drivers' champion Michael Schumacher is reported to be in critical condition after brain surgery in Grenoble for a head injury suffered while skiing in the French Alps.
Latvia becomes the 18th EU member state to adopt the euro despite public opposition.
Two suspected Al-Qaeda militants are killed in a U.S. drone strike in the southeastern province of Hadhramaut.
Alberta Health Services confirms first avian flu death in Alberta.
U.S. sports personality and Basketball Hall of Famer Dennis Rodman defends his visits to North Korea after he is criticized by the family of an American detainee.
Protesters gather in Bangkok to shut down the city centre in an effort to bring down the government of Prime Minister of Thailand Yingluck Shinawatra.
Communitary forces take several towns in Mexican state of Michoacán trying to expel the Knights Templar Cartel forces, and prompting the intervention of Mexican Army against them.
The United States returns 11th-12th century sculptures stolen by art thieves from temples in India.
A British photographer designs and builds a drone as a low cost alternative for shooting nature documentaries.
California Governor Jerry Brown declares a drought emergency and asks residents of the state to voluntarily conserve water.
Monsoon rains cause flooding in the Indonesian capital Jakarta causing the evacuation of more than 30,000 people.
The United States rejects the invitation of Iran by the United Nations in peace talks involving Syria.
Ukrainian security forces start dismantling protest camps in Kiev with two protesters feared dead after clashes with police. ,
Scientists from the European Space Agency and other institutions detect the presence of water vapour on Ceres.
Hong Kong orders the destruction of 20,000 chickens after the H7N9 bird flu strain is found in chickens imported from mainland China.
Scientists warn that penguin populations may be declining due to extreme environmental conditions related to climate change
In India, the first 8.9 km of the Mumbai Monorail is inaugurated.
Philippine President Benigno Aquino III compares China's territory claims in the South China Sea to Nazi Germany's invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Fighting between Syrian rebels and government forces rages around the Aleppo Central Prison in the war-torn city of Aleppo, but it is unclear whether rebels control all or part of the facility.
Civilians are evacuated from a rebel-held area of the Syrian city of Homs after more than 18 months under a government blockade.
A measles outbreak from the Philippines has spread into Australia, Canada, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom.
Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro arrests opposition activists in reaction to an "attempted coup" against his government.
Botswana ends diplomatic relations with North Korea following a UN report on the latter's human rights record.
Chinese vessels reportedly harassed Filipino fishermen off the coast of the Philippines last January 27, according to the Philippine military.
A 4.4-billion-year-old crystal from Western Australia has been confirmed as the oldest fragment of Earth's crust.
Chaos erupts in Stockholm after the Swedish Public Employment Service by mistake invites 61,000 persons to the same job interview.
Alfonso Cuarón wins the Academy Award for Best Director for the film Gravity, which earned the most Awards during the ceremony, a total of seven.
Vladimir Putin orders troops near the Ukraine border to return to their bases with Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov calling the military exercises a "success".
UN Envoy Robert Serry is ordered to leave Crimea at gunpoint after being threatened by 10–15 armed men.
The Israel Defense Forces captures an Iranian ship carrying long-range artillery rockets to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
Two members of the protest band Pussy Riot are left with chemical burns and head injuries after being attacked by a group of people in a McDonald's.
A study released by the University of California, San Diego shows that vitamin D increases the chances of survival in patients suffering from breast cancer.
An intoxicated hit-and-run driver in Austin, Texas, United States, drives into a nighttime crowd at the South by Southwest festival, killing two and injuring 23
A French court sentences former Rwandan army captain Pascal Simbikangwa to 25 years for his role in the 1994 Rwandan genocide.
A 6.7 magnitude earthquake strikes off the coast of Chile with officials issuing precautionary tsunami warnings for the nation's coast.
The United Nations Children's Fund reports that an outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus that has so far claimed the lives of 59 victims has spread from southern Guinea to the capital Conakry.
The interim President of Ukraine Olexander Turchynov orders Ukrainian forces to withdraw from Crimea.
Alan Shatter fights for his political survival in front of the Republic's parliament when he faces questions about yesterday's revelations of decades-long nationwide bugging.
Canada's Atlantic seaboard provinces brace for a spring blizzard that is predicted to be the worst storm in a decade.
Prince Muqrin bin Abdulaziz Al Saud is confirmed as second-in-line to the Saudi Arabian throne.
The US Geological Survey records a 5.1 magnitude earthquake in the Los Angeles area of California.
The first possible case is reported in Mali, with the death toll rising in Guinea and Liberia to 90.
The world's two largest cement manufacturers, LaFarge of France and Holcim of Switzerland, agree to a merger that would create a firm with a market value of $55 billion.
A massive forest fire in Valparaíso, Chile destroys thousands of homes and leaves 11 people dead.
The death toll from the West Africa ebola outbreak reaches 121.
Six armored personnel carriers belonging to the Ukrainian military are captured by pro-Russian protesters amid rising tensions between the protestors and the military.
Russian President Vladimir Putin admits having sent Russian forces to Crimea last month to protect its military equipment there.
An official study released by the Chinese government reveals that about one-fifth of China's soil is contaminated.
The UK government announces that Cornish people will be granted minority status under Council of Europe rules for the protection of national minorities.
Tornadoes hit the Arkansas towns of Vilonia and Mayflower with reports of casualties.
More than 50 royal mummies have been discovered by Egyptian and Swiss archeologists in the newly opened KV40 tomb in Egypt's Valley of the Kings.
The People's Republic of China and Russia announce plans to hold joint naval exercises in the East China Sea in late May amid regional tensions about islands and airspace.
The first U.S. case of MERS is reported in Munster, Indiana, of someone who travelled to Saudi Arabia.
The Sunday Herald becomes the first Scottish newspaper to declare its support for a Yes vote in the forthcoming referendum on Scottish independence.
The World Health Organization states that the spread of polio is an international public health emergency.
A 5.0 magnitude earthquake strikes Shaheed Benazir Abad District, Pakistan, killing 1 person and injuring another 70.
A group named Turkestan Islamic Party claims the responsibility for the attack on Ürümqi Railway Station in China.
AstraZeneca rejects the latest, and likely the last, takeover price from Pfizer, close to 70 billion pounds or US$118 billion.
Nest Labs announces plans to recall 440,000 smoke alarms to fix a problem that could cause the alarms to not go off immediately after detecting smoke.
The International Institute for Species Exploration announces the "Top 10 New Species" of 2013.
The newly elected President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko vows to continue Kiev's anti-terrorist operation against pro-Russian militants in the east.
A report sponsored by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and published online by the Lancet finds that 30% of the world's population is overweight or obese.
Psy's "Gangnam Style" becomes the first video to reach 2 billion views on YouTube.
In boxing, Carl Froch knocks out George Groves in the eighth round to retain the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation super middleweight championships.
A study published in The New England Journal of Medicine links MERS to several infected camels.
The World Health Organisation estimates that an outbreak of the ebola virus has killed more than 200 people in West Africa.
Vietnamese banking tycoon Nguyen Duc Kien is sentenced to 30 years in prison in Vietnam on charges of tax evasion, violating state economic regulations, fraud, and running an illegal business.
German ex-Formula 1 champion Michael Schumacher is out of an induced coma and has left Grenoble Hospital in France for further rehabilitation.
The President of the United States, Barack Obama, proposes to expand the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument, creating the world's largest marine sanctuary in the Central Pacific Ocean.
The Ukraine Parliament confirms all government candidates, including that of foreign minister, appointed the previous day by President Petro Poroshenko.
Egypt's president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi makes his first official visit abroad to Algeria where security was top of the agenda.
Scientists identify a new species of elephant shrew, named Macroscelides micus.
North Korea says it will put on trial two American tourists, Jeffrey Fowle and Michael Miller, for crimes against the state.
The prehistoric bird Pelagornis sandersi is identified as the largest flying bird yet discovered.
An experimental vaccine for dengue fever has been developed in Manila.
Four Slovenian skiing officials are suspended for allegedly rigging results so that violinist Vanessa-Mae could compete for Thailand in alpine skiing.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum obtains a full copy of the archives of the United Nations War Crimes Commission from World War II and makes it available online.
A firefighting helicopter searching for missing people from the sinking of the MV Sewol in April crashes in the South Korean city of Gwangju with five people aboard.
Dr. Kent Brantly, the medical director for Samaritan's Purse in Liberia, tests positive for the virus.
Danish scientists find a genetic variant among Greenlanders that dramatically increases the risk of developing type-2 diabetes.
The World Health Organisation estimates that the death toll from the Ebola virus outbreak has risen to 887.
Officials in Karamay in Xinjiang, western China, places a temporary ban on Islamic headscarves, clothing and those with beards from using public transport, following violence in the region.
The US launches a fourth round of air strikes targeting Islamic State fighters near Erbil, and Kurdish forces regain control of two towns in Nineveh province after heavy fighting.
Protests against the shooting of Michael Brown by the Ferguson Police Department in the US state of Missouri turn violent.
The Democratic Republic of Congo confirms two deaths from Ebola in the north of the country, the first cases reported from the current outbreak.
Ukrainian forces say they managed to stop a larger part of a convoy of around 50 armoured vehicles, which entered Ukraine from the border with Russia near Novoazovsk.
The President of Russia Vladimir Putin meets with the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in Minsk, Belarus, as disputes in eastern Ukraine continue.
The UN Human Rights Council issues a report accusing both IS militants and Syrian government forces of committing war crimes in Syria.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reports that dozens of Syrian government forces, captured after the loss of the Tabqa air base, were executed by IS militants.
The United Nations Security Council will hold an emergency session on Ukraine at the request of Lithuania.
In association football, Cristiano Ronaldo of Real Madrid wins the UEFA Best Player in Europe Award ahead of Manuel Neuer and Arjen Robben of Bayern Munich.
Malaysian Airlines announces plans to lay off 6000 staff as a result of a restructuring following the loss of two aircraft in disasters this year.
Judith Collins resigns from the New Zealand Cabinet following allegations that she undermined the head of the Serious Fraud Office in 2011 when she had ministerial responsibility.
Mohammad Reza Rahimi, former Iranian vice president, is convicted to a prison term for his role in the 2011 embezzlement scandal.
Pharmacy chain CVS Pharmacy announces it will change its name to "CVS Health" and cease marketing tobacco products.
Two species of dendrogramma, found off the coast of Australia in 1986, are discovered to be unclassifiable in any existing phylum.
China says two pilots conducting fighter jet take-off and landing tests for the Chinese aircraft carrier Liaoning were killed during trials.
American twins Bob and Mike Bryan win their fifth US Open men's doubles title, giving them 100 ATP World Tour titles as a team.
Clarence House confirms that the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are expecting their second child.
Gold extends a fresh three-month low as a stronger U.S. dollar sapped investor appetite for the metal.
India suspends rescue operations due to heavy rain in Jammu and Kashmir state where over 100,000 still await rescue.
Lawmakers from Ukraine ratify a landmark agreement with the European Union in tandem with a meeting of the European Parliament.
Australia raises security for its Parliament after conducting raids that arrest dozens of suspected terrorists.
Students from more than 20 universities and colleges in Hong Kong are boycotting class in protest against Beijing’s decision to rule out fully democratic elections.
NASA's MAVEN space probe successfully arrives in orbit over Mars.
The World Health Organisation says that the death toll from the Ebola virus is over 2,900.
Fatah and Hamas agree to form a unity government on the Gaza Strip.
Pacific walruses unable to find sea ice on which to rest in Arctic waters are coming ashore in record numbers on a beach in north-west Alaska.
18,000 Palestinians are facing life-threatening shortages of water in the Yarmouk Camp neighborhood of Damascus.
British neuroscientist John O'Keefe and Norwegian scientists May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser share the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
Albania's prime minister is embroiled in scandal after his brother is linked to the stunt.
In North American Major League Baseball, the Kansas City Royals sweep the Baltimore Orioles in the 2014 American League Championship Series 4-0 to progress to the 2014 World Series.
Mali confirms that a 2-year-old girl has tested positive for Ebola, marking the country's first documented case.
Protesters in Iran call for increased security after four women are injured in acid attacks in Isfahan for allegedly not wearing veils.
The Temple Mount in Jerusalem was closed to all visitors for the first time since 2000, following the attempted assassination of Israeli activist Yehuda Glick.
Mexican Federal Police arrest a mayor and his wife, the alleged masterminds of the kidnapping of 43 students in Iguala, Guerrero.
Mali confirms that it has a new case of Ebola virus, this time in the capital Bamako.
The Church of England adopts legislation paving the way for the appointment of female bishops.
UNESCO declares the Rizal Monument in Manila, Machu Picchu of Peru, Camino de Santiago of Spain, and the Dampier Archipelago of Australia as World Heritage Sites in Danger.
The Scottish Parliament elects Nicola Sturgeon as the first female First Minister of Scotland.
A roadside bomb planted at a bus station near the town of Mubi in northeastern Nigeria kills 40, including 5 soldiers.
Greek labor unions begin a general strike to protest ongoing government austerity measures shuting down public medical, educational, and transportational services.
France sets a new record for unemployment with 3.46 million recorded in October.
The UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East declares a state of emergency on the Gaza Strip following heavy floods.
The United Nations World Food Program suspends a food program for 1.7 million Syrian refugees after donor countries fail to meet their commitments.
A South African judge rules that the prosecution can appeal the decision not to convict Oscar Pistorius for the murder of Reeva Steenkamp in 2013 to the Supreme Court of Appeal.
In the NBA, Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers moves to third on the all-time point scorer list overtaking Michael Jordan.
A tunnel collapse traps twelve Vietnamese workers, including one woman, at a construction site of a hydropower plant located in the Central Highlands.
US clothing company Gap Inc. agrees to distribute their apparels to Chinese e-commerce company JD.com.
A South Korean court orders the dissolution of the Unified Progressive Party citing pro-North Korean stances.
In cricket, the Boxing Day Test commences at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, with Australia playing against India.
In the latest advance in Operation Indian Ocean, Somali government forces assisted by AMISOM troops capture seven towns in the central Hiran province from Al-Shabaab.
President of Gambia Yahya Jammeh remains in power after a failed coup attempt while he was travelling outside the country.
Pope Francis announces the appointment of 20 new Cardinals, many of them coming from outside of Europe.
Ireland becomes the first European nation to be allowed to export beef to the United States since the mad cow disease scare 15 years ago.
In ice hockey, the 2015 World Junior Ice Hockey Championship closes with Canada beating Russia in the gold medal game, while Slovakia captures bronze.
Cuba starts releasing political prisoners as part of an historic agreement with the United States announced last month.
NASA's Kepler space observatory announces the discovery of three new planets in the Goldilocks zone capable of supporting life.
The US Olympic Committee chooses the city of Boston as the American bid city to host the 2024 Summer Olympics.
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report estimates the effectiveness of the influenza vaccination in 2014–2015 at 23% which is the lowest since 2006.
Chinese officials impose an emergency ban on tourists approaching pandas subsequent to the death of two pandas from a canine distemper virus.
According to preliminary tests at the Glendive, Montana city water treatment plant, the January 17 oil spill in the Yellowstone River contains benzene, a chemical that causes cancer.
The government-installed pollution gauges that were set up along roadside stations to monitor Hong Kong reach the maximum level of their ranges.
City officials of Glendive, Montana declare that the tap water is safe to consume following the January 17 oil spill in the Yellowstone River.
File sharing site Pirate Bay returns online after having been shut down by Swedish authorities in December 2014.
Iran successfully puts the Fajr satellite in orbit using a Safir-B1 rocket.
Twelve people die of swine flu in the Indian state of Gujarat taking the death toll to 136 since January with 130 new cases reported.
The Prime Minister of Australia Tony Abbott issues a last-minute plea for Bali Nine drug smugglers Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran facing the death penalty in Indonesia.
The 2015 Cricket World Cup begins with New Zealand playing Sri Lanka at Christchurch's Hagley Oval and Australia playing England at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.
Cyclone Marcia is expected to strengthen to category 5 before making landfall in Central Queensland. ,
Israel is hit by the heaviest snow storm in a century causing the closure of schools and highways in high places throughout the country.
Research published in the journal Nature claims that a large portion of the lithium in the universe was produced by novae.
John Key, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, announces plans to deploy up to 143 New Zealand Defence Force personnel to Iraq on a training mission to last no more than two years.
In rugby league, the Australian-based National Rugby League takes over control of the Gold Coast Titans following five current players being charged with supplying cocaine.
The Argentine National Congress approves installation of a Chinese satellite tracking station in Patagonia.
Energy-rich Kazakhstan suspends Russian fuel and gas imports to protect its domestic market from a surplus due to a weakened ruble which has sent ripples of economic uncertainty through Central Asia.
U.S. President Barack Obama signs an executive order declaring Venezuela a national security threat to the U.S.
The United States Food and Drug Administration approves genetically modified potatoes and apples.
The Opportunity rover completes a Martian marathon, the first time any vehicle has traveled more than 26.2 miles on the surface of another world.
An American sailor who was lost for 66 days in the Atlantic Ocean is found by a German tanker.
Burkina Faso culls 115,000 chickens over a bird flu scare.
Kentucky U.S. Senator Rand Paul announces that he will seek the Republican nomination for the U.S. presidency in 2016.
Benjamin Netanyahu demands that any final agreement on the Iranian nuclear program include a "clear and unambiguous Iranian recognition of Israel's right to exist."
A mystery disease that kills patients within 24 hours has killed at least 18 people within the past week in the Nigerian town of Ode-Irele in Ondo State.
Blue Bell Creameries recalls all of its products in the United States due to a Listeria monocytogenes outbreak.
Pope Francis accepts the resignation of Robert Finn as bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Kansas City–Saint Joseph for failing to report a suspected child abuser.
Kenyan Eliud Kipchoge topped all male runners and Ethiopian Tigist Tufa won the women's elite event in the 35th running of the London Marathon.
State-owned gas company, Gazprom, loses 86 percent in net income due to ruble devaluation, plunge on oil prices, and Ukraine crisis.
Thousands of people are fleeing Kathmandu due to uncertainty over food supply.
The sovereign bonds of Germany experience second straight day of historic sell-off, dragging other securities in much of the continent with them.
South Korea claims that North Korea has executed its defense chief Hyon Yong-chol with an anti-aircraft gun.
Dzhokhar Tsarnaev is sentenced to death for his role in the Boston Marathon bombings.
Cleanup continues after the Refugio Oil Spill at Refugio State Beach along the coast of Santa Barbara County, California.
Science publishes a series of papers on biodiversity in the deep sea, including tens of thousands of single-celled organisms most of which had not been previously identified.
Record breaking rain causes flooding in the American states of Oklahoma and Texas with Oklahoma City recording record rainfall levels for the month of May.
The newly elected British House of Commons commences its session with the State Opening of Parliament ceremony in which the Queen's Speech is delivered.
The number of deaths from MERS in South Korea rises to six with 23 new cases reported.
Spain gives the late writer Miguel de Cervantes, author of Don Quixote, a formal burial at a Madrid convent nearly 400 years after his death in 1616.
The European Space Agency's Philae spacecraft wakes up after six months in hibernation as comet 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko gets closer to the sun.
Nepal announces plans to reopen heritage sites in the Kathmandu Valley two months after the April 2015 Nepal earthquake.
Ninety-four people die, and 45 others are hospitalized, after drinking moonshine in Mumbai (Bombay), India.
Prime Minister of Greece Alexis Tsipras makes a new offer for reforms which could signal a late deal in the country's debt talks.
India offers Nepal an additional billion dollars to help it recover from the April 2015 Nepal earthquake.
The European Union has reached agreement to share at least 40,000 migrants over two years. ,
The Hellenic Parliament passes a package of economic reforms to end the current stage of the debt crisis.
Nominations for the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards are announced with Game of Thrones receiving 24 nominations.
The People's Republic of China releases 10 South African tourists held for allegedly distributing terrorist material.
In golf, the final round of The Open Championship is played at the Old Course at St Andrews in Scotland with Zach Johnson winning a four hole playoff with Marc Leishman and Louis Oosthuizen. ,
Two suicide bombings at a swimming pool in northern Iraq kill at least 12 people.
The Tunisian parliament approves a new anti-terror law that allows the death penalty for terrorists.
Debris found near the Indian Ocean island of Réunion is consistent with material from a Boeing 777 and is being examined to confirm whether it is from Malaysia Airlines Flight 370.
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia announces that 8-year old Zion Harvey became the first pediatric patient to receive a double hand transplant earlier this month.
Researchers from the University of California, Riverside discover that soybean oil and corn oil increase diabetes rates in mice more than coconut oil and fructose.
The death toll from an outbreak of legionnaires disease in New York City rises to eight with 97 people sick.
The Government of Cambodia claims that the Royal Thai Army has killed five Cambodians since January.
South Korea and the United States commence a joint military exercise despite threats from North Korea.
The United States announces that it is proposing sanctions against those connected to the South Sudan conflict, unless a ceasefire is reached promptly.
Typhoon Goni leaves seven people dead and two people missing as it moves from the Philippines towards Taiwan and Okinawa, Japan.
Malaysia finds the bodies of more than 20 people believed to be victims of human trafficking in mass graves buried near the border with Thailand.
A teenage girl suicide bomber kills five people and injures fourteen others in the Damaturu area in northeast Nigeria.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights claims that ISIL has blown up the ancient Temple of Bel in Palmyra.
South Africa will become the first African nation to host the Commonwealth Games as Durban is granted the rights to host the games in 2022.
BlackBerry Limited announces it will purchase Good Technology, a provider of mobile software, as part of its broader shift to a services role within the internet of things.
The Delhi government defers elective surgery to free up 1000 hospital beds to treat a dengue fever outbreak.
Martin Winterkorn resigns as the CEO of Volkswagen as a result of an emissions cheating scandal.
England becomes the first host nation and first former finalist to be knocked out of the Rugby World Cup during the group stages following their defeat to Australia.
The World Health Organization announces that, since the Ebola outbreak began in March 2014, last week marked the first week of no new cases worldwide.
The American Cancer Society recommends women at average risk of breast cancer should begin annual mammograms at age 45, and women 55 and older scale back screening to every other year.
Lewis Hamilton wins a third World Drivers' Championship in Formula One, as his team Mercedes secures the Constructors' Championship.
A new study by scientists finds that areas around the Persian Gulf could become uninhabitable to humans in less than 100 years due to rising temperatures.
A series of blasts at an ammunition depot in Svatove, Luhansk region of eastern Ukraine leaves four dead and eight injured.
Royals catcher Salvador Perez wins the World Series Most Valuable Player Award.
Harvard Law School Professor Lawrence Lessig announces his decision, via a four-minute YouTube video, to end his campaign for the 2016 Democratic Party presidential nomination.
The Japanese economy goes into recession for the second time since the election of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.
Leaders and representatives from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints release statements clarifying recent policy changes effecting same-sex couples and their children.
A mass brawl breaks out in a refugee shelter in Berlin with a hundred police required to restore order.
According to the FBI, the couple that perpetrated the attack had long been radicalized, and had been practicing at a target range days before their murder spree.
U.S. airplane manufacturer Boeing unveils the first Boeing 737 MAX airplane at its factory in Renton, Washington.
The United States Food and Drug Administration approves the Merck & Co. drug, Bridion, that reverses the effects of muscle relaxants used during surgery.
Germany recruits 8,500 teachers to provide special German language lessons for 196,000 Syrian child refugees.
Trade is suspended on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange for a second time in a week after share prices tumble following the devaluation of the yuan.
The Chinese securities regulator introduces legislation limiting the sale of shares by shareholders.
Windows 8 along with Internet Explorer versions 8, 9 and 10 are now officially unsupported by Microsoft.
Former Prime Minister of Thailand Yingluck Shinawatra appears in court to face corruption charges.
Sierra Leone imposes quarantine on hundreds of people following a recent death from the Ebola virus.
Greece faces suspension or expulsion from the European Union's Schengen Area if it can not prevent waves of migrants from crossing over the country into Macedonia.
Human rights activists claim that three pro-democracy advocates have been sentenced to up to five years imprisonment on charges of attempting to overthrow the Communist Party government in Guangzhou.
Social networking service Facebook, and its photo-sharing subsidiary Instagram, ban private, person-to-person sales of guns via their services.
Jamaican health officials confirm the country's first case of the Zika virus in a 4-year-old child who recently returned from a trip to Texas.
Haiti delays Carnival celebrations over concern that anti-government protests might turn violent.
Billy Kenoi, the mayor of Hawaii's Big Island, declares a state of emergency to deal with the growing outbreak of dengue fever, which is spread by infected mosquitoes.
The LIGO Scientific Collaboration experiment announces the first direct observation of gravitational waves. , ,
Canadian multinational aerospace and transportation company Bombardier Inc. is to cut 7,000 jobs worldwide over the next two years, including over a thousand jobs in the United Kingdom.
Serbia closes its southern border with Macedonia to migrants from countries not affected by war as part of measures to prevent illegal immigration.
ISIL militants cut off the Syrian Army's main supply route to the city of Aleppo and capture the village of Khanasir, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is investigating 14 cases where the Zika virus may have been sexually transmitted.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un orders nuclear weapons to be ready for use at any time.
Aden unrest Airstrikes on the Al-Qaeda-held Al-Mansoura district in the port city of Aden, kill at least 17 militants and injure 20 civilians, according to local medics and a Yemeni security official.
Radar scans at the tomb of Tutankhamun, Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt, reveal two chambers adjoining the tomb, raising prospect of finding the resting place of Queen Nefertiti.
Dutch iconic professional footballer and manager Johan Cruyff dies from lung cancer at the age of 68.
Thousands of people in Dublin, Ireland, attend the Irish government's commemoration of the 1916 Easter Rising against British rule.
Belgium officials lower the official death toll from 35 to 32, with nearly 100 still hospitalized.
Hundreds of arrests are reported in the U.S. Capitol in response to the Democracy Spring protests.
A British brain scan study of Lysergic acid diethylamide shows LSD may be useful in treating mental disorders such as major depressive disorder.
Ethiopia claims that members of South Sudan's Murle people have killed 140 people and abducted 39 children.
Mayor of London and cabinet member Boris Johnson says that U.S. President Barack Obama is "inconsistent and hypocritical" in persuading the British people to remain in the European Union.
Spain commemorates the 400th anniversary of the death of its most famous author Miguel de Cervantes.
In basketball, the Golden State Warriors, the top seed in the ongoing NBA playoffs, announce that the NBA's reigning MVP, Stephen Curry, will miss at least two weeks with a sprained MCL.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports the first Zika virus related death in the United States, an elderly man in Puerto Rico.
The death toll from the Kenya floods including the Nairobi building collapse rises to fourteen.
The Football Federation of Kosovo becomes the 55th member of UEFA following a secret ballot at the 40th Ordinary UEFA Congress in Budapest.
A Swedish court sentences Claver Berinkindi, a 61-year-old Swedish citizen originally from Rwanda, to life in prison for participation in the Rwandan genocide in 1994.
In the Philippine general election, the Liberal Party emerges as the party with a plurality of seats in the Philippine Senate election, 2016 and Philippine House of Representatives elections, 2016.
Two hundred thousand people flee the Sri Lankan capital Colombo as floods caused by several days of heavy rain worsen.
The World Health Organization confirms that the Zika virus strain spreading in Cape Verde is the same as the one in the Americas.
Reports claim that an Egyptian forensic official says that body parts recovered from EgyptAir flight 804 indicate that the crash was caused by an explosion.
A preliminary study by the National Toxicology Program finds that cellphone radiation has the potential to increase the risk of tumor growth in male rats.
As of this day, local and central government are prohibited from making announcements in a way that could affect the outcome of the referendum.
Association football icon Pelé announces that he will sell 1,500 lots of his possessions via Julien's Auctions, which will include his medals, trophies, jerseys, and diplomatic gifts.
Haiti will redo its presidential election after findings of widespread voter fraud in last years voting.
The World Health Organization advises women in areas where the Zika virus is prevalent to delay pregnancies.
Scientists confirm a second detection of gravitational waves by LIGO.
One of five Hong Kong booksellers who disappeared in 2015 says he was forced by Chinese agents into a confession of "illegal trading".
Duterte wants to return capital punishment in the country so he can hang people.
Rebels of the New Syrian Army begin an offensive to capture the eastern town of al-Bukamal, currently held by ISIL militants.
Donald Trump accepts the nomination of the Republican Party in the 2016 US Presidential election.
Russia's track and field athletes will not be allowed to compete in the Rio Olympic Games, even if they did not fail drug tests, after an appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport is rejected.
Every square inch of the United States is forecasted to have hotter-than-normal temperatures for the first time in recorded history.
The Bank of Japan announces a 6 trillion yen stimulus package to help invigorate the Japanese economy.
The American Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating claims that the Hillary Clinton campaign has been hacked as part of recent cyber-attacks on the Democrats. ,
A Syria Civil Defence volunteer search and rescue team says 33 people, mostly women and children, were affected by toxic gas dropped from a helicopter on Saraqeb in rebel-held Idlib Governorate.
China's unmanned lunar rover Yutu shuts down after exploring the Moon for 31 months.
Hong Kong's Centre for Health Protection confirms Hong Kong's first case of Zika virus in a 38-year-old woman and says it will report the case to the World Health Organization (WHO).
A curfew has ended in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir after 52 days of protest allowing for an all-party delegation to visit the state on Sunday.
The number of Zika virus infected in Singapore rises above 40.
The population of African elephants have fallen by about 30% between 2007 and 2014.
The oldest fossil (stromatolite) that had life is discovered in the melting snow at the Isua Greenstone Belt of Greenland.
U.S. President Barack Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin fail to agree on a peace deal regarding the Syrian civil war.
A suicide bomber attacks a charity in the Kabul suburb of Shāre Naw with the Taliban claiming responsibility.
A new infection of the Zika virus spreads to the Philippines.
American swimmer Ryan Lochte agrees to a 10-month suspension while his other colleagues get four.
The Department of Health of the Philippines discover an additional two cases of Zika virus infections bringing the total to eight.
The Cuban-born American arsonist who torched 87 people in March 1990 at The Bronx Happy Land fire, Julio González, dies in prison at the age of 61.
Citing irreconcilable differences, Angelina Jolie files for divorce from Brad Pitt and seeks full custody of their six children.
A triple suicide bomb attack north of Tikrit kills at least 11 and injures another 34 members of Iraqi security forces.
The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission warns that Samsung washing machines may explode if washing heavy load items at high speeds.
2016 FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, the first ever FIFA women’s football tournament in the Middle East, kicks off in Jordan.
The World Health Organization warns that the Zika virus will continue to spread across Asia with cases already reported in Singapore and Thailand.
Google introduces a so-called "fact checking" feature on its news aggregate service to combat alleged political bias.
Philippines president Rodrigo Duterte says he plans to cut ties with his country's former colonial ruler, the United States, while strengthening ties with China.
Iraqi Special Operations Forces have fought their way into the outskirts of Mosul.
A woman who was allegedly raped by Donald Trump drops her lawsuit against the presidential candidate.
The leaders of northern and southern Cyprus meet in Switzerland to restart talks about reuniting the island.
President-elect of the United States Donald Trump meets with President Barack Obama for the first time at the White House.
Samsung Electronics agrees to buy the U.S.-based Harman International Industries for $8 billion in the biggest overseas acquisition ever by a South Korean company.
The World Health Organization declares an end to its global health crisis over the spread of the Zika virus as it has been shown to be a dangerous mosquito-borne disease like malaria or yellow fever.
Ayatollah Khamenei warns that Iran will retaliate if sanctions that breach the Nuclear Deal are approved.
Scientists say warm seas around Australia's Great Barrier Reef have killed two-thirds of a 435-mile stretch of coral in the past nine months.
American film actor and producer Kirk Douglas, one of the last living movie stars of the Golden Age of Hollywood, celebrates his 100th birthday.
Cardell Hayes is found guilty of manslaughter by a Louisiana jury in the road rage shooting death of former New Orleans Saints star Will Smith.
In Brooklyn New York, 2 brothers were stabbed, 1 fatally in a dispute after a school soccer match.
A vaccine for the ebola virus is discovered to be 99.78%–99.87% effective.
American actress Debbie Reynolds has a stroke and dies one day after her daughter Carrie Fisher's death.
The Attorney General of Israel Avichai Mandelblit orders a criminal investigation of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for alleged corruption in two different cases.
The United States expels 35 Russian diplomats over the alleged Russian interference during the U.S.'s 2016 presidential election.
At least seven people are killed and 30 trapped after a pile of waste collapses in a Coal India mine in Jharkhand.
Mo Farah and world tennis number one Andy Murray are among those knighted by Elizabeth II in her 2017 New Year Honours list.
Authorities seek three men after they rob $6 million on New Year's Eve from the offices of high-end jewelry designer Gregg Ruth in New York City.
A UCLA research team, analyzing lunar minerals brought back during the Apollo program, reports that the moon is at least 4.51 billion years old, up to 150 million years older than previous estimates.,
Uber agrees to pay $20 million to settle U.S. Federal Trade Commission claims the company exaggerated prospective earnings and downplayed the costs of buying/leasing a car when recruiting new drivers.
Japanese toilet industries agreed to standardize the iconography of electric toilet seat controls in order to make them less confusing for users.
Mashhad in northeastern Iran was officially named the capital of the Islamic culture in 2017 by the ISESCO.
Israeli authorities approve 153 construction permits for settlement homes in East Jerusalem, and plan to approve another 11,000 in the coming months.
The Indian Space Research Organisation launches a record 104 satellites in single mission.
Seattle-based Amazon.com says it will create 15,000 new full-time jobs across Europe by the end of 2017, increasing its European workforce by approximately 30 percent.
More than 4.9 million people in South Sudan are in need of aid due to a famine.
The Guatemalan army blockades a ship from the Dutch NGO Women on Waves that provides material for abortions.
Casey Affleck wins the Best Actor for his role in Manchester by the Sea, which also won Best Original Screenplay.
The Trump administration plans to increase the budget of the United States Armed Forces by more than 9%.
Near the town of Ramle, Israeli archeologists uncover hundreds of gin and whiskey bottles dating back to the First World War at the site of a former British Army barracks.
Taliban insurgents seize control of the strategic town of Sangin in the southern Helmand Province after a year-long battle with Afghan security forces.
The night parrot is confirmed sighted (and photographed) in Western Australia for first time in nearly 100 years.
The Big Maple Leaf, a solid gold 1 million dollar Canadian coin weighing 100 kilograms (220 lb), is stolen from the Bode Museum in Berlin, Germany.
A bomb targets a mosque in the city of Parachinar near the border with Afghanistan killing at least 22 people and wounding dozens more.
A bus carrying around 50 school children rolls over on a highway south of Sveg in the northern region of Härjedalen, Sweden, killing three people.
An Egyptian excavation team discovers the remains of a pyramid dating back 3,700 years to the thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt at the Dahshur necropolis 40km south of Cairo. ,
The United States is to deploy troops to Somalia for the first time since 1994 to help train the Somali Armed Forces in their conflict with al-Shabaab insurgents.
Plans for a Chicago-based presidential library in honour of the former U.S. President Obama are revealed.
France bans the breeding of killer whales and dolphins in captivity and orders aquariums and water parks to expand their pools within three years following a campaign by animal rights groups.
Incumbent Prime Minister Perry Christie of the Progressive Liberal Party concedes defeat to Hubert Minnis of the Free National Movement.
Mountaineers led by Tim Mosedale confirm suspicions that Mount Everest's famous Hillary Step had completely collapsed.
Gunmen open fire on buses carrying Coptic Christians in Minya Governorate, Egypt, killing at least 28 people and injuring dozens more.
A spokesman for the Chipotle Mexican Grill restaurant chain reveals that hackers stole customer payment data from most of their stores over a span of three weeks starting from the end of March.
Colombey authorities report the tomb of French national hero Charles de Gaulle has been vandalized.
The government of the Philippines and the Communist Party cancel peace talks after president Rodrigo Duterte declares martial law in Mindanao.
Japan Tobacco announces plans to quadruple its output of smokeless tobacco by the end of next year.
Robert Kaplan, head of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, says that low bond yields suggest sluggish growth ahead for the economy of the United States. .
All 800 homes in the five tower blocks of the Chalcots Estate, in Camden, London, are evacuated after the cladding was declared to have failed fire safety tests.
Chinese political activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo is released from prison on medical parole after being diagnosed with terminal liver cancer.
France's National Front leader Marine Le Pen is under investigation for alleged misuse of European Union funding.
A garment factory boiler explosion in Dhaka, Bangladesh, kills 10 people and injures dozens.
Volvo says it plans to phase out fossil fuels by building only electric or hybrid cars.
UNESCO declares the old city of Hebron and the Cave of the Patriarchs, both in the West Bank, as world heritage sites.
Coffee may prolong the human lifespan, suggests one study by Imperial College London and the International Agency for Research on Cancer, and another by the Keck School of Medicine of USC.
Researchers in New Zealand have discovered that the MeNZB vaccine for meningitis may protect against gonorrhea by 30%.
Several major internet companies and activist groups post messages defending net neutrality.
The President of Spanish Football Federation and Vicepresident of FIFA and UEFA, Ángel María Villar, is arrested with his son amid a corruption scandal.
A hearing in the U.S. Senate is held about alleged human rights violations in the Philippines's war against illegal drugs.
Brown University researchers discover that a substantial amount of water may be present beneath the surface of the Moon. ,
Reformist candidate Mohammad-Ali Najafi is unanimously elected Mayor of Tehran by the city council, ending the 12-year tenure of Principlist Mohammad-Bagher Ghalibaf.
A mudslide triggered by heavy rain near Sierra Leone's capital Freetown, kills at least 350 people with the death toll expected to rise as high as 500.
Pakistan holds a state funeral for German-born Catholic nun Ruth Pfau, known as "Pakistan's Mother Teresa," who devoted her life to eradicating leprosy in the South Asian country.
Tropical depression Harvey becomes a hurricane, expected to make landfall on the Texas coast at Category 3, bringing life-threatening storm surge, rainfall, and wind hazards.
Toronto's Sheraton Cadwell Orchestras closes and its management resigns following public backlash to a fat-shaming email that said only "physically fit and slim" singers would be featured in shows.
The opposition movement in Venezuela seeks help from France.
Google is being sued over alleged inequality in the pay of male and female employees.
A journalist for the British newspaper Financial Times is killed by a crocodile in Sri Lanka.
The World Health Organization says that hunger around the world has risen as a result of war and climate change.
Russian and Syrian warplanes carry out airstrikes in southern Idlib, killing three civilians and wounding others.
U.S. President Donald Trump announces new sanctions on North Korea over its nuclear weapons program.
The king of Saudi Arabia issues a decree allowing women to be issued driving licenses by June 2018.
The United Kingdom's Monarch Airlines goes into financial bankruptcy administration, suspending all flights, cancelling 300 thousand bookings, and leaving tens of thousands of passengers stranded.
The Federal Communications Commission approves Google's plan to restore some cell phone service in hurricane-hit Puerto Rico with Project Loon balloons.
The New York Police Department and London's Metropolitan Police Service open investigations into alleged sexual assault allegations against the American film producer Harvey Weinstein.
The Board of Directors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences decides to strip Harvey Weinstein of membership following several allegations of predatory sexual behavior.
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan announces that the Kazakh language will begin using a Latin script, rather than the current Cyrillic script.
A North Korean defector claims children are being born with deformities near North Korea's nuclear testing site.
U.S. President Donald Trump visits South Korea amidst a crisis with North Korea.
22 police agents are wounded in Brussels when celebrations for Morocco's 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification turn violent.
Former Zimbabwe finance minister Ignatius Chombo, who was arrested during Operation Restore Legacy, is charged in Harare Magistrate’s Court with three counts of fraud, abuse of power, and corruption.
A European Union appeal committee votes to reauthorise the use of glyphosate as a herbicide for a five-year period.
Apple Inc. faces backlash and lawsuits after admitting to slowing down the speed on some of their older phones deliberately. ,
North Korea’s foreign ministry, in an official statement, says the latest United Nations sanctions are an act of war and are, in effect, a complete economic blockade.
Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton are voted the most admired man and woman in the United States, according to Gallup's annual poll.
Iran enforces a ban on teaching English in elementary schools, calling it a "cultural invasion" by the West.
Zimbabwean politician Roy Bennett is killed in a helicopter crash near Raton, New Mexico, United States.
In American football, the Philadelphia Eagles win the National Football Conference, defeating the Minnesota Vikings 38–7.
Seven people die in clashes between security forces and worshippers taking part in an Ethiopian Orthodox religious ceremony marking Timkat (Epiphany) in Woldiya, Amhara, Ethiopia, over the weekend.
A judge in Amsterdam delays the extradition of the man suspected of a lethal stabbing on the Bruges Market Square, citing concerns over the living conditions in Belgian jails.
Scientists discover a large colony of more than 750,000 pairs of Adélie penguins on the Danger Islands in Antarctica.
A UNICEF report says that 20% of girls under 18 are married, compared to 25% ten years ago, with an estimated 25 million marriages having been prevented in the past decade.
British music journalism magazine New Musical Express (NME) issues its final print edition after 66 years, becoming a purely digital medium.
A second package presumed to have been sent by the bomber is discovered in a FedEx facility near Austin-Bergstrom International Airport.
U.S. graphics processing unit producer Nvidia suspends all its tests of self-driving cars.
Polish President Andrzej Duda vetoes a bill that would have demoted all communist-era military officers who served between 1944 and 1990 to private.
A study in Nature shows species which are visually unusual or attractive go extinct at higher rates.
8,500 prisoners are granted amnesty in Myanmar by President Win Myint.
On the anniversary of the Columbine High School massacre, thousands of students across the United States walk out of school to protest against school shootings.
Thailand expresses its interest in hosting the planned summit meeting between U.S. President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.
The government of Guyana reports that pirates attacked fishermen off the coast of neighboring Suriname.
A new outbreak of the Ebola virus disease kills at least 17 people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Prime Minister designate Giuseppe Conte gives up trying to form a government after President Sergio Mattarella earlier vetoed the nomination of technocrat Paolo Savona as Minister of Finance.
Donald Trump announces that he canceled his ceremony for the Super Bowl LII champion Philadelphia Eagles at the White House due to the National anthem protests controversy.
The Walt Disney Company announces that its animation chief, John Lasseter, will leave the company after December 31, after he was accused of misconduct late last year.
In basketball, the Golden State Warriors defeat the Cleveland Cavaliers in four games to win the National Basketball Association Championship.
Germany issues a recall of 73,000 eggs from the Netherlands suspected to be contaminated with fipronil.
Demetrius Pitts, accused of planning an al-Qaeda bombing in Cleveland, makes his first court appearance.
Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed meets with Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki in Asmara and they pledge to restore diplomatic relations.
David Davis resigns as the United Kingdom's Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union amid disagreements with Prime Minister Theresa May over Brexit negotiations.
Divers in Thailand rescue four more boys from the cave Tham Luang Nang Non bringing the total to eight rescued.
Iranian women post videos of themselves dancing to protest the arrest of Instagram blogger Maedeh Hojabri.
The heat-related death toll in the Canadian province of Quebec rises to 70, with 34 of those occurring in Montreal.
France knocks out Belgium from the World Cup, with France moving on to the final against either Croatia or England.
Pakistan, Iran, China, and Russia agree on joint efforts against the Islamic State group in Afghanistan, in an effort to ensure peace and eliminate terrorism from the region.
In data collected by NASA's Juno spacecraft, an INAF team discovers suggestions of a new volcano close to the south pole of Jupiter's moon Io.
Iranian police arrest 46 people in fresh crackdowns on models and associated colleagues posting "immoral images" on Instagram.
The White House announces $12 billion in bailouts for farmers and ranchers affected by recently imposed retaliatory tariffs.
England's Local Government Association reports that approximately two-thirds of plastic objects which reach recycling facilities cannot be recycled, due to the mix of polymers used by producers.
NASA launches the Parker Solar Probe, an unpiloted spacecraft designed to study the sun.
Russian president Vladimir Putin attends the wedding of Austrian foreign minister Karin Kneissl (FPÖ) and businessman Wolfgang Malinger.
Liu Xiang breaks the 50-metre backstroke swimming world record, setting it at 26.98 seconds, to win the women’s gold medal at the Asian Games.
The Spanish government passes a decree which amends the Historical Memory Law to allow the government to exhume Francisco Franco's remains from the Valle de los Caídos.
Two weeks after Elon Musk expressed his intentions of making Tesla, Inc. private, he and the company's board announce that the company will remain publicly listed.
A magnitude 6.0 earthquake strikes the western Iranian province of Kermanshah, killing at least two people and injuring more than 200 others.
The Ministry of Justice of the United Kingdom announces that divorce laws in England and Wales will be altered to allow for "no fault" divorces.
A South Korean man is diagnosed with the potentially deadly MERS virus and is being treated at a hospital in Seoul, the first such case in three years.
Iranian Kurdish shopkeepers begin a region-wide strike against the executions of Kurdish activists and the bombing of opposition parties in Koya in the neighboring Iraqi Kurdistan Region.
Archaeologists discover a centuries-old shipwreck near the Portugal coast of Cascais.
American singer Taylor Swift wins four trophies, including Artist of the Year, and holds 23 American Music Awards, beating Whitney Houston.
Kepler 159d, a exoplanet with the same size as Saturn, is discovered by University of Western Ontario student Chris Fox and professor Paul Wiegert.
Cobalt Air suddenly announces its dissolution, cancelling all future operations and leaving many passengers stranded in Cyprus.
Authorities arrest eight men after a gang rape in Freiburg, Germany on 14 October, with police seeking more men.
Research published in JAMA Internal Medicine describes that mothers should wait at least a year between giving birth and getting pregnant again to reduce health risks to mother and baby.
Denmark suspends future weapons export licenses to Saudi Arabia in response to the killing of Jamal Khashoggi and the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen.
UEFA confirms that a new annual European football club competition called UEFA Europa League 2 will be introduced in 2021.
The deputy governor of Sweden's central bank, the Riksbank, says that the country is likely to become a cashless society within the next three to five years.
A beaver is seen in Northern Italy on camera, a species that has not been seen in the country since 1471.
Carlos Ghosn, formerly the chairman of Nissan, is arrested again on suspicion of shifting personal losses to the company.
U.S. President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump make an unannounced post-Christmas visit to troops at the Al Asad Airbase in Iraq, their first visit to a combat zone since taking office.
After a 56-day trek, British Army captain Lou Rudd becomes the second person to cross Antarctica alone and unaided, over two decades after the first solo crossing by Norwegian Børge Ousland.
Yemen's Shiite rebels say they have given control of the port of Hodeida to the coast guard and local administrators.
South Korean media reports that North Korean officials are expected to visit the United States to discuss a second summit between the two countries at an unspecified date.
The death toll from floods and landslides in South Sulawesi, Indonesia, rises to 68, while six people are still missing.
Pacific Gas and Electric Company files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy for its recent roles in the California wildfires.
A bug in Apple Inc's FaceTime software is reported to have allowed users to spy on other devices.
The Associated Press and Snopes say they are no longer providing fact-checking services for Facebook.
A car bomb kills 11 people and injures 10 others in an attack on a mall in Mogadishu, Somalia.
Several homes have been damaged in an uncontrolled bushfire near the New Zealand city of Nelson.
NASA scientists report the MarCO satellites, two CubeSats in deep space, have lost contact with Planet Earth.
Two Long Island Rail Road trains collide into a car in Westbury, New York, United States, killing all three occupants in the car.
Joe Percoco, former aide to New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, is denied bail and is expected to start his six-year prison term for bribery.
US-backed Syrian forces resume their offensive on the final enclave controlled by ISIL in Syria at Baghuz.
The second President of Kazakhstan, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, is sworn into office, after the resignation of Nursultan Nazarbayev.
Elvis Luciano of the Toronto Blue Jays becomes the first person born in the 2000s to play in a Major League Baseball game.
David Saint-Jacques becomes the fourth Canadian astronaut to take part in a spacewalk and the first in 12 years as he begins a roughly seven-hour mission.
Debenhams, one of the largest department stores in the United Kingdom which employs 25,000 people, collapses into administration.
The last known female Yangtze giant softshell turtle, the world's largest species of freshwater turtle and one of the most endangered species on the planet, dies at Suzhou Zoo in China.
Two people are dead, and two others were wounded in a drive-by shooting outside a nightclub in Melbourne, Australia.
Tiger Woods wins the Masters Tournament in Augusta, Georgia, his first major golf win in 11 years and his first win at the Masters since 2005.
Apple Inc. and Google remove TikTok from their app stores in India after a high court in Madras ruled the app could expose children to sexual content and cyberbullying.
John William King is executed by lethal injection by the state of Texas, 21 years after the murder of James Byrd Jr., for which he was sentenced.
The death toll in cyclone-hit northern Mozambique has risen to 38, as aid workers struggle to reach the worst-affected areas.
Efforts begin in Solomon Islands to refloat a ship after an oil spill in what the government says will be a "very difficult operation."
Germany and the Netherlands suspend military training mission in Iraq citing escalating tensions in the region with Iran.
Pope Francis urges ethnic Hungarians and Romanians to mend their differences toward a peaceful existence in one country.
Israel kills ten people in airstrikes conducted against Syrian military targets in the Golan Heights in response to two rockets fired at Mount Hermon late Saturday.
Riviera Beach, Florida, is paying $600,000 to a hacker who took over local government computers three weeks ago.
Japan's Defense Ministry says Russian Air Force bombers violated southern Japanese airspace, prompting Japan Air Self-Defense Force fighters to scramble and escort the planes out of the area.
Iranian Americans protest outside the State Department as tensions increase.
A ceremony is held at the former site of Germany’s Buchenwald concentration camp to remember people imprisoned there because they were thought to be gay.
Japan announced tightening of chemical exports to South Korea that are crucial for semiconductor industry.
A major holiday celebration and military parade is held in Washington, D.C., United States, by President Donald Trump to commemorate the Fourth of July/Independence Day.
Through Argentine Foreign Affairs Minister Jorge Faurie, the Lima Group say that "the use of force in Venezuela will be implemented when required".
The death toll of the heat wave in Japan rises to 57, while 18,347 others are hospitalized.
The Department of Health of the Philippines declares a national dengue epidemic in the country, as cases spike to 622 deaths.
California regulators announce a ban on chlorpyrifos, an organophosphate nerve agent used as a pesticide.
Walgreens and CVS ask customers not to bring guns into their stores in response to several deadly mass shootings last month.
The California State Senate approves Assembly Bill 5, a bill to regulate gig economy work, introducing a formal test to classify workers as independent contractors or employees.
Donald Trump says the U.S. military is "locked and loaded" after the attacks on its ally Saudi Arabia, but is awaiting confirmation from Riyadh on who launched the strikes before taking action.
Over 12 miles (19 km) of roads are closed for traffic in central London.
Doctors Without Borders alleges the World Health Organisation is rationing vaccines for Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo despite adequate resources.
Japan and South Korea fail to make progress toward resolution, but agree to continue dialogue.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports the number of deaths caused by vaping-associated pulmonary injury has risen to 27, with an additional 1,299 cases of non-fatal injuries.
In a men's football match attended by women supporters for the first time in decades, Iran beats Cambodia 14–0.
Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed wins the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to make peace between Ethiopia and neighbouring Eritrea.
In golf, Tiger Woods wins the inaugural Zozo Championship in Japan by three shots over Hideki Matsuyama for his 82nd career PGA Tour title, tying him with Sam Snead atop the all-time list.
An archaeologist discovers a 25 m (82 ft)-wide ring cairn dating back to the Bronze Age near Tidenham, Gloucestershire.
The United States notifies the United Nations of its formal withdrawal from the Paris Agreement.
Five Malaysian men are sentenced to six months in jail, fined, and caned for "attempting gay sex".
The Supreme Court of India rules in favor of Hindus over a place of worship that has been the center of disputes between them and the Muslim community in the country.
An explosion at a fireworks factory in the town of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto, Sicily, Italy, kills five people and injures two others.
The Shanghai police department says that Wang is a conman who was convicted for fraud in 2016 and is being investigated for another case of fraud since April 2019.
A Camair-Co plane is fired upon while attempting to land at Bamenda Airport, but the pilot manages to safely land the plane with no casualties reported.
Former President of Bolivia Evo Morales lands in Argentina after being granted asylum.
Despite the boycott attempt by Democratic Tsunami, El Clásico is played in Camp Nou, Barcelona, with important security measures.
Twitter bans almost 6,000 accounts, alleging that they were "amplifying messages favourable to Saudi authorities" in a Saudi state-backed coordination.
China announces the reduction of tariffs on 850 products and measures to open markets in several industries.
Canada's Chief of the Defence Staff General Jonathan Vance announces that some of its military personnel in Iraq will be moved to neighboring Kuwait over safety reasons.
Japan issues an arrest warrant for former Nissan Chairman Carlos Ghosn's wife Carole for allegedly lying during testimony.
The U.S. Department of the Interior halts its civilian drone program indefinitely out of concerns that China manufactured the fleet via the SZ DJI Technology Company for espionage.
Apple says it is helping authorities in the Pensacola shooting investigation but refuses to unlock their phones.
The Vatican appoints Francesca Di Giovanni undersecretary for multilateral affairs in the Secretariat of State, the first woman to hold a management position in this office.
The NFL's Oakland Raiders officially relocate to Las Vegas, and are now known as the Las Vegas Raiders.
COVID-19 pandemic in Spain The Ministry of Health of Spain confirms the first case of coronavirus in the country in La Gomera, Canary Islands, from a German tourist.
Winds gusting up to 100 miles per hour have been recorded over much of the United Kingdom and Ireland, causing widespread damage and disruption.
Israel blocks all Palestinian export of agricultural products from the occupied West Bank following Palestinian limitations on imports of Israeli cattle.
A court in Israel sentences Sheikh Raed Salah to 28 months in prison for "inciting to terror".
General Motors pulls out of right-hand drive markets, ending the Holden brand in Australia.
Lesotho PM Tom Thabane is granted sick leave until 27 February when he is due to appear in court for the murder of his former wife.
The Carnival of Aalst in Belgium goes ahead despite UNESCO withdrawing its recognition of the event as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity because of Jewish caricatures.
A 300-bed isolation ward has been set up in Islamabad for Chinese citizens returning to Pakistan after vacations.
Former Santo Domingo mayor Roberto Salcedo Sr. resigns from the government and the Dominican Liberation Party.
The Committee on the Rights of the Child of the United Nations condemns the government of the Cook Islands for criminalizing homosexual sex.
Astronomers discover 139 new "minor planets" in the Solar System that are beyond the orbit of Neptune, which helps boost odds of finding Planet Nine.
Fans attend the Vive Latino festival in Mexico City despite coronavirus concerns.
The Jerusalem Islamic Waqf announces the closure of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Dome of the Rock to upend contamination of the holy sites from COVID-19.
British textile design company Laura Ashley plc collapses into administration, saying the coronavirus has had a "significant impact on trading".
Yonhap News Agency reports that North Korea has fired two projectiles from Pyongan Province into the Sea of Japan.
The Russian military sends medical help and disinfection tools to Italy to battle the coronavirus.
64 Ethiopian illegal immigrants are found dead and 14 alive inside a cargo container on a lorry in Tete Province, Mozambique, apparently having died of asphyxiation.
Fiji declares a 30-day state of natural disaster in areas affected by Cyclone Harold.
Swedish auto manufacturer Volvo Cars resumes full production at its plant in Torslanda, Sweden, which had been shut down due to the COVID-19 pandemic since March 26, 2020.
The Indian Council of Medical Research advises all states to suspend using COVID-19 rapid test kits for two days, after some kits were found to be faulty.
Microsoft announces a $1.5 billion investment in Italy, as part of its expansion of cloud computing services around the world.
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States COVID-19 pandemic in New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy announces that their beaches will reopen for Memorial Day, but with restrictions.
COVID-19 pandemic in Madagascar Madagascar reports its first death from COVID-19; that of a 57-year-old medical worker who suffered from diabetes and high blood pressure.
NASCAR becomes the first major American sports league to resume its season since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States.
Protests against the government resume in Santiago due to food shortages in the poorest neighborhoods of the city created by the lockdown to control the COVID-19 pandemic.
During protests in Indianapolis, two people are shot dead and two others injured after unidentified assailants open fire against protesters.
Vatican Press Secretary announces that the last remaining patient has recovered and that there are zero active cases in the state.
Two firefighters are killed and four others are injured in a Baghjan gas well blowout fire in Assam, Northeast India.
In a Europe-wide operation, police penetrate EncroChat, a top-secret communications system used by criminals to sell drugs and plan attacks.
Indian Minister of Power R. K. Singh announces that India will halt the importation of US$2.8 billion worth of Chinese power equipment due to heightened tensions between the two nations.
Military medics are deployed to hospitals in Texas and California as cases surge.
Several Beirut port officials are placed under house arrest as an investigation starts into how 2,750 tons of ammonium nitrate was left unsecured at a warehouse at the port for six years.
The MSC Grandiosa disembarks from Genoa, Italy, on a seven-day cruise in the Mediterranean Sea, the first major cruise ship to sail in the Sea in almost five months because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The daily number of new COVID-19 cases in France tops 3,000 for the first time since lockdown eased.
Antifa militants, far-right groups, and pro-Confederacy groups clash at Stone Mountain, near the city of Stone Mountain, Georgia.
The UK's national debt exceeds £2 trillion ($2.61tn) for the first time, according to data from the Office for National Statistics.
2020 NFL season The National Football League will require all coaches and staff in bench areas to wear masks.
Tropical Storm Nana is expected to strengthen into a strong tropical storm before it makes landfall in Belize tomorrow.
COVID-19 pandemic in Slovenia Slovenia registers its highest number of new cases since April 1, with 55 new cases reported in the last 24 hours.
Turkish Volkan Bozkır becomes the new President of the United Nations General Assembly.
2020 Stanley Cup Finals The Tampa Bay Lightning win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 2004 following their game 6 victory against the Dallas Stars.
The U.S. Department of Justice announces the seizure of 92 domain names believed to be used by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to "spread pro-Iranian disinformation".
Multiple skeletons of Oksoko avarsan are discovered in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia.
Rwanda legalizes the production of medical cannabis for export, but the Health Ministry states that cannabis consumption of any kind in the country will remain illegal.
The Gambia announces that they have submitted a lawsuit against Myanmar for their role in the Rohingya genocide at the International Court of Justice in The Hague.
The Greek Navy's mine countermeasures vessel HS Kallisto is cut in two in a collision with a container ship.
FIFA announces that the President Gianni Infantino tests positive for COVID-19.
The Czech Police Forces announce that they will carry out random border checks with Austria as a preventive measure against terrorism.
Baby Shark Dance, produced by Pinkfong, surpasses "Despacito" as the most-viewed video on YouTube.
The Egyptian Football Association announces that Liverpool forward Mohamed Salah has tested positive for COVID-19 shortly before Egypt's 2021 Africa Cup of Nations qualifier match against Togo.
Kosovo's parliament unanimously approves deploying the Kosovo Security Force on international peacekeeping missions, following a formal request by the United States Central Command.
Twitter says that they have suspended over 70,000 accounts linked to the QAnon conspiracy since the Capitol storming.
United States Vice President Mike Pence congratulates incoming Vice President Kamala Harris, 73 days after the presidential election.
Polish biotechnology company Mabion S.A. signs an agreement with Novavax to begin commercial-scale production trials for Novavax's future vaccine.
YouTube suspends channels run by Myanmar's military and removes junta propaganda videos for "violating its community guidelines and terms of service".
Gujarat reports a record 12,553 new cases of COVID-19 in the past 24 hours.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky invites his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin to a face-to-face meeting on the front line in the war-torn Donbas to negotiate an end to the conflict.
The United States Navy announces that it has seized a shipment of thousands of weapons in a stateless dhow on the Arabian Sea believed to be en-route to Yemen.
Eid al-Fitr, the "Feast of Breaking the Fast" that marks the end of the month-long dawn-to-sunset fasting of Ramadan, is celebrated in Istanbul's Hagia Sophia for the first time in 87 years.
Pro-Palestinian protesters storm the Queensway tunnel in the United Kingdom, disrupting traffic.
President Jovenel Moïse postpones the constitutional referendum, originally scheduled for June 27, to an unknown date citing rising COVID-19 cases in the country.
U.S. President Joe Biden signs a law that would make Juneteenth a federal holiday, thereby making it the first federal holiday since the 1983 establishment of Martin Luther King Jr. Day.
Germany bans the flag of Hamas after it was used during protests over the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis.
The United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom impose sanctions against Belarus for last month's diverting of Ryanair Flight 4978, which led to the arrest of journalist Roman Protasevich.
The United Nations' World Meteorological Organization confirms that a record high temperature of 18.3 °C (64.9 °F) has been recorded in Antarctica at the Esperanza Base.
Two prison riots in Ecuador leave at least 18 people dead and dozens more injured.
The Plumas County Sheriff's Office orders mandatory evacuations in the area amid the spread of the Dixie Fire.
Cuba recognizes cryptocurrency as legal tender, becoming the second nation to do so after El Salvador.
India's economy rebounded at a record rate of 20.1% in the three months to the end of June even as a devastating second wave of COVID-19 hits the country.
The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation announce a recommendation that half of million people with severe immunosuppressed will receiving a third dose of the COVID-19 jabs.
Protests broke out in front of hospitals across Greece to oppose compulsory vaccination for healthcare workers which takes effect today that risk dismissal of 10,000 unvaccinated workers.
Ethiopia Coffee and Betika Sports Betting Company have signed a five year sponsorship deal.
The sport betting company agreed to pay six million birr for this season.
The company logo will be printed on the right chest of the players’ kit.
Wondessen was provisionally suspended until February 1, 2024 after testing positive for Cathinone.
However, the athlete was also under investigation for various misdemeanors, disrupting the investigation process and attempting to defraud officials.
Loza, who has joined the Malta based Football Club, Birkirkara on a one year contract a couple of months ago, is making history once again pushing her dream and international football career a step further.
On December 11, 2019 many media outlets were busy reporting about the Ethiopian goal prodigy.
Africa’s first black woman to receive an Olympic gold medal, Derartu Tulu, has been elected to lead the Ethiopian athletics Federation on Thursday November 15, 2018.
In an emergency meeting, the Ethiopian Athletics Federation (EAF) elected Derartu to replace Haile Gebreselassie after he announced his resignation on Monday.
The government of Ethiopia awarded and honored the national athletics team that participated in the Tokyo 2020 Olympics in a grand ceremony held at the National Palace on Thursday in the presence of President Sahilework Zewde.
It is to be recalled that Ethiopian Tokyo 2020 Olympics team had finished the competition with 4 medals including one gold medal.
Ethiopian female athletes have won Berlin Marathon with Gold, Silver and Bronze medals.
This year’s edition of the Great Ethiopian Run has seen participation of more than 44,000 runners; and the event has grown to become a major street festival attracting more and more locals and tourists, every year.
The Great Ethiopian Run was launched in 2001 by the initiative of the athletics icon Haile Gebreselassie and so far it has held 17 streets runs in Addis Ababa and other towns.
AACF president, Rezene Beyene, said that the annual tournament will be called the Coca-Cola Addis Ababa Cycling Tournament.
“This is a great inspiration for the cyclists of Addis who are in desperate need of materials and other tools to enhance their capacity,” Rezene said.
Three-time Olympic champion Kenenisa Bekele, who finished third at this year’s London Marathon, has been named as a reserve, along with world silver medallist Adhane Yemane and 2013 world silver medalist Lelisa Desisa.
Mare, who equaled her lifetime best of 2:19:52 when winning last year’s Xiamen Marathon, is joined on the women’s team by two-time Berlin Marathon champion Aberu Kebede and three-time Dubai Marathon winner Aselefech Mergia.
Gianni Infantino, the newly-elected president of the world football's governing body, FIFA, visited Ethiopia this week.
During his visit, Infantino met with a delegation of the Ethiopian Football Federation led by Juneydi Basha, its president.
The movie is about a young man and his childhood sweetheart who is married.
Explaining about this Moges said: "There is this young man who is in love with his childhood sweetheart; the two young lovers decide to run away together but soon they were caught by her husband.
So neighbors stall the ensuing fight and an elder bind together the two men’s cloths, symbolically chaining them together and tells them they must travel to the capital to stand trial in the queen’s court.”
Simet film tells a historical story set in the momentous Zemene Mesafint period.
Brothers Mesfin and Endalk compete for their father’s throne in Gondar.
Murder and betray abound with the kingdom battling with neighboring kingdoms Gojam and Shoa.
While the king of Gondar decides who will succeed him and make peace within the divided country, the son, Endalk, is rightly suspicious that his younger brother Mesfin is the favorite and likely successor.
Fanuel Leul, 22, a graphic designer and illustrator who has been a big fan of comic books, says Jember is a great start and looks forward to other Ethiopia-inspired comics making their way to bookshelves.
Comic books are increasingly becoming a popular medium for visual storytelling and many young digital artists are venturing into the field.
Fanuel, who graduated from Alle School of Addis Fine Art and Design, is himself working on his own comic called Qedamawi, studying Ethiopian history and showcasing the country as the ‘land of the brave’.
The social media pages of Qedamawi feature Ethiopian patriots such as Emperor Menelik, Ras Alula and those that fought the Adwa war reimagined as superheroes.
He was known for his instrumental version of shellela, a genre of traditional Ethiopian vocal music sung by warriors before going into battle.
He appeared onstage in a warrior's animal-skin tunic and lion's mane headdress.
He continued to refine his instrumental shellela style, recording an entire album in 1970, Negus of Ethiopian Sax, which was later released as part of the Ethiopiques CD collection.
Hermon Haily’s Price of Love will be featured at the Lincoln Center this week at the New York African Film Festival as well as Director Yared Zeleke’s award winning drama Lamb: Red Leaves by Bazi Gere starring Debebe Eshetu; Afripedia X New York by Ethiopian and Eritrean filmmakers Teddy Goitom and Senay Berhe of Sweden; and the Dance of King David by Axel Baumann exploring the Ark of covenant.
The Dance of King David is a documentary film about the history and the contemporary worship of the Ark.
The legendary Ethiopian singer Alemayehu Eshete has been laid to rest at St. Trinity Cathedral, Addis Ababa with a massive funeral ceremony attended by many.
Families and fans of the artist, government officials, religious leaders and thousands of Ethiopians from the capital and several places of the country have attended the funeral service at the historical cathedral.
Betty G also performed Yamlu Mola’s “Sin Jaalada” and ‘Hagere’ at the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize Ceremony in Oslo.
Prior to becoming a Goodwill Ambassador, Betty G served as UNHCR’s High Profile Supporter and visited a number of refugee camps in Ethiopia hosting South Sudanese, Eritrean and Somali refugees, according to a statement issued by UNHCR.
The actress has performed in stages and played in numerous Amharic movies over the last 42 years especially representing unforgettable mothers’ characters.
She has worked as an actress, dancer and makeup artist in the infamous National Theatre, the oldest in its kind in the country.
Hub of Africa, with the support of Vogue Talents and the Italian Embassy in Addis Ababa will showcase eight visiting designers and six established Ethiopian designers who have showcased their designs on global catwalks from October.
In addition, six upcoming Ethiopian designers together with other upcoming designers from the continent will display their designs.
As entertainment consumption becomes increasingly visual, artists are struggling to keep up with the audience demand. The audience is leading the market.
According to Samson, artists must wake up and manage their own YouTube channels.
Many in the industry agree with that.
Art contributes tremendously in raising morale during times of war.
Speaking about the show’s aims, Desta said: “The show aims to incorporate performances that will both give the troops alertness and the motivation needed to stand steadfast for the unity of the country.”
The performances, like so many that came before them, will have themes of patriotism.
Schools all over the country have closed their doors in response to COVID-19 pandemic, leaving parents and caregivers scrambling to find daily activities for their children.
Before that, when things were normal, an activity that became commonplace among kids of all ages was spending their weekends at game zones.
The city of Axum, in the Tigray Regional State with its magnificent obelisk overshadowing a city in need of direction and support, the historic city, despite its historical worth is still a hidden treasure of Ethiopia that has not received the respect it rightly deserves.
A society rich with ancient sites, a population that is still young – Axum is a shock.
The place has very few visible tourists coming to its shores.
Head of the bureau, Gebremichael Meles, said that efforts to register Ashenda as an intangible world heritage is getting momentum.
He noted that officials of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) were at Mekelle last year.
The 14th National Flag day is observed in all corners of Ethiopia starting early in the morning today.
The day was marked under the theme: “ New Beginning with Full Sovereignty,” at the House of Peoples’ Representatives.
“This year’s Gondar Epiphany is colorful with increasing number of foreign tourists and Ethiopian-born citizens shown an increase appetite for coming,” said Sertsefire Sibhat, Tourism Ethiopia Deputy Director.
He said that the government has given due attention to the tourism sector in a bid to increase revenue by creating conducive situation for sector actors including tour operators.
Genet is a painter, a collage artist and a printmaker, who creates her own paper from natural fibers including teff.
She graduated from Addis Ababa University Ale School of Fine Arts and Design in 1998.
The 122th Adwa Victory was commemorated yesterday at National Theatre with different programs that attracted officials and veteran patriots.
Ethiopians regardless of different backgrounds, and from far or near together marched to Adwa, where they crushed aggressor Italian forces.
The Ethiopian Catholic Church Cardinal Berhaneyesus C.M., on his part said that the faithful should commemorate and celebrate the holiday with the essence of helping, caring and loving for the well being of others' lives.
The Cardinal also noted that authorities of the government should exercise their leadership in satisfying public interests and ensure good governance in their deep reform journey.
The efforts being made to inscribe the Gada system on UNESCO’s world heritage list are yielding positive results, said the Oromia Regional State Culture and Tourism Bureau.
The Gada system is an indigenous democratic and socio-political system of the Oromo people.
The European Parliament adopted a resolution that demands an “immediate cessation of hostilities by all parties” and calls for an Ethiopian-led inclusive national dialogue including representatives from Tigray, Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Afar, Oromia, Sidama, Somali, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region (SNNPR), and Gambella to find a lasting solution to the ongoing crisis in the country, The Reporter learnt.
The Parliament also called on its Member States “to halt exports of arms and surveillance technology to Ethiopia that are being used to facilitate attacks on civilians and perpetrate human rights violations,” the resolution reads.
The Ethiopian national elections scheduled for August, 2020 were postponed due to the threat posed by the Coronavirus pandemic.
The postponement was a controversial move for Ethiopian political parties, especially the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) which held regional elections unilaterally in defiance of the federal government’s decision to postpone the election.
According to a report from Fana Broadcasting Corporation, Gedu on his part briefed Pompeo stating “Ethiopia’s rationale behind building GERD which stood on the principles of fair and reasonable utilization of its water resources.”
In related news, speaker of the House of Peoples’ Representatives of Ethiopia, Tagesse Chafo slammed the recent resolution by the Arab league over the GERD.
Five months after Ethiopia and Eritrea officially ended a two-decade old stalemate and somewhat restored normalcy in relations, President Sahle-work Zewde received a credentials letter of the newly appointed Eritrean head of mission, Semere Russom at the National Palace on Thursday.
Semere came to Ethiopia four months ago following the restored relations with the signing of a joint declaration of Peace and Friendship agreement in Asmara last July.
It is to be recalled that, in October 2017, Prime Minister Hailemariam Dessalegn, in his address to the House of Peoples’ Representatives (HPR), said that his administration has accepted the resignation of Bereket.
Bereket was serving as deputy head of Policy Studies and Research Centre, an institution set up to aid the PM in high-level policy issues.
Yeshiwas Assefa, the newly elected president of Semayawi (Blue) Party, who assumed the leadership at the general assembly held at the headquarters of the All Ethiopian Union Party (AEUP) a few weeks ago, has announced the establishment of a new executive committee during the National Council meeting that was held last Saturday.
The National Council endorsed the nomination of the executive committee the president presented at the same meeting
The Federal High Court fifteen criminal bench has postponed its ruling on corruption charges involving former intelligence Chief Woldesilassie Woldemichael.
The criminal bench was set to rule on whether charges filed by prosecutors of Federal Ethics and Anti Corruption Commission should be amended or not.
A Disapora Consultant Council which will strengthen ties between Ethiopians and foreign national of Ethiopian origin and the government will be formed, the director further noted.
He added that Diaspora National Council and Diaspora Affairs Coordination Offices will be formed at national and regional levels, respectively.
The Ethiopian Roads Authority announced on Tuesday that the construction of a highway linking Ethiopia with neighboring Sudan had been completed and was open now for traffic.
The 100km-long road, stretching from Ethiopia’s Asosa town to Sudan’s Kumruk (Kormuk), will enhance trade relations as well as social ties between the two countries.
President Girma said in particular the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, road, railway, telecommunication, electric power, potable water and irrigation development are the projects given priority in this fiscal year.
In his speech made here on Monday while opening the Joint Session of the two Houses, President Girma said the government will move forward by formulating good governance and public initiation for development to execute the various development programs.
According to Samuel, the dam with a big reservoir will regulate a steady flow of water in the river and reduce risky floods that have occasionally been killing people, causing massive displacement, and loss of properties in Sudan.
In Sudan, heavy rains and flooding during August and September 2021 have, for instance, affected more than 314,000 people.
He further remarked that the milestones achieved in the planning and implementation of the annual initiative need to be duplicated in various sectors, facilitating Ethiopia’s inevitable prosperity.
The PM congratulated all Ethiopians in all corners of the country for finalizing a successful Green Legacy season this year with 6.7 billion seedlings planted, surpassing the set target.
According to the press release sent to ENA, heavy to very heavy rainfall (top 10 to 5 percent on record) is expected in regions of Al Qadarif and Sennar in Sudan, Gash-Barka and Debu in Eritrea, and parts of Tigray, western Amhara, and southern Afar.
It added that total rainfall above 100mm is forecasted in these regions.
In delivering opening remarks, State Minister H.E. Ambassador Redwan Hussien said the workshop demonstrates Ethiopia’s unwavering determination to be at the forefront of climate change issues in the international arena.
Noting the recurrent drought, flooding, and locust invasions in the Horn of Africa, Ambassador Redwan said, it is vital that we give due attention to climate diplomacy to enhance support to mitigation and adaptation interventions at the grassroots level.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change said that it has been working to bring the consultants and organization operating in the country in one association.
According to the Ministry, once consultants and organization working on the environmental impact assessment associated in one entity, it would be so easy from Ministry to communicate and update them with rules and regulations they have to abide by while operating in the country.
At the opening ceremony, Minister of Environment and Forestry Belete Tafere said strong institutional work was necessary to benefit from forest resources and the institute would play a pivotal role in sustaining the continued building of the green economy for which the country has gained recognition internationally.
The institute would in particular help to reduce the widespread deforestation and enhance the utilization of forests, the minister added.
In 1997 MIDROC Gold acquired the Legadembi open pit gold mine for 172 million USD through privatization process.
Since 1998 MIDROC has been mining gold and silver from the gold mine and export the bulk of its product to Switzerland.
The company built the first underground mining in Ethiopia and undertook a vast exploration work in Sakaro and Metekel license area and discovered commercial primary gold deposits.
Initiated by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed (PhD) in a bid to combat climate change and environmental degradation, it is part of the six billion seedlings planned to be planted in Ethiopia and neighboring countries in the coming rainy season.
The government seeks to plant 20 billion seedlings by 2024, to help build a green climate-resilient economy.
Youths who are tasked to control effects of environmental hazards are expected to investigate factors related to noise pollution, liquid and solid waste effluences, among others and bring recommendations to address the problems accordingly, Sisay said.
According to the Commissioner, the youths are to be organized under enterprises and deployed to their respective Woredas in the capital.
During a national discussion forum on the Environment, Forest and Climate Change Sector Commission Commissioner Prof. Fekadu Beyene said that the country has achieved remarkable successes in terms of mitigating and responding to the effects of climate change.
EPA quoted Prof. Fekadu Beyene saying “The country’s forest cover has hit 17.2 percent.
ohn O’Connor, Director of African Operations at IOHK, expressed his eagerness to harness Ethiopia’s greatest attributes and discover solutions using technology of lower cost, more efficiency and functionality, leapfrogging the traditional usage of technology.
He said he was excited to meet enthusiastic and forward thinking public officials at MoST and hopes to establish Ethiopia as the tech leader in the continent.
Zerfie Mersha, environmental technology director with LIDI, told The Reporter that the acceptable amount of chrome in water waste is 2 mg per liter but most Ethiopian tanneries discharge high concentration of chrome as high as more than 90 mg of chrome per liter.
Zerfei said the chrome is toxic to plants, aquatic plants and fish.
Zerfie said the new technology avoids the use of water, salt and sulfuric acid and formic acid.
“We are introducing the technology to local tanneries and we highly encourage them to apply it but we cannot force them to use it,” she told The Reporter.
“Egypt should not worry about the effect of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) and its potential impact on the flow of the river downstream,” Hailemichael explains.
“Since it would be possible to drink from sea water in the near future thanks mainly to the salt being separated from the water by using technology.”
Manufactured by Tomizawa & Co. Ltd, a small Japanese company, AdPower is a unique technology developed twenty years ago, Toru Tomizawa, President, told The Reporter on Thursday, while briefing reporters about the product.
According to Tomizawa, ADPower is made of special pigments, special alloy (that mainly is composed of copper) and fiber glass which help vehicles’ engines neutralize and contain CO2 emissions and in turn supplies purified oxygen via discharging electrons.
Andualem Borecha Lemecha is a founder, chief designer and product engineer at Eduance, and EduTech startup that provides personalized e-learning and adaptive teaching technology.
The views expressed in the article do not necessarily reflect the views of The Reporter.
Ethio Telecom CEO Frehiwot Tamiru acknowledged the employees of the company who participated in the implementation of the new technology at various levels and pointed out that effective work has been done.
Noting the technology is now a matter of existence said, adding “We have shown that it is possible to start and finish with the help of coordination and good leadership.”
Addressing the Webinar, Ethiopia’s Ambassador to the U.S. Fistum Arega said the government of Ethiopia is undertaking various legal amendments with the view to create conducive business environment and attract foreign investors.
According to him, amendment is made on Trade Law besides drafting investment proclamation to encourage the private sector.
“As a company that creates digital journeys for our customers, we have the skills and capabilities to pay it forward to the communities that need us the most.
The past year has resulted in just about everything going remote, and our ability to accelerate digital inclusion has become our number one focus.”
Kassahun noted that the policy would enable the country to conquer its challenges as biotechnology plays important role in enhancing productivity, reducing climate change, improving health, and bringing about economic growth.
“I believe we will have micro and small-scale enterprises that can be produce electronics, software, IT and automotive electronics.
There will be also small and medium scale manufacturing companies that have the capacity to produce electronics machines in this country,” Getahun stated.
Speaking at the 2016 Samsung Africa Forum, Abey Tau, Corporate Citizenship and Public Affairs Manager, said: “As a global citizen, we felt it was important to use our technology to give back to society.
We do this in four ways: by creating new learning opportunities so that young people can enjoy access to better education; by using our technical expertise to develop and provide access to new healthcare solutions; by supporting youth employment through vocational training and skills development; and by reducing our impact on the environment.”
In a bid to boost employment opportunities for Ethiopian nationals, the Ministry of Health as well as the Job Creation Commission (JCC) of Ethiopia has signed a trilateral MoU with the UAE-based Response Plus Holdings PJSC.
The signing ceremony took place during the Ethiopian Minister of Health Dr. Lia Tadesse’s visit to Abu Dhabi last week.
Coronavirus cases in Ethiopia have reached 123,145 since the first Coronavirus outbreak in the country reported in March 2020, according to the Ministry of Health.
To date some 1,785,132 sample tests have been conducted, 109,846 COVID-19 patients recovered and 231 patients are currently in severe condition.
Indian Embassy to Ethiopia in collaboration with Indian community in Addis Abeba marked today the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi in the capital at Gandhi Memorial Hospital.
On the occasion, Indian Ambassador to Ethiopia, Anurag Srivastava said “we decided to make this year’s celebration at the very special and historic venue of Gandhi memorial Hospital, where Indian communities and Ethiopians contributed to build the hospital.”
Ethiopia has established a high level national taskforce to prevent Ebola virus that has occurred in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Briefing journalists, Public Health Institute Director-General Dr. Eba Abate said similar taskforces formed in regions are making preparations to prevent the virus.
WHO Director-General Tedros will attend the 32nd Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union.
During his stay in Ethiopia, he will also attend Food Safety Conference organized by the African Union, World Health Organization and World Food Program that will begin next Tuesday.
Malaria Program Coordinator with the Ministry, Hiwot Solomon, told WIC that various prevention mechanisms are implemented in area vulnerable to the pandemic during peak periods of spread.
More than 30 million anti-mosquito nets are distributed to such areas since last year, she noted.
Ethiopia’s health care service has been proved successful in not only by making primary health care service accessible but also by improving quality of service from time to time.
The policy direction geared toward prevention has also been successful in engaging the public at large, said Yibeltal.
The Ethiopian Federal Ministry of Health and the National tuberclosis (TB) Program in collaboration with WHO and partners conducted a workshop from December 17 to 18, 2018 to launch a new guideline for reaching missed tuberculosis cases.
In her opening remark, Dr Lia Tadesse, State Minister of Health, noted that TB is one of the priority diseases closely supported in the Ministry of Health and the MoH continues to work very closely with partners, private sectors, civic societies, universities and other important stakeholders in order to identify missed TB cases, abort TB transmission to familiies, and public as well.
USAID’s Health Financing Improvement Program builds upon the successes of earlier investments like USAID’s community-based health insurance initiative, which currently provides medical coverage to nearly 20 million Ethiopians nationwide.
Over the next five years, the new program will focus on mobilizing increased domestic resources and streamlining medical insurance schemes to expand coverage to millions more people.
The project will also work with public and private healthcare providers to better utilize resources and revenues to finance their services.
The Ethiopian delegation led by the Health Minister, Dr Amir Aman, is attending the 72nd international health forum commenced today in Geneva.
The delegation is expected to submit two proposals that Ethiopia has prepared to be discussed and decided up on the meeting.
A road run with the aim of promoting the tourism of Bale, in Oromia, has been held in the town of Bale Robe.
Noting the varied tourist attractions of Bale, Mayor of Bale Robe, Gezahegn Dejene, says, apart from promoting tourism, the event will have a role in enhancing other commercial activities.
Dubai Marathon champion Tirfi Tsegaye, who clocked a world-leading 2:19:41 earlier this year, and Tigist Tufa, who won the 2015 London Marathon and finished second in this year’s race, are the reserves for the women’s team.
Ethiopian long distance running legend, Haile Gebrselassie, will be running a different race—he will be running for the presidency of the Ethiopian Athletics Federation (EAF).
The election will be held on tomorrow in Addis Ababa. Haile will be representing Addis Ababa competing with other officials from regional states.
Ethiopia have appointed former Adama City FC coach Ashenafi Bekele as the new man in charge of the men’s national team.
His appointment was announced this week at Intercontinental Addis.
The 2018 Total CAF Women’s African Cup of Nations will be held in Ghana from November 17 to December 1, 2018.
The tournament also doubles as the African qualifiers to the 2019 Women FIFA World cup.
The top three teams will qualify for the World Cup in France.
Nigeria is the defending champion.
The 2017/18 Ethiopian Premier League (EPL) defending champions, Jimma Aba Jiffar, is all set to use online mobile system for its day to day activities which enables fans get relevant information regarding the club.
The service will help to easily exchange updated live scores, fans registration, monthly payments and allowing voting for best player’s award.
The 70th edition of FIFA congress, scheduled to be held in Addis Ababa, has been rescheduled due to coronavirus (COVID-19) fears.
FIFA stated that, on account of the spread of COVID-19, numerous international bodies and public bodies have advised against the organization of international events.
President of the Ethiopian Football Federation, Esayas Jira, has been elected as vice president of the Council for East and Central Africa Football Associations (CECAFA).
He was elected to serve as vice president for the coming four years at the Associations’ General Assembly held in Kampala, Uganda today.
Mekelle November 29/2018 A cycling tournament that starts from Mekelle and extends to Asmara and Mitswa in Eritrea will begin tomorrow, according to Tigray Region Youth and Sports Affairs Bureau.
The aim of the tournament is to strengthen the people-to-people relations between the peoples of Ethiopia and Eritrea, it said.
Seifu Tura Abdiwak of Ethiopia and Ruth Chepngetich of Kenya won Sunday in the return of the Chicago Marathon, which was scrapped last year amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Abdiwak, who placed sixth in the Chicago race in 2019, finished in 2 hours, 6 minutes, 12 seconds.
Written and directed by Moges Tafesse, Quragnaye addresses the question: “How far would you take punishment into your own hands or wait for the system to levy the appropriate punishment?”.
The story takes place in Ankober, an old town located 174kms north of Addis Ababa.
The most charming Meskerem Abera that plays the love interest of Mesfin and daughter of the king of Gojam brightens the tension brought on by Endalk.
The accents of the actors do not strictly abide by their character’s locales and the sparsely decorated palace grounds beg for more attention to set dressing.
Ethiopian artist Abby Lakew announced at a press conference arranged by her management company on Tuesday at Sapphire Hotel that she will be donating all proceeds from her latest album to charity.
‘Mekedonia Home for the Elderly and Mentally Disabled’ is to be the recipient of the gesture from the star.
The resulting visual data serves as the basis for the painting, mixed media, kinetic and screen-print that would define the four quadrants on the two dimensional surface of the stretched canvases, papers and panels.”
Abraham, a talented artist, holds both an MFA degree in Studio Art and BFA (Cum Laude) majoring in Graphic Design, Painting, and Drawing from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, as well as an AA degree from Truckee Meadows community college. (Tadias)
The Swedish pop, jazz and soul sensation, Kristin Amparo, is scheduled to perform on June 13 at African Jazz Village.
Amparo is a performer and composer from Stockholm who has been a fulltime musician for more than a decade.
At least seven Ethiopian films are set to screen in NYC in May 2016 as part of the New York African Film Festival and the 13th Annual Sheba Film Festival.
A graduate of Alle School of Fine Arts and Design, Addis Ababa University, Daniel Asfaw's painting has always been inspired by the experience of life.
His meeting with his teacher and mentor, Tadesse Mesfin, has also been a decisive one that he tamed his growth obtaining the right mentorship to devote his entire life to art.
Design Week Addis Ababa (DWAA), a weeklong celebration of innovation and creativity, which was launched on January 14, will close today.
Design Week Addis Ababa is an internationally recognized design and innovation event in Ethiopia.
According to Beserat Debebe, creator and writer of the comic, Jember is a character inspired by the life and experiences of young residents in Addis Ababa.
Aman’s creation was informed by his friends’ and relatives’ job seeking experiences in the city.
“He reflects the story of those that are in the transition period between their college life and adulthood. Cities like Addis typically have a high youth unemployment rate. This often leads to a feeling of disappointment and hopelessness for a lot of ambitious young Ethiopians.”
Sewit disagrees with this statement.
“Supply creates its own demand. People like me have given up on shopping. Even the mannequins outside the stores aren’t representative.”
The experience can be irritating for the plus size/curvy/full-figured/voluptuous woman.
Ethio Agri-CEFT, member of Midroc Investment Group, revealed preparations to install the largest edible oil processing complex in the country.
Activities to prepare land on the outskirts of Addis Ababa started with the total investment expected to cost over USD one billion.
In a meeting held late on Friday, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) consulted business owners and managers from the Tigray region on ways of addressing the problems companies faced during the operation.
Officials of the Ministry noted that 93 giant enterprises and nearly 6700 small and medium enterprises are found in the region, and that a task force has been established to conduct a survey and investigate the cost of damages to reinvigorate factories into normal production.
Ethiopia and France signed a military cooperation accord in March 2019 during President Emmanuel Macron’s visit to Addis Ababa.
The deal includes helping the landlocked nation build a navy.
The accord also provides for air cooperation, joint operations and opportunities for training and equipment purchases.
Three international oil trading firms bidding to supply fuel to the Ethiopian Petroleum Supply Enterprise (EPSE) in the 2019 fiscal year.
Last September EPSE has floated a tender inviting international oil trading companies for the supply of fuel to be delivered as of January 2019.
It is recalled that Ethio Telecom has recently announced the launching of 4G LTE service in 92 towns nationwide and in the capital, Addis Ababa as phase-I 4G LTE service expansion strategic plan for the 2020/21 budget year.
Ethio Telecom also promised to expand the service in the remaining towns of the country as we have been immensely working on to finalize phase -Il network upgrading and expansion to meet the ever-growing data demands of customers.
Ethiopia has earned $1.33 billion from exports during the past five months, attaining 94% of the $1.41 billion target.
The revenue increased by $224.5 million or 20% compared to the same period last year, according to the Ministry of Trade and Industry.
The Saudi Arabian Government and business delegation led by Minister of State for African Affairs Ahmed bin Abdul Aziz Qattan arrived in Addis Ababa on Sunday.
In his opening remarks, Dr Aklilu Hailemichael, Ethiopia’s State Minister of Foreign Affairs, said such kinds of events are necessary to further cement the age-long and historical ties between the peoples of the two countries.
Ethiopian Sugar Corporation which was selected Chair of the International Council for 2018 at the last conference held in London 2017 made the announcement today.
Ethiopian Sugar Corporation Communication Director Gashaw Aychiluhem told ENA that the nation will benefit from hosting the international conference.
Ethiopia and South Korea have signed an agreement that could enable to jointly work on issues tied with urban land development.
The agreement was signed between Solomon Kebede, Head of the Federal Urban Land and Land Related Issues Registration Agency, and his Korean counterpart Biki Chaw.
Everest Textile Co, which makes fabrics and garments, said two new plants in Ethiopia and the US are scheduled to start operations in the first half of this year.
The plant in Ethiopia is to manufacture garments for the company’s brand name customers from Europe, while the US facility is to supply knitted fabrics and garments to customers in the US, the firm said.
The Ethiopian Human Rights Council (EHRCo) called for legal and operational amendments for future elections based on its observation outcomes of the elections conducted on September 30, 2021.
According to a preliminary report issued by the Council on Thursday October 21, 2021 at Saphire Addis Hotel, irregularities were observed both in the elections and the Southwestern Peoples’ Region referendum.
Speaking to The Reporter, the Amhara regional state police commissioner, Abere Adamu reaffirmed the readiness of the regional police force to go into operation in Benishagul region if the federal government is busy handling other matters.
“When one regional state fails to protect the safety and security of citizens, the federal government is responsible to act,” said Abere, stressing the need for maintaining rule of law in the area where the killings are taking place.
The Houses of Peoples' Representatives (HPR) is expected to elect a new Supreme Court president to replace the outgoing Tegene Getaneh, who resigned from his post citing health problems that render him unable to carry out his duties.
Two weeks ago, House Speaker, Abadulla Gemeda told Members of Parliament that his office has received a letter from the Office of the Prime Minister stating that the Prime Minister Hailemariam has accepted Tegene’s letter of resignation.
“The Tana Forum is now recognized as the truly African Security Conference modeled on the Munich Security Conference.
It has the goal of convening peace stakeholders to discuss issues of peace and security in an informal and relaxed environment,” Tedros, who served the Forum as master of ceremony, said.
In his remarks after the signing agreement, Japanese Ambassador to Ethiopia Shinichi Saida commended the current geopolitical trends towards peaceful power transition taking shape in Africa.
“I believe I can say, now is a time of fundamental change in Africa.
Ethiopia experienced its first peaceful transition of power in its modern history, followed by South Africa and Zimbabwe”, Ambassador Saida added.
According to the UK Renaissance Dam Diaspora Participation Coordination Council, members of the Ethiopian community had already pledged close to one million birr which brings the total to about 3 millions birr.
The Council, comprising of Ethiopians from a variety of civic and development associations, religious groups, artist groups, professional associations, business organizations, renowned personalities, academics, youth and women associations and other pertinent groups, was launched on 8th October during its first meeting at the Ethiopian Embassy in London.
Speaking on the meeting held on the draft Diaspora Policy in Addis Ababa, Diaspora Affairs Director General with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Faisel Aliyi said inputs obtained in the discussion processes were included in the draft.
He said the draft Diaspora Policy is expected to be endorsed by the Parliament in April 2012. (ERTA)
EREC’s deputy project manager, Cai Qinhao, said his company is working to accomplish the project on schedule.
But he urged stakeholders to remove all public utility lines en route the rail track, specifically a major pipeline on the road from Hayahulet to Urael.
The Addis Ababa Water and Sewerage Autority (AAWSA) has hired a contractor to relocate the pipeline by April 2013, according to ERC’s deputy CEO, Debo.
Some representatives from the warring factions in South Sudan have arrived in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa.
They will soon begin negotiations as part of a regional effort to end the conflict, according to Dina Mufti, Ethiopia’s foreign ministry spokesman.
The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) will regulate the water flow of Nile River and reduce flooding risks and sedimentation in downstream countries, Arba Minch University Water Resource Research Center Director Samuel Degalo said.
The director told ENA that the dam will benefit the downstream countries, especially Sudan, by regulating the water flow and sediments.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, Commissioner Yinager said the drought and civil unrests in some part of the country has not barred the economy from growing.
“When we look at the past two years GTP-II performance, expected and unexpected things have happened such as drought and unrest which were unexpected, but if the prevailing peaceful situation remains unchanged and we do more in the two and half years left, the planned economic growth will be achieved,” the Commissioner said.
Ethiopia has been taking “very strong engagement” on land restoration, AU Great Green Wall Initiative Coordinator Elvis Paul Tangem said.
“I think Ethiopia has done a lot,” he said, adding that some 15 million hectares of land have been under restoration in Ethiopia.
According to Wordy, “Ethiopia has the natural resources to generate all the clean energy it needs and to decouple its economy from the fluctuating prices and unsustainable nature of the oil-based economy.”
As one of the rapidly urbanizing countries, Ethiopia has identified the essentiality of implementing effective waste management to realize its green growth strategy, he pointed out.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed and President Slahilework Zewudie today participated in cleaning-up campaign through sweeping their respective environments.
Last Friday Premier Abiy has called residents for clean-up campaign to keep their localities free from rubbish.
Tefera pointed out that substantial amount of land has been covered with watersheds, to protect flood, land degradation and soil erosion, which as a result increased agricultural productivity.
“At the onset, the works were not sustainable in solving the problems to the required extent due to lack of awareness and vastness of the water shade to be covered,” he said.
The premier highlighted in a statement posted on his Face-Book page on Sunday that with the launch of this year’s Green Legacy, “let us not think that the government is asking citizens to throw caution to the wind.”
Strictly adhering to prevention measures is critical he said, adding that, “we can also maintain productivity and meet our goals while observing these measures put in place.”
In a platform organized to promote carbon trading, Oromia Forest and Wild Animals Development Enterprise Director, Ararsa Regassa told ENA that comprehensive work is being undertaken to ensure the public benefit from natural resources.
He added that the project Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation, plus the sustainable management of forests, and the conservation and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+) has made significant impact in natural resource development and conservation.
Light rainfall less than 30mm is expected over parts of northern and southern Somalia, western Kenya, parts of western Rwanda, much of Uganda, eastern South Sudan, southern Sudan, and eastern Ethiopia.
On the other hand, dry conditions are expected in northern Sudan, eastern and northern Kenya, western and southern Tanzania.
EEFRI Director-General Abiyot Berhanu said the institute has been collecting tree seeds to recover deforested lands.
“To be one of the best institutes in Africa, EEFRI needs legal procedure, active involvement of the people and the concerned bodies as well as capital and human resources,” he added.
Ethiopia has encountered some 2,800 cyber-attack attempts during the last Ethiopian fiscal year (2020/21), according to the Director-General of Information Network Security Agency (INSA), Dr. Shumete Gizaw.
The Director-General made the remark at a ceremony organized to launch the month-long cyber security program under the title “Cyber Security Shared Responsibility, Let’s Know & Be Cautious”.
Nokia signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Addis Ababa Science and Technology University and Addis Ababa Institute of Technology in order to collaborate and provide high-level technical skills to students in line with rapidly changing market needs.
As part of the agreement, Nokia will work with the two universities to provide tailored training and coaching programs and share the latest technical and business practices in the ICT sector in line with global developments and market demands.
Sophia is quite a celebratory, attracting much attention as she travels the world But Getahun Mekuria, Ethiopia’s science and technology Minister, told BBC Amharic that Sophia would still appear at Saturday’s MCIT International Expo.
Getnet Asefa, the manager of Icog Labs – the engineering firm behind her Amharic programming, explained that Sophia was fixable and they would find alternative parts for her.
An Ethiopian-American Plant Breeder, Geneticist and Professor at Purdue University, Gebisa Ejeta (PhD) has received 5 million dollars from Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana State, USA to promote his contributions and achievements in sorghum breeding research.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation has handed over the award to Gebisa.
The research of the Ethiopian award-winning researcher, Dr. Martha Zewdie was on regulatory T cells in pulmonary tuberculosis patients.
She told ENA that the research was part of her PhD work and basically looked at immune responses of patients and infected individuals in tuberculosis.
According to the Minister, Ethiopia set to have thousands of technology centered micro and small enterprises that could produce various technological products expected to join the global market.
Information Communication Technology Sector Director-General at the ministry, Abiyot Sinamo told ENA that the national strategy designed to digitalize key public services has been well underway and being implemented as per the plan.
According to him, 34 institutions are providing services using digital technologies.
Digital Transformation Program Director General at Ministry of Innovation and Technology, Dr. Abiyot Bayou said, “The grant will support our ministry in guiding and enabling digital reform under the EoDB Programme.”
He also stated that besides adding Bahirdar and Diredawa cities to the national business portal, the support will enable the ministry to facilitate the implementation of EoDB reform by allowing further digitalization and reform ownership of the project.
The National Veterinary Institute of Ethiopia is preparing to manufacture veterinary drugs to substitute imported drugs, an official said.
The Institute, the sole veterinary vaccine production center in Ethiopia, will start to produce drugs at the end of this year, Director General of the Institute Dr.Marta Yami told ENA.
AIC Deputy Director-General Taye Girma told ENA that the center which aims to become a national center of excellence by establishing AI policy and creating conducive ecosystem for the private and public sector is facing two major challenges in general.
According to him, almost all government institutions and private entities require AI applications to deliver effective services with the support of AI technology.
President of the Association, Meaza Kitaw, said the association is now providing integrated sexual and reproductive health services including maternal and child health, family planning, screening and treatment.
Fifty years ago the association was established with three members and now has 18,000 members.
Close to six million people have received reproductive health service only in 2015 alone, it was noted.
The Ministry of Health has announced that it is spraying anti-malaria chemicals in 160 Woredas in order to wipe out mosquito following the rainy season the country has been experiencing.
Ministry’s Malaria Programs Officer, Dereje Dilu, told Walta Information Center that over 916,000 kilograms of anti malaria chemicals and spraying materials have been distributed in 160 malaria prone Woredas of the country.
Out of the three hospitals, the referral hospital under construction in Gnignag has been completed only 75 percent of its construction phase so far according to the head of the regional health bureau, Oman Amelu (MDr.)
According to the head, the reason behind the delay is related to the fleeing the contactor from the area.
Red Crescent Society of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) has provided the Ethiopian Health Ministry with 50 ambulances.
The ambulances worth 250 million Birr and seven of them are said to have arrived in Addis Ababa.
Some 200,000 residents of Addis Ababa living in extreme poverty are going to be provided with support in the second phase of the food security program which will start tomorrow.
In his media briefing today, Mayor Diriba Kuma said 200,000 citizens in 55 woredas of Addis Ababa will benefit from the program.
Following the outbreak of the fatal Novel Coronavirus – now renamed COVID-19 by the World Health Organization (WHO) – Ethiopian Airlines announced that it has stepped up passenger screening and aircraft disinfection process at the Addis Ababa Bole International Airport.
Officials of Ethiopian Airlines and Ethiopian Airports organized a tour for the local media on Thursday.
According to a letter issued by Tsigereda Kifle, deputy director of EPHI, HIV Kits including First Response HIV 1-2.0, Uni-Gold HIV, VIKIA HIV-1/2, Beijing Wanta HIV-1/2 are said to be under evaluation.
Beijing Wanti was registered by the Food, Medicine, Healthcare Administration and Control Authority on July 5, 2016 representing by a local company called GeZ Chemicals and Pharmaceutical PLC.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the development arm of America’s Department of State has completed its seven-year-long strengthening of Human Resources for Healthcare projects in Ethiopia.
The Tewodros Ashenafi Foundation was established by founder and CEO of SouthWest Holdings Ltd.
The Reproductive Health Innovative Fund (RIF) project founded and being implemented by the Ethiopian Public Health Institute, is attaining encouraging fruits in various ways.
The Ethiopian Women’s U-20 national team is set take part in the CECAFA Senior Challenge Cup hosted by Uganda.
Ethiopia, Burundi, Eritrea, Djibouti, Tanzania and Uganda have been preparing for the tournament, which will take place from October 30 to November 9, 2021.
The well experienced Yalemzerf is the first woman in history to run a half marathon in under 65 minutes.
She ran the Northern Ireland’s Antrim Coast Half Marathon in 63: 43 at the end of August, and has been representing Ethiopia in various continental races particularly, half marathon races.
In this regard, the competition presents as an opportunity for athletes to perform at the highest level. The competition was scheduled for last year; however, the EAF had to postpone the race due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Similar to Marathon Competition Rankings, Road Running competitions are ranked in 3 different categories, namely: combined ranking of the Men's and Women's races, Men's Road running ranking and Women's Road Running ranking.
Match week eight of the Ethiopian Premier League (EPL) will feature across the country this weekend.
From the stand out fixtures, Fasil City will host Ethiopia Coffee while Welwalo Adigrat faces Hadiya Hosana and St. George play against Dire Dawa City.
In the first preliminary round, Mekele 70 suffered a 2-1 defeat with the only crucial away goal scored by Amanuel Gebremichael in the 81st minute.
With thousands of fans expected to show, the debutants in this year’s competition face a stern test in overturning the score and keeping a clean-sheet.
After returning home, the champions have continued to prepare for their second leg encounter in Mekele.
Meanwhile, the officials will undergo medical and physical tests besides theoretical and practical sessions under the supervision of experienced CAF instructors.
According to CAF’s statement, to be discussed are the amendments to the law of the game, which takes effect starting from June 1, 2019 and will be implemented during the tournament.
Elsewhere, Ethiopian cup winner Defense is set to face the Nigerian side Enugu Rangers in the preliminary return leg fixture on Wednesday in Addis Ababa stadium.
After the appointment of a new coach, Seyoum Kebede, the army side seems to be in a good run of form.
Defense has won its ninth cup in the Ethiopian cup competition. However, the army side were beaten 2-0 in first round via two penalty goals.
The Ethiopian Athletics Federation (EAF) is scheduled to celebrate the ‘global running day’ with a one-mile race on Wednesday, June 6, 2018.
Elite athletes will take part in the race which covers a distance of 1.6kms.
Partnering with sport ministers, city governments, race organizers and member federations around the world, the IAAF’s initiative incorporates the race to be held in a dozen cities across 15-time zones.
Officials of the Ethiopian Football Federation (EFF) announced that Ethiopia has not made any formal bid to host the 2018 African Nations Championships (CHAN) after the Confederation of African Football (CAF) made a decision to strip the hosting duties from Kenya.
CAF announced that three countries – Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea and Morocco – have requested to replace Kenya as host countries.
Kenenissa, who is double Olympic gold medalist, will return to the championship by competing in the marathon after two years of injury.
He is now making an astonishing performance in different world marathon races.
Kenenisa was left out of the 2016 Rio Olympics team because he did not fulfill the requirements which were set by the Ethiopian Athletics Federation (EFF).
ano Band — a pioneering Ethio-Rock Fusion Band famed for blending melodic Ethiopian styles with powerful metal grooves, heavy guitars, and electronic sounds since 2011, has inaugurated its new recording studio.
For its inaugural launch, the band hosted an invitation-only event featuring an array of guests, esteemed individuals and participating artists.
According to Tenagne Tadesse, Program Assistant at the Institute, the films were selected on the basis of having been released less than 3 years ago, their coverage of social issues and documenting African realities, as well as the awards they had won and acclaim they had gained thus far.
The aim of the film week is to showcase successful African films and encourage local filmmakers.
They call it “the lung of Addis Ababa”.
And it does not take long for anyone who sets foot in the area to understand why.
With the best panoramic view of the city, Mount Entoto is home to diverse flora and fauna.
The taciturn, yet breathtaking Entoto Natural Park is part of the chain of mountains on the northern part of Addis.
Oje Ken Ollivierre, the Jamaican reggae star widely known as Protoje is set to rock Addis on July 29th at Laphto Mall.
The son of Caribbean artists, his mother was a one-hit wonder of the “Breakfast in Bed” song from four decades ago and his father was a calypso artist with some success within the Caribbean region.
The young artist has been gaining an international audience in the last decade with unique sounds and daring songs.
The highly popular Kana Television has launch of two new shows – an original Kana production and an international localized drama series – to further enhance the viewing experience of its growing audience.
Kana now produces nearly 30 hours of fresh content per week in Amharic.
Legendary Ethiopian saxophonist Getachew Mekuria passed away this week at the age of 81.
Getachew began his musical studies on traditional Ethiopian instruments such as the krar and the masenko, and later moved on to the saxophone and clarinet.
He began his musical career in Addis Ababa in the 1940s and was a member of Ethiopia’s famous Police Orchestra.
Near the city of Dire Dawa, Porc-Epic has long been a focus of study because of the variety of rocks characterized by a red or yellow color or streak, known as ochre, found there.
Over 4,000 pieces of ochre have been discovered at Porc-Epic and currently reside in a museum in Addis Abba.
There, they were studied by Daniela Eugenia Rosso of the University of Barcelona in Spain and Francesco d'Errico and Alain Queffelec of the University of Bordeaux in France.
A photograph exhibition entitled: “Peregrinate” will be presented on May 19 at Modern Art Museum Gebrekirstos Desta Center.
Peregrinate features the work of three photographers: South Africans Thabiso Sekgala and Musa Nxumalo, and Kenyan Mimi Cherono Ng’ok.
Asian-Pacific Film Festival kicked off this week to a devoted audience eager to experience foreign films.
The festival was delayed by a day following protests in Addis Ababa on Saturday.
The social media platform, TikTok, owned by a Chinese company ByteDance, is used to make a variety of short-form videos of different genres and is getting popularity, including in Africa.
Trace Tv is a global afro-urban entertainment channel to connect and empower the new generation and it is experiencing rapid international expansion, with different feeds present in 60 countries.
Halloween, as an event, seems to be growing each year in Ethiopia, specifically in Addis Ababa.
What originally begun within the expat community in Addis has now spread to local young people and event goers.
Celebrating this festival are also those who have returned from abroad.
So much for ‘when in Rome, do as the Romans do.’
Zoma is a sustainable museum that tries to bring the focus to traditional architecture in Ethiopia.
Located in Mekanisa, it gives a different meaning to modernism and what we consider as modern.
Guzo Adwa has inspired similar initiatives driven to educating a wider set of people about Ethiopian history.
Grassroots movements have spawned, taking locals on tours around historic sites in Addis Ababa and beyond
Fikru has shown his work worldwide in over 50 exhibitions and across three continents.
He has long been one of the highest selling contemporary Ethiopian artists.
Since moving back to Ethiopia 6 years ago, Fikru has been working full time on these paintings.
The relationship between aesthetic and commercial value especially in relation to the works of living and contemporary artists will add a layer of complexity to the objectivity of viewers.
The intoxicating aroma of freshly roasted coffee can be hard to resist.
Perhaps it is what gets most people through the day.
But have you ever considered using the deliciously warm brew in your cup to create a painting? Well, Tesfalem Atenaw did.
Fendika hosts this distinctive band every Monday night.
But each Monday is unlike the one before it.
That particular Monday, Kaÿn Lab joined forces with Nur M. Adam, a trumpeter for a night of impromptu performances.
Getting “good haircut” often means transforming one’s hair style to a “conventional” and “presentable” one.
But, for the millennials of Addis, it is far more than simple grooming.
Having the conventional haircut has been perceived as a way to be more acceptable to certain relatives, as well as to the wider community.
However, to some members of the youth, it is more than that – it is political, writes Gouled Ahmed.
Renowned storyteller, Tesfaye Sahilu, a.k.a. Ababa Tesfaye passed away on July 31, 2017, at the age of 94.
He died a week after he (through his daughter-in-law) received an honorary Doctoral Degree from Unity University – a recognition that is believed to be too little too late by many.
For many, Ababa Tesfaye was a father figure, a teacher, an educator, an entertainer and a patron of good will in society, writes Samuel Getachew.
Eyob, a 9th grader, who has been skating for the past five years, is a daredevil who tries various tricks.
Jemal and Gedion, on the other hand are both 11th graders, and agree that Eyob has the best tricks of all of them.
But, they explain each of the skaters have their own signature moves and marks with which they can be identified.
It is all about attitude for Arega.
He says the audience is yet to find its test in terms of street performance.
“We struggle in terms of finding training space since we have no licenses or permits to do our work,” Arega argues.
And he says he never gets paid nearly enough commensurate with the level of hardship he goes through while training and the hustle he faces when he takes his show to the street.
Ministry of Trade and Industry discloses that 42.75 million USD has been garnered in a quarter of the Ethiopia’s fiscal year from exporting manufactured goods.
The target for this sector has been set at 42.85 million USDs.
As the leading air cargo service provider in Africa, Ethiopian Airlines, coupled with the competitive geo-strategic advantage Djibouti has, this project, when fully operational, will double the cargo operation of the Airlines and make Djibouti a hub for sea-Air cargo logistics.
Sea-Air cargo project that is twice as fast as the sea only and twice as cheap as the Air only transportation would massively scale up trade relations between the two countries as well as between the two continents; Africa and Asia; in particular China.
The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and Awash Bank have announced a new partnership that will make up to $6.4 million in financing available to microfinance institutions and small- and medium-sized agricultural businesses in Ethiopia.
Under a USAID Development Credit Authority (DCA) agreement, this program will expand commercial bank lending into underserved areas and provide the private capital needed to help farmers and businesses intensify production, and support Ethiopia’s efforts to modernize its agricultural sector.
Wang Jun for his part said The Chinese Government would provide the necessary support to Ethiopia’s move towards digitized tax collection and tax administration services.
The Ethiopian delegation is on an official visit to China since December, 16.
Shangtex Holding Co. Ltd has signed a lease agreement with the Ethiopian Industrial Parks Development Corporation to invest at Bole Lemmi II Industrial Park.
Shangtex is the second largest textile company in China.
The agreement was signed here by Lelise Neme, CEO of the Corporation and representative of the Chinese company.
Ethiopian and Kuwait held discussion on the draft memorandum of understanding (MoU) on the employment of domestic workers.
In the discussion held from 21-22 January 2020 at Sheraton Hotel in Kuwait city, the two sides concluded the negotiations with promising progress.
They also agreed to finalise the remaining issues soon, according to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia (MFA).
“Ethiopian is responding to COVID-19 outbreak effectively with extra cargo flights and is shouldering its continental responsibility by shipping masks and testing kits where those supplies are being used in the fight against COVID-19 in Africa,” Tewolde noted.
In March alone, the carrier transported donations made to Africa by the Chinese business mogul Jack Ma in six days for all 54 African countries, the CEO stated, adding that “many African countries were surprised how the airlines distributed the medical equipment in a very short period of time.”
US Acting Assistant Secretary for African Affairs Donald Yamamoto said US needs to have a significant contribution for the industrial park development of Ethiopia.
Secretary Yamamoto made the remark following the discussion with Ethiopia’s Foreign Minister Workneh Gebeyehu in Addis Ababa on Friday.
She mentioned the increasing Moroccan investment in Ethiopia since the past two years including investments by Anwar Invest Group and Holmarcom Group, the country’s top investors.
According to her, the agreement signed between the two countries has helped to improve the tie in the economic sector.
According to the Hub, apparel continues to dominate East African exports across countries, accounting for 84.4 percent of all AGOA exports during the reported period.
East African countries have made sustained efforts to take advantage of their AGOA eligibility in recent years.
The Ethiopian Petroleum Supply Enterprise (EPSE) is the sole government body for the importation of petroleum products while the Ministry of Trade sets retail petroleum prices upon the recommendations of the enterprise.
The public is complaining that the government did not make appropriate price reduction whilst the nose diving global price of oil.
The story of the EPRDF-led developmental state is rather short; yet it is highly eventful.
For one, it is one of the few states in the world where perplexities of a rosy economic prospect and tainted democratic and human rights track record has co-integrated for more than 15 years. The shorter version of this story goes like this.
The report also concludes that the fact that the authority of federal prosecution is vested on the Ministry of Justice which combines judicial and executive powers is a serious problem.
The study also highlights the negative impacts of other government offices also having prosecutorial authority.
“The fragmentation of public prosecution weakens the institution, especially as different prosecution authorities are accountable to different ministries. This may be detrimental to the independence of the Public Prosecution Service,” it states.
In an unprecedented move, Members of Parliaments (MPs), the 100 percent Ethiopian Peoples’ Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and affiliates controlled Ethiopian Parliament, demanded to ascertain the country's external debt repayment capacity, before ratifying new concessional loan agreements recently entered into with the Government of China.
The loan agreements in question are signed recently with the Chinese Export-Import (EXIM) Bank, which agreed to avail an aggregate outlay of USD 332.7 million for a highway road construction and power transmission projects envisaged to relieve the traffic congestions as well the fluctuating electric power supply in parts of Addis Ababa.
“The people of the two regions recently sat down and agreed to resolve their problems peacefully. The rent seekers have also been identified by the two regions, and were relieved of their position,” he added.
The PM told the house that the federal government has also identified the ringleaders, and vowed to bring them to justice.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed (PhD) met and discussed with members and leaders of opposition political parties who have returned home and those who are conducting their political activities in the country following the call by the PM during his inaugural speech back in April.
The discussion between the PM and the leaders of different political parties was held on Tuesday at the PM’s office; the two sides discussing various issues with the PM presenting a three-stage plan.
The historic deal was signed by Mohamed HamdanDaglo, deputy chief of the military council, and opposition leader, Ahmed al-Rabie, in Khartoum, Sudan.
The signing ceremony was witnessed by PM Abiy, SalvaKiir, President of South Sudan and other Heads of States from neighboring countries.
Soleyana Shemeles, the Communications Advisor to the NEBE, told The Reporter that “the NEBE designed all materials to be printed in five languages including Amharic, Amharic/Oromiffa, Amharic/Tigrigna, Amharic/Afar, and Amharic/Somali.”
The main materials being procured internationally, according to Soleyana, are voter registration book (voter list books), voter cards book, and plastic boxes with seals, to be used in the transport of materials to a secured storage facility at polling stations for overnight stays, voter registration forms, and voter registration stationary kits.
The closed sixth year fifth ordinary session also saw lawmakers approve the Defense Forces Amendment Proclamation.
The House of Peoples Representatives has approved the state of emergency that was referred to it by the Council of Ministers.
Ethiopia has done much in protecting biodiversity after the signing of the Rio Agreement in 1992, according to Ethiopian Biodiversity Institute.
The institute has been diversifying efforts to improve the ecological system and conserving biodiversity during the period.
UNDP Country director Louise Chamberlain said on her part that the goal of the plan can only be achieved with strong involvement of the people of Ethiopia and government leaders at all levels and across the country through strong partnerships.
The NFSDP will ensure an increase in Ethiopia`s forest coverage to 20 percent in 2020 and 30 percent in 2025 and make forest a core sector in economic structural reforms.
Oromia Environment, Forest and Climate Change Authority Deputy Director-General, Bona Yadessa said the authority will take corrective measures against the companies in the region which failed to implement the federal requirements.
In this regard, the region will not only penalize companies but award gold, silver and bronze to the companies that respected the code of conduct and realize chemical and wastage usage as well as labor protection.
The public parks that will be developed through this project will have lanes dedicated for bicycle riders, pure water and solar energy supply and recreational areas.
The project is expected to be completed within three years, and create job opportunities for lots of people of the city.
Factories causing environmental pollution in Oromia Regional State were urged to promptly mend their ways and operate as per the set standards.
Officials of the region who visited factories in good standing conducted a half-day discussion with factories in the region on issues of environment protection today.
“It will not create a problem on crops in Ethiopia for now,” the state minister noted, adding that “The dispersed locusts in Tigray region will go to the coast of the Red Sea for breeding; and the other swarms of locusts dispersed in Afar and central parts of the country will go to the coasts of Somalia.”
However, the state minister pointed out that it will return back in Belg season.
Trade and Industry State Minister, Yohannes Dinkayehu stated that deposited chemicals can be identified through the registry system and the government will dispose of or find way to reuse the chemicals.
He noted that the current industrial chemical use in Ethiopia needs strong administration system to know how to use or how to dispose chemicals.
Tigray Interim Administration Agriculture and Rural Development Bureau disclosed that 10 million tree seedlings are readied to be planted in the region this rainy season.
Bureau Natural Resources Development and Safety Net Sector Coordinator Desta Gebreselassie told ENA that tree planting holes are being prepared at various nurseries.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed called on the people of Ethiopia to duplicate the milestones achieved in the planning and implementation of the annual green legacy initiative in various sectors, facilitating Ethiopia’s inevitable prosperity.
The 2021 Green Legacy edition was officially closed in Adama today in the presence the Prime Minister and other senior government officials.
Heavy to very heavy rainfall (top 10-5% on record) is expected in western Oromia (Western and Eastern Welega and Illubabor) and southern Benishangul Gumu in Ethiopia, and localized areas of central and south-western Sudan.
Moderate rainfall between 50 – 100 mm is expected in the Darfur region in Sudan; western and northern regions of South Sudan, central and western Ethiopia, and a few areas in central Uganda and western Kenya.
Federal Government Procurement and Property Administration Agency announced that it has finalized preparations to start electronics procurement system technology (e-GP).
In an Exclusive interview with ENA Acting General- Director of the Agency, Jonse Gedefa said that the agency has been running the e-GP technology system project that would help to clear the government procurement activities from human error and misappropriation.
This robot is currently available in Ethiopia for ICT Week sponsored by Ethio-Telecom.
Designed by Hong Kong firm Hanson Robotics, Sophia has been programmed to speak Amharic, Ethiopia’s official language.
India is committed to further deepen its partnership with Ethiopia to support its development with innovation and technology.
The exhibition at the headquarters of Ministry of Innovation and Technology will remain open until December 14, 2019.
The MoU was signed at the Ethiopia and China Industrial Matchmaking Conference held in Addis Ababa.
At the conference, Trade and Industry State Minister Teka Gebreyesus said Ethiopia and China have good historical foundation to bring the current industrial cooperation into higher level.
He is expected to meet with Ethiopia’s ‘Tech Queen’ Betlhem Dessie, Project Manager at ‘ICog’, a tech firm dedicated to advancing the frontier of artificial intelligence research and application quality products to customer based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
He will also meet with Noel Daniel, who is a cofounder at Africa ‘Tech Next’, a global series of panel events on African tech entrepreneurship and market opportunities in the continent’s unfolding digital revolution.
Ethiopians on Sunday morning witnessed the solar eclipse after the moon is moving between the sun and the earth obscuring the planet Earth.
The solar eclipse was visible in several cities across Ethiopia, including the historical town of Lalibela and the capital Addis Ababa starting from 6:50 a.m to 9:30 a.m.
State Minister of Education Dr. Geremew Huluka told journalists during the event that the government has changed the curriculum to encourage science and innovation in schools starting from the lower classes.
“The education system at present highly encourages science and innovation starting from the bottom; and through this we can establish and find many scientists in every child that can help our day to day life in a scientific way,” he stated.
China Ecology and Environment Vice Minister, Liu Hua commended Chinese and Ethiopian professionals for doing their level best to see the satellite project succeed and meet its objectives.
Ambassador Teshome and Vice Minister Liu Hua noted that the two countries need to give impetus to their relationship with multifaceted bilateral and multilateral engagements in the future.
Finance Minister Ahmed Shide and a Safaricom delegation led by CEO Peter Ndegwa held discussion today.
Safaricom Ethiopia delegation provided updates on its operations in the country, it was learned.
The annual Innovation Africa Digital Summit that focuses on accelerating national ICT agendas, supporting African countries as they look to improve ICT maturity rankings, and laying foundations for achieving Sustainable Development Goals is underway here in Addis Ababa.
Opening the two-day summit, Innovation and Technology Minister Belete Mola said Ethiopia is working to transform its economy using digitization as a key instrument.
Ministry of Health has signed a trilateral agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the China Atomic Energy Authority (CAEA).
The agreement is to jointly implement an extra-budgetary in-kind contribution for a project titled “strengthening capabilities of member states in building, strengthening and restoring capacities and services in case of outbreaks, emergencies, and disasters”.
Ethiopian Health Minister Dr. Lia Tadesse has met with the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US-CDC) Ethiopia’s new country director, Dr. Caroline Rayan.
The two discussed ongoing partnerships around HIV, immunization, Public Health Emergency Response including lab capacity as well as on potential new areas of partnerships.
As COVID-19 in Ethiopia has been consistently on the rise and triggering calls for more robust measures to halt the spread of the virus, the government is taking various measures to prevent the spread of the pandemic, it was indicated.
Following the first confirmed case of COVID-19 in Ethiopia in March 2020, the Government of Ethiopia took several public health measures and protocols to prevent increased levels of infection.
General Health Director with MoH, Dr. Yibeltal Mekonnen, on his part said that the ministry has acknowledged and will provide necessary support to the center so that it will spearhead a private health sector’s social responsibility engagements in responding to people in need.
Regular training for the health professionals is according to him, a basic assistance the ministry had gave to improve the efficiency treatment.
Ethiopia began accelerated Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus Elimination (MNTE) efforts in 1999.
In 2011, all the regions in the country except the Somali Region were validated for MNTE. The 2011 validation mission made recommendations that would see the Somali Region progress to MNTE over time.
Meat production today is nearly five times higher than in the early 1960s – from 70 million tonnes to more than 330 million tonnes in 2017.
A big reason for this is that there are many more people to feed.
According to UNICEF, disposable sanitary products are expensive and often unavailable. As a result nearly 75% of Ethiopian women and girls do not have access to the menstrual supplies they need to manage their periods.
Mebrahtu’s motivation came from personal experience.
The WHO Representative to Ethiopia, Dr. Boureima Hama Sambo, thanked Canada for the available funding to support the continuity of essential health services. He said, “The grant will not only strengthen the provision of quality, gender-responsive essential health services at primary care level but also boost health system resilience by building the capacity of regional and city health authorities to deal with current and future crises.”
This grant will benefit approximately 6.5 million Ethiopians in need, of which 50 percent are expected to be women.
Eka Kotebe General Hospital, which incorporates a mental institution in its premises, has been officially inaugurated today by Deputy Prime Minister Demeke Mekonnen and Health Minister Amir Aman.
Since it began operation in 2017, the hospital has provided health services for 116, 029 patients, of which 25 percent are mental disabled persons, it was learned.
A cornerstone has been laid today, to build the Ethiopia’s first specialized cardiac care center in the capital at a cost of 40 million Euro.
Minister of Health, Dr. Amir Aman and The Netherland’s Ambassador to Ethiopia, Bengt Van Loosdrecht have laid the cornerstone to build the cardiac care center at Black Lion hospital.
Gudaf Tsegay broke the women’s world record for the indoor 1500 metres on Tuesday after posting a time of three minutes, 53.09 seconds during a meeting in Lievin, France.
Ethiopian Tsegay beat by more than two seconds the previous record set by her compatriot Genzebe Dibaba in Karlsruhe in 2014.
“I’m very happy to set a world indoor record. I have been training really hard and I set myself a target to break the world indoor record,” Gudaf Tsegay told the World Athletics website.
Athlete Lena Hailu also won the French Indoor Championships in the 3000 meter while Athlete Habtam Alemu finished second in the French 800 meter.
The first Great Ethiopian Run in North America is scheduled to take place in Minnesota, USA, on the 4th of July 2020.
The Great Ethiopian Run scheduled to take place for the first time outside Africa is also the 1st edition in the US.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, Great Ethiopian Run General Manager Ermias Ayele said preparations are being finalized to celebrate the event together with the Ethiopian Diaspora residing in USA and around the world.
The International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) will hold its 70th congress in Addis Ababa next year.
The FIFA Congress, the most-critical gathering of international football’s governing body, used to assemble every two years.
According to chief of staff of the African Union chairperson, Ambassador Abdoulaye Diop the next congress will take place at the AU’s headquarters in Addis Ababa in May 2020.
This year’s 18th Great Ethiopian Run has grown to become a major street festival in Africa attracting thousands locals and foreign tourists every year.
On today, thousands people have taken to the streets of Addis Ababa to take part in Africa’s biggest road race, a challenging 10km run at 10,000ft above sea level.
On the day, a huge variety of runners from all age groups and fitness levels participated, it was indicated.
The Ethiopian National Football Team has qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations (CAF) today.
Ethiopia qualified for CAF after the match between Niger and Madagascar ended in a draw, while Cote d’Ivoire beat Ethiopia 3 to 1.
Letesenbet smashed the world record at the Valencia Half Marathon Trinidad Alfonso EDP, clocking 1:02:52 on her debut at the distance at the World Athletics Elite Label road race on Sunday.
Competing in the same Spanish city where she broke the world 5000m record last year, Gidey took more than a minute off the previous mark of 1:04:02 set by world marathon champion Ruth Chepngetich earlier this year.
Ethiopian-Israel golfer Asher Iso, without taking anything away from the extraordinary achievements of the other winners this week, has championed Israel Men’s Masters Tournament at the Caesarea Golf Club.
Asher, a dedicated staff member of the club, immigrated to Israel from Ethiopia in 1991 and first came to the golf club 27 years ago.
In Betking Ethiopia Premier League match, happened in Hawasa, the champions Fasil Kenema beat Hadiya Hosaena 3 to 1.
Fekadu Alemu has got a hat-trick in the game by scoring all the three goals for Fasil Kenema while Baye Gezahegn netted the only goal of Hadya Hosaena.
In the league’s closing encounter of the first week, Sebeta Ketema and St. George drew nil.
The Ethiopian national anti-doping office said it has begun doping tests on athletes.
More than 150 elite athletes are undergoing the two-day tests being done in partnership with world athletics integrity unit, it said.
According to EBC, more than 22 Ethiopian experts are taking part in the anti-doping tests.
Hadijah Nandago gave Uganda a 1-0 lead after 26 minutes before skipper Fauzia Najjemba made it 2-0 on 40 minutes when substitute goalkeeper Demelash Banchayehu failed to hold the ball.
After the break, Ethiopia’s Ridet Assrasahang pulled one back on 50 minutes.
Substitute Ariet Odong made it 2-2 after the 78th minutes before the referee sent off Ethiopia’s coach Firew Hailegebral.
But the Ethiopian team did not give up and scored the winning goal through Turist Lema on 82 minutes.
The South African National Football team has arrived in Bahir Dar for FIFA 2022 World Cup Qualifiers match they have tomorrow with their Ethiopian counterpart.
As goal.com reported a few days ago, their Belgian Coach, Hugo Broos, said that their game with Ethiopia is “crucial.”
According to this outlet, ‘Broos has challenged his side to “do everything to get six points” from back-to-back matches against Ethiopia as the qualifiers enter top gear.’
South African, the Bafana Bafana, is leading the group by a point ahead of Ghana, the Black Stars; and Ethiopia, the Walia Antelopes, placed third.
he extraordinary spate of athletics world records in the super spikes era continued on Tuesday as Letesenbet Gidey smashed the two-day-old women’s 10,000m best, set by Sifan Hassan on Sunday, by more than five seconds.
It was the latest in a long line of staggering performances in the game-changing technology, which is reckoned to improve performance by between half a second and a second a lap.
Gidey, who was running on the same Hengelo track where Hassan set her world record, always looked confident.
For much of the race – which doubled as the Ethiopian trials – she churned out 72-second laps before powering home in a final lap of 63 seconds, despite having to weave between other runners, to finish in 29:01.03.
Following the qualification of the Ethiopian men's national team (Walias) to the 2022 African Cup of Nations (AFCON) in Cameroon after an eight year absence from the tournament, over 500 fans and 25 sports journalists are set to attend the event to be held from January 9 – February 6, 2022 in Cameroon.
The Secretary General of the Ethiopian Football Federation (EFF), Bahiru Tilahun, and the owner of Sisay Aderisse Promotion, Sisay Aderisse, held a joint press conference on Tuesday, December 7, 2021 at Sheraton Hotel, where it was stated that fans will be able to attend the event.
A package of three-day visits, a ten-day return ticket (ten days depending on the result) was prepared and additional packages would be discussed accordingly.
Following the request by the Ethiopian Football Association to have its World Cup qualifier against Ghana in South Africa, the Ghana Football Association asked the world football governing body last Friday to ensure that there is fair play in the last two matches.
Ghana and South Africa are separated by one point going into the last two group matches.
It is, therefore, shocking that the Ethiopian Football Association would seek to take their home match against Ghana to South Africa.
President of the Ethiopian Olympic Committee (EOC), Ashebir Woldegiorgis (MD), announced that kenenisa Bekele will represent Ethiopia and compete in the coming Tokyo Olympics, scheduled to be held from July 23 to August 8, 2021.
In his comments, Ashebir acknowledged that the Ethiopian Athletics Federation (EAF) has the mandate to select the athletes.
“Passing decision on who makes the cut is the responsibility of the Athletics Federation. Our main demand is to achieve results that will raise the flag of our country. So, we can’t stand by and watch when athletes who have one of the best times are left out of the competition due to improper practices,” Ashebir said.
A runner who fled Ethiopia nearly a decade ago is preparing for Sunday's Tokyo Marathon with hopes of returning to Japan this summer as a member of the Refugee Olympic Team.
Yonas Kinde, 39, who competed at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympics, has been training this week with a university athletics team in Tokorozawa, near Tokyo, after receiving an invitation from Tokyo Marathon organizers to run in the elite division of the race.
"I'm in good condition," he said during training on Thursday.
"I hope the weather will be nice, and (I want) to find a good pace for me and record my fastest time at the Tokyo Marathon."
The first Irrechaa Great Run is scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa on September 22, 2019
During a press conference held on Thursday, Oromia Regional State Tourism Bureau stated that 50,000 runners and several elite athletes are expected to participate in the event.
According to the organizers, the winners will be awarded with a prize.
Ethiopian international referee Bamlak Tessema has been selected to officiate at the FIFA U-20 World Cup which is scheduled to be held in Poland from May 23 to June 25 2019.
The FIFA referees committee has selected 27 referees, 42 assistants and 21 video assistants for VAR technology.
The FIFA U-20 World Cup match officials’ capacity building preparation will focus on the wide range of topics, such as their reading of the game and football understanding, teamwork and the importance of obtaining the best position or angle.
According to FIFA requirements, the referees should be at the right place at the right time to make the correct decision.
Well, there were different Taekwondo competitions in Addis Ababa and its regions held by the Ethiopian International Taekwondo Association
During my young age, I had a chance to watch these competitions and in 2004, I competed in the Addis Ababa club championships.
After my debut competition,I have achieved several medals in all local tournaments.
Following the resignation of my former instructor in 2008, I took a responsibility to manage Choi Hong Hi taekwondo club and since then, I have been working as an instructor.
So, my good performances helped me to participate in international competitions across the world.
The Ethiopian National Football Team has qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations (CAF).
According to sources, Dawit won her first indoor competition in Prague in February 2014, running a time of 4:09.08 minutes.
At the Rabat Meeting she established herself among the world’s top 1500 m runners with a win in 3:59.53 minutes.
Letesenbet Gidey of Ethiopia smashed the world half marathon record with 1:02:52 at Valencia half-marathon, an average of 2:59 min/km!
She took more than a minute off Ruth Chepngetich’s 1:04:02 in Istanbul last April.
Second placed Yalemzerf Yehualaw again dipped under 1:04 (1:03:51) after her previous result of 1:03:44 at Antrim Coast half was not ratified due to a short course.
Ethiopian Premier League Share Company has decided Mekelle 70 Enderta and Fasil Kenema football clubs to participate in the 2020/21 CAF continental club football competitions.
Accordingly, Mekelle 70 Enderta, champion of the 2011 E.C. (2018/19) Ethiopian Premier League season, will represent Ethiopia in the CAF Champions League.
The 22-year-old has now won her second league title in Europe, with her first the Swedish Elitettan crown in the colours of Kungsbacka DFF in 2018 which she scored three goals in eight games to power her side to the Damallsvenskan for the first time, it stated.
Before joining for Melania Bajada’s team, the striker had returned home from Sweden to help Adama City to win its first-ever Ethiopia Women’s Premier League title and won top scorer for the fourth time, scoring 18 goals despite joining in the mid-season.
The festival opened to local and international filmmakers and film enthusiasts alike at Vamdas Cinema and Entertainment in partnership with the Embassy of Brazil in Addis Ababa and the Association of Black Audiovisual Professionals on Wednesday July 18.
The three-day festival kicked off with Carolina, a 2003 short film about the life of black Brazilian author Carolina Maria de Jesus and her struggles with poverty included footage of her increased popularity once her book was published.
Leza, a radio show on Sheger FM 102.1 hosted by Berhanu Digaffe, has been organizing Leza Awards for seven years now.
Recognizing talent by a selection of musicians and filmmakers, it has been one of the platforms where local artistic excellence is celebrated.
Leza, the organizer of the event, also paid tribute to prominent singer Zeritu Getahun who had passed away the previous day.
Mulatu Astatke’s trailblazing album, Mulatu of Ethiopia, was officially rereleased on Friday May 19.
Recorded in New York, the album from 1972 arrived at a time when Mulatu had begun to master the delicate fusion of styles needed to create Ethio jazz.
The release of one of the most acclaimed artist Teddy Afro’s album, entitled “Ethiopia,” definitely is one of the stories that “broke the Internet” (went viral) among Ethiopians and the Ethiopian diaspora.
On the one hand, the song “Ethiopia” was criticized for preaching the grand narrative of Ethiopian nationalism without deconstructing the historical injustice, thereby denying the existence of oppression.
In his new work entitled "The Massacre of Debre Libanos Ethiopia 1937; the Story of One of Fascism’s Shocking Atrocities", the author yet again presents the events surrounding both the assassination attempt in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on 19 February 1937, and the reprisal killings and massacre that occurred in the days and months that followed.
The author in his book presents a traumatic and detailed account of the extent of the massacre, which resulted in the deaths of more than two thousand monks, priests, and local residents at the monastery.
The comencement of Walta’s Televistion paves a way for an alternative platform that can market new ideas in a manner that can educate, inform and entertain the general public, watchers said.
The Center plans to prepare content in different local, regional and international languages. However, the programs which are being aired are in Amharic.
KUTU was formed as a result of a meeting in Addis Ababa between French violinist Théo Ceddaldi and Ethiopian new age singers Hewan Gebrewold and Haleluya Tekletsadik with band members Valentin Ceccaldi on bass, Akemi Fujimori on keyboards and Cyril Atef o
The independent satellite channel is currently producing 12 different programmes, incorporating psychology, law, music and drama, the publication reported.
This time around however, Festal Tigray was for the first time celebrated colorfully in Mekelle the capital city of Tigray National Regional State.
The festival also included entertainment activities accompanied with musical extravaganza presented by renowned Tigrian musical artists such, as the late kiros Alemayehu and the late Iyasu Berhe and many other new talented musicians as well.
Ethiopia’s first success at the Cannes Film Festival tells a simple tale, but the film’s director has set his sights on the world stage thanks to support from the French film industry.
Having successfully premiered “Lamb” in the director’s home city of Addis Ababa earlier this month, the filmmakers have turned their attention to their next important release: in France on September 30.
The Addis Ababa City Beautification, Park and Cemetery Development Agency announced that it will soon inaugurate six mulita-purpose parks in the city, which include features satisfying all age groups.
These parks are designed to have swimming pools, basketball courtyards, amphitheaters and cafes, according to the Agency.
MultiChoice Ethiopia, a South African company that operates the DStv satellite television service, announced plan to significantly increase its investment in Ethiopia.
The company said in a statement that it is looking to extensively expand its reach, investment in people and infrastructure in Ethiopia.
It is also planning to provide support to Ethiopian content and content creators including investing heavily in local content as part of its hyper local content strategy.
During the event, artists performed traditional dances that demonstrated the beauty of the diverse nations, nationalities and peoples of Ethiopia.
Ras Theater Director, Meron Teshale told ENA that art has a power to strengthen unity in diversity and show diversity as a source of peace and harmony.
Poems, drama, music, and dance, among others, are important instruments to teach the people about the beauty of diversity with few words and through entertainment, she added.
Gohe peace and unity award 2021 has been awarded for 11 eminent person,including gammo fathers, inter-religion council of ethiopia and ethiopian traditional leaders council in a colorful ceremony that took place on Sunday
The award was given as symbol of their unwavering commitments towards promoting peace and unity in their localities and the country at large.
With the celebration of the UNESCO registered Timket fesival approaching, restoration of Jan-Meda, the open field where the festival is celebrated, has been intensified, Addis Ababa City Deputy Mayor Adanech Abiebie said today.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, the deputy mayor said besides being a place where Timket is celebrated, Jan-Meda is a place for hosting many social events and sports.
Ambassadors of different countries to Ethiopia and various diplomatic corps have attended cultural music, dances and fashion shows on Saturday at National Theater.
The show, which was colorfully staged in the event organized by Ministry of Culture and Tourism, hopes to capture and portray diverse cultural heritages, traditional music and fashion from country’s nations, nationalities and peoples.
President Sahle-Work Zewde has met with the General Manager for Africa of CANAL+ Group who presented the company’s work in Ethiopia.
CANAL+ Group has made a significant investment in the entertainment industry.
President Sahle-Work appreciated the commitment of the company to incorporate Ethiopian content and content creators on the platform and highlighted the importance of using such platforms for education as well as entertainment.
The second channel of Oromia Broadcasting Network (OBN), a regional broadcaster headquartered in Adama, has started trial transmissions today.
The new channel, called ‘OBN Horn Of Africa’ as per the decision of the regional state, targets strengthening unity and fraternity among people in the east African region, according to Adisu Arega, head of social cluster with the rank of Deputy Chief Administrator of Oromia.
The Meskel Square-Addis Ababa City Hall Project that mainly contains the refurbishment of Meskel Square is the most iconic public gathering space in the modern history of Addis Ababa that has been hosting several cultural, religious, political, entertainment and sports activities for more than 60 years.
Meskel Square annually hosts the Meskel-Demera Religious Festival which has already been inscribed by UNESCO as world’s intangible heritage.
The name Meskel derives from the Amharic term Holy Cross.
President Sahle-Work Zewde received Imtiaz Patel, Chairperson of the Board of Multichoice Group.
Multichoice Group has made sizable investments in Ethiopia both in improving access to the many information and entertainment products that they have but also in supporting local content creation in sports and entertainment.
Fana television will migrate to SES satellite as of December 31st, 2020.
Ethiosat is Ethiopia’s first-ever dedicated free-to-air (FTA) TV platform, hosted on SES’s NSS-12 satellite.
Ethiosat currently delivers 65 channels to Ethiopian homes, with 16 of those channels already in high definition (HD) quality.
KUTU was formed as a result of a meeting in Addis Ababa between French violinist Théo Ceddaldi and Ethiopian new age singers Hewan Gebrewold and Haleluya Tekletsadik with band members Valentin Ceccaldi on bass, Akemi Fujimori on keyboards and Cyril Atef on drums.
The KUTU tour set out to embody the magic they have created through this alliance, with upcoming performances outside of Ethiopia and within Ethiopia as well.
The set included multilingual music from within Ethiopia, incorporating love songs, breakup anthems and folk songs in different languages.
Nowadays multiple skateboarding parks have been built in recognition of the culture after years of the youth skating in unauthorized and dangerous streets due to the unavailability of proper venues.
Amongst the list of people and institutions responsible for the growing culture is ‘Kushineta skates.’
“Kushineta is opening up its first store in megenagna and that’s a huge step forward,” said Yared, hoping the future is wide open for the industry.
In an exclusive interview with FBC, a member of the Afro-Ukrainian hip hop trio Fo Sho, Betty Endale said that their group has a plan to promote immense tourism potentials of Ethiopia to the rest of the world.
The Afro-Ukrainian hip hop trio consisting of the three Ethiopian-Ukrainian sisters, Bethlehem (Betty), Miriam and Siona Endale have already left an imprint on the Ukrainian hip-hop scene.
“In Africa we are one, to show unity in diversity; we may have different borders like Ethiopia, Nigeria, Egypt, and Central Africa Republic but Africa is one.
In our diversity there is a lot of unity among us, so we want to spread that unity,” he noted.
Ethiopia will participate for the first time at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival in the African Pavilion, Tourism Ethiopia announced.
Briefing journalists today, Tourism Ethiopia CEO, Lensa Mekonen said partnered with local and Diaspora film professionals, Ethiopia is ready to participate in the Film Festival which will be held in France next week.
A few weeks after the controversial draft law establishing the Office of the Federal Attorney General got the approval of members of the parliament (MPs), the government has submitted yet another controversial draft law to provide for the computer crime.
Ethiopia first introduced cybercrimes in the 2004 Criminal Code which penalizes only cybercrimes of ‘hacking’, ‘dissemination of malware’ and ‘denial of service (DoS) attacks’.
Seven law enforcements officers and an unknown number of armed protesters were killed in the series of clashes that happened on Monday in West Arsi zone of the Oromia Regional State.
According to the locals, the cause of the clashes an alleged ban of an Oromifa song that has a political content.
They told The Reporter that the clashes started after police officers questioned why the banned song was played at a wedding ceremony.
The report was prepared upon the request of the governments of Ethiopia and Sudan and describes the illegal activities that are taking place from the Horn of Africa via Libya to Europe as a “dangerous and organized illicit trade”.
The 39-page report entitled, “Human Smuggling and Trafficking on the Horn of Africa-Central Mediterranean Route” was made public February 19, 2016 during a consultation meeting organized by the new ISSP office, which was opened in Addis Ababa.
The stay-home protests are currently taking place in Gondar and in some parts of Bahir Dar.
But as of Thursday, a wave of protester and unrest has been observed in Finote Selam and Bure, towns in West Gojam Zone of the Amhara Regional State, becoming the latest regions to join the mood of protest in the regional state.
The ruling Ethiopian Peoples' Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and opposition parties have recently put their differences aside and have agreed to come to a roundtable to find ways of redeeming the already tense political environment.
The parties have so far been discussing on modalities of negotiation, which would serve them as a bylaw for their future dialogue.
Nonetheless, the parties are finding it hard to agree on some points, which would be the legal framework.
President Sahle-Work Zewde has been selected as one of the World’s Most Powerful Women of 2019 by Forbes.
The President is the only African woman on the list.
President Sahle-Work Zewde is a role model not only for Ethiopian women but women all around the world.
Ahmed Shide for his part said “the Cooperation Framework is the planned support of the UN Agencies to the national development priorities of Ethiopia as shown in the Ten Years Perspective Plan and the Home Grown Economic Reform.”
The Finance Minister hailed the signing of the cooperation framework which comes at a time when Ethiopia is undergoing a major strategic shift to embark on a transformational growth while fighting against the pandemic.
The one-day exhibition is part of the annual celebrations to mark the 120th anniversary of the diplomatic relations between Ethiopia and the Russian Federation.
Ethiopia and the Russian Federation established diplomatic relations in 1898, just after the Battle of Adwa.
Abiy, who recalled EPRDF’s decision to limit the term of office, said an amendment that would help to limit the term of office for the Prime Minister will be added in the constitution shortly.
The Water Ministers of Ethiopian, Egypt and Sudan are conducting a joint meeting with the technical committee on the Ethiopian Grand Renaissance Dam.
The meeting that kicked off today in Addis Ababa will stay for two days.
Ethiopia’s Water and Irrigation Minister Sileshi Bekele, Sudan’s Minister of Water resources and Irrigation Muataz Musa; and Egyptian Water resources and Irrigation Minister Mohamed Abdel Ati have been attending the meeting.
The Nobel Committee awarded the prize for Abiy for his efforts to achieve peace and international cooperation, particularly for his decisive initiative to resolve the border conflict with neighboring Eritrea last year, three months after he came to power in April 2018.
The PM is the 100th winner and was selected from 223 private and 78 organization nominees.
The 10th criminal bench of the Federal Supreme Court granted police 14 days additional time for further investigation on Abdi Oumer Mohammed, former president of the Somali region and accomplices.
The lawyers of the defendants contested the request for additional time. However, police requested for the additional time, arguing that the case demands deep investigation.
The joint forces have taken control of the Zobl mountainous area and other very significant towns including Arjo, Fokissa and Boren.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has launched a 52 million dollars five year program to help pastoralists in Ethiopia.
The program called “Pastoralist Areas Resilience Improvement and Market Expansion – PRIME” is jointly designed with global climate change initiative and will be implemented from October 2012 up to 2017 in 36 districts found in Oromia, Afar and Somali regions.
Ethiopia is building a $4.3 billion, 6,000-megawatt hydropower plant on the Blue Nile River, the main tributary of the Nile River that provides Egypt with most of its water.
The dam, to be completed by 2017, has raised concerns in Egypt that it will cut supplies of water allocated by accords put in place more than five decades ago.
The project, known as the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, is set to be Africa’s biggest hydropower plant when it is built.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia (MoFA) has downplayed warns of attack by Somali militant group al- Shabaab, notified by the US government.
The United States government recently reported to have received threat reports of al-Shabaab’s intent to target the Bole area of Addis Ababa city.
The humanitarian situation is most acute in the Tigray Region, where 5.2 million are at risk, along with another 534,000 in Afar and 3.3 million in Amhara.
However, there is still no indication as to when help will arrive after the UN announced on Wednesday that it was forced to suspend aid distribution in the northern Ethiopian town of Kombolcha after gunmen looted its warehouses.
More than 80 people have been killed in two days of unrest in Ethiopia following the killing of prominent singer Hachalu Hundessa.
The 34-year-old had emerged as a powerful political voice of the Oromo ethnic group, and had made many enemies during his musical career.
Ethnic nationalism was kept ruthlessly in check under the Marxist Dergue regime and during the two decades of EPRDF rule that followed.
The opening of the political space under Mr Abiy has lifted a lid on ethnic tensions.
Ethiopia's system of ethnic federalism was always going to be vulnerable to politicians playing on atavistic sentiments.
Many Oromo activists are being held at the Qilinto facility, according to pro-opposition media.
New York-based Human Rights Watch says that more than 400 people have been killed in clashes with the security forces in Oromia, although the government disputes this figure.
Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn has blamed "anti-peace forces" for the violence.
Violence between the Amhara and Gumuz ethnic groups left dozens of people dead last month in Amhara and its neighbouring region, Benishangul Gumuz.
Ethnic violence, typically sparked by land disputes, has displaced nearly three million people across Ethiopia.
Another issue the prime minister is having to grapple with is unrest within the military.
The 41st anniversary of the foundation of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) is celebrated in Mekelle through commemoration of the martyrs, panel discussion and other programs.
The party has urged the young generation to understand the reasons behind the party’s armed struggle and ensure the already started journey of the country towards renaissance.
The 12th annual meeting of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) concludes meeting re-electing Abay Woldu as a chairperson.
The meeting, held for six days, also elected Dr. Debretsion Gebremicheal as vice chairperson of the front.
According to Ambassador Asminew, Ethiopian forces are also given additional responsibility to train Somali forces to establish a strong national army that can conduct operations independently.
“These efforts will help spread security and stability to all the Somali people,” he said.
The census, planned to start this month, was postponed to next February due to various technical problems, according to the agency.
Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea today signed a reciprocal visa waiver agreement for holders of diplomatic and service passports.
The agreement was signed by State Minister Hirut Zemene and Don Simeon Oyono, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Equatorial Guinea.
On the occasion, President Dr. Mulatu Teshome congratulated the newly appointed Ethiopian Ambassadors on their appointment and wished a successful tenure.
The Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) announced that it is ready to serve the 1 million Ethiopian Diaspora expected to come to their home country for twenty-four hours seven days a week and provide several financial services.
Speaking to ENA, Commercial Bank of Ethiopia CEO, Abie Sano said the visit of 1 million Ethiopian Diaspora is a good news to the bank and the bank is making preparations to further develop packages and refresh services.
The bank has launched a booking system called Gate Rooms, which enables the diaspora to book hotels from where they are, the CEO revealed, adding that members of the diaspora who come to Ethiopia could easily make booking, pay, and book online.
National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) has introduced a contractionary monetary policy that would be effective as of today.
A contractionary monetary policy increases interest rates in order to slow the growth of the money supply and bring down inflation.
This can slow economic growth and even increase unemployment but is often seen as necessary to cool down the economy and keep prices in check.
Ministry of Mines and Petroleum disclosed that it has earned 513 million USD from export of mines during the last ten months.
Briefing journalists today, Mines and Petroleum Minister Takele Uma pointed out that the income is remarkable when compared to same period of last Ethiopian year, which was 90 million USD.
Out of the total revenue, USD 504.7 million was obtained from gold export, he added.
Inhabitants around the recently inaugurated Genale-Dawa III Hydro-power said the project has opened immense opportunity for them, besides benefiting the country.
Genale-Dawa III hydropower project, which generates 254 MW, was inaugurated by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed this week.
Among the inhabitants residing around the dam, Abdi Haji told ENA that “the power project plays immense role in their lives in terms of road connectivity, irrigation, energy as well as job opportunity.”
All pluses and other commodities which are trading through the Ethiopian Commodity Exchange (ECX) are set to be mandatory starting from this Ethiopian budget year, according to the authority.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, ECX Corporate Communications Manager Netsanet Tesfaye said the trading of all pluses through the authority starting this Ethiopian budget year will help combat contraband.
All stakeholders, including ministries of Revenues and Trade& Industry will follow up the implementation process in accordance with the agreements reached.
Addis Ababa January 23/2019 Prime Minster Abiy Ahmed said that Ethiopia is working to enhance the engagement of the private sector in order to ensure more inclusive and socially sustainable growth.
Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, the Premier said that bringing vitality to the economy is part of the sweeping reforms that the country has been undertaking.
The Premier elaborated to the Forum that the economic reform is aimed at leveraging the collective power of Ethiopians specially, women and youth.
Turkish investment in Ethiopia is increasing as more companies interested in doing business in the Horn of African country, Turkish Ambassador to Ethiopia Fatih Ulusoy said.
Ethiopia, the largest investment destination for Turkey in Africa, has attracted close to half of the latter’s investment in the continent.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, Ambassador Ulusoy said, Turkish foreign direct investment in Ethiopia has continued to increase.
Ministry of Mines announced that it will be implementing a policy change that will give metal and steel manufactures access to local iron ore in order to produce steel bars.
Mines Minister Engineer Takele Uma said that the implementation of the new policy will eliminate the struggle manufacturers are facing including lack of raw material and forex.
We are visiting our manufactures today to discuss this with them and urge them to continue to focus on what matters during this critical time of our historic trajectory and continue our initiative to use our natural resources.
Tourism Ethiopia Director, Sileshi Girma told The Ethiopian Herald that they have identified 50 potential sites for investment in the coming 10 years in the tourism industry.
He stated that the participation of the private sector in tourism and hospitality sectors has been good over the past years.
However, there are challenges such as lack of access to loan from banks and most of the tourism destinations are far from the capital of Ethiopia, he added
The Soflet Malt which joined the Bole Lemi Indistrial Park with an outlay of 70 Million Euros has finalized preparations to start production on coming March 2021.
The Soufflet Malt Ethiopia which is a French family-owned business based on collecting and adding value to agricultural raw materials is building malt factory at 10 ha of land in the industrial park.
Soulfflet Malt Ethiopia has already created production supply chain for 25,000 farmers, and will increase number of beneficiaries to 40, 000 when its factory goes fully operation in the future, the information from Industrial Parks Development Corporation.
According to Industrial Parks Development Corporation, Soulfflet Malt Ethiopia will have a capacity of producing 100,000 metric tons of malt per annum.
Ethiopian gold exports surged after the central bank offered higher prices for the metal in a bid to curb smuggling and as part of wider efforts to spur investment in mining.
Ethiopia’s gold industry is currently dominated by small-scale artisanal miners, but Newmont Corp. and Australia’s Allied Gold Corp. are among the companies exploring for the precious metal in the Horn of Africa nation.
The government hopes that cleaning up informal mining by channeling gold sales through the central bank is a first step to making the country more attractive to investors.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved last month a program for Ethiopia of 2.9 billion US dollars.
The program is aimed at supporting the homegrown economic reform agenda of the country.
The economic reform is designed to eliminate macroeconomic imbalances and lay the foundation for sustainable and inclusive growth.
According to IMF, the $2.9 billion program would facilitate Ethiopia’s transition to flexible exchange-rate system.
The country is importing daily the same amount of fuel as it was in the past days via Djibouti and Sudan with more than 300 fuel trucks, he said.
The Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) as well as the Ministry of Mines, Petroleum and Natural Gas said they are not authorized to control fuel distribution in the country.
The Minister said Ethiopia has introduced cadastral-based modern mining licensing and database system to promote investments in the sector.
The system enables investors to see different investment opportunities, to request for license from where they are living and to pay payments in simple and clear way, he added.
He stated that the Cadastre System assures conducive environment for investment by building trust and creating closeness among the community, the companies and the government.
Ethiopia collected some $318 million from the export of flowers and other horticulture products Ethiopian fiscal year, which ended July 7, 2019.
The Public Relations Director remarked that over a hundred companies have been engaged in the cultivation of flowers, fruit, and vegetables as well as herbs and supply of high-quality products to the international market.
Ethiopian horticulture products' main export destinations are the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, UK, USA, Japan, Norway, Germany, UAE, Belgium, and Italy.
Ethio-telecom has announced new tariff cuts on international voice calls and short text-messaging.
In a press conference today, CEO of Ethio-telecom, Firehiwot Tamiru, said the company had made 10-40 percent reduction on international voice calls.
She also announced up to 51 percent tariff cut on international short text-messaging.
The Ethiopian economy will maintain its growth lead for the East African region according to the latest World Bank report.
The latest forecast puts Ethiopia at a percentage point behind Ghana.
The West African nation is forecast to grow at 8.3% as against Ethiopia’s 8.2%.
“Among East African countries, Ethiopia is likely to remain the fastest growing economy, but growth is expected to soften as it takes measures to stabilize government debt.”
The addition of Habesha Petroleum, JR-Petroleum Plc, Kernel Oil Trading Plc and Kalub Oil Ethiopia, pushed the total number of oil retail companies in the country to 22.
JR-Petroleum is the latest entrant among the four companies opening its doors on December 25, 2017.
The company was established with a 21 million Br capital and is headquartered in Addis Ababa.
Founded by three partners engaged in distributing fuel from Nile Petroleum under a franchise arrangement, JR currently runs eight filling stations.
Ethiopia's year-on-year headline inflation crept up to 8.8 percent in June, up from 8.7 percent the previous month, the statistics office said on Tuesday.
Food inflation slowed to 11.2 percent in June from 12.3 percent the previous month, it said. Non-food inflation was at 6.7 percent in June, up from 4.7 percent in May.
The Ministry of Trade has disclosed that it has planned to gain about 1.2 billion birr from the export of oilseeds and pulses this year.
Crop production and Marketing Directorate Director with the Ministry, Mulugeta Muhammed, told WIC that the country has planned to export 98.233 thousand tons of oilseeds and pulses this year and gain the stated amount of income.
The planned amount of export has increased by 26 percent as compared to the same period last year.
The drastic increase of Ethiopia’s debt stock has been a source of debate among policymakers, researchers and political analysts in Ethiopia for the last half a decade.
As the country’s total debt surpassed 50 billion dollars since 2017, the country has become among the most indebted economies in Africa.
Especially the tendency of the central government to undertake mega projects with finance secured from external creditors, even with a high interest, coupled with the critical foreign currency shortage in the country have weighed negatively on the country’s ability to meet its debt obligations
Last week, the National Bank of Ethiopia introduced a new rule that forces depositors make a maximum of five transactions per week.
While this was intended to paralyze illegal money transfer agents and weaken the parallel market, the measure comes with a risk as it could result in a fall in business transactions and create a fear that it would lead to an economic slowdown.
“Hurting the wider business community just to cripple few illegal money operators is not fair. Of course, weakening the parallel market is a step in the right direction but adopting a radical measure will cause more problems,” said Wujrayib Yibgeta, Vice President of Addis Ababa Traders Forum.
Given the repercussions of the transaction limit, which some experts refer to as a draconian measure, it is simple to understand how desperate the government is to increase remittance flow, which averaged USD5.7 billion over the last five years.
A decade ago, ETB17 was equivalent to a dollar. As the years rolled and following the repeated devaluation of the currency in order to boost the international competitiveness of the import-dependent country, the value of the Birr has been reduced by as much as 130%.
Though this was meant to boost export earnings, while reducing import bills of the country, none of these have been realized so far.
While the country shipped an average of three billion dollars of goods annually in the last decade, its imports barely averaged 15 billion dollars.
Accordingly, the MTN Group Ltd. and a consortium led by Vodafone Group Plc, have bid for the licenses.
Ahmed told The Reporter that the company's bidding document is under evaluation and as soon as it gets the government’s approval, the results will be publicized.
According to Abayneh, this time, the zonal administration livestock and fishery office is finalizing all the necessary preconditions to relocate people who live in the surrounding areas to other places.
For instance, Chencha, Dita, Gacho Baba and Bonki are some of the mountainous areas where the farming is taking place.
Mati Multiplex, the first state-of-the-art cinema house in the country, has launched a plan to expand nationwide with branches across six major regional towns while Bahir Dar becomes the first town outside Addis Ababa to have 3D Cinema facility.
Although Mekele, the seat of the Tigray Regional State, is the first regional town to host the first branch of the Cinema chain a year ago with 35mm movie screening cinema facility, another regional town Bahr Dar has taken the lead in hosting the 3D Cinema infrastructure outside of Addis Ababa.
Addressing Climate Ambition Summit 2020, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed said that Ethiopia has taken bold leadership on climate action by launching its ambitious climate resilient green economy strategy that aspires to build a carbon neutral and resilient economy by 2030.
Over the last two years, Ethiopia’s green economy strategy has been fully mainstreamed into the recently launched yet 10 year perspective development plan, which runs from 2021 to 2030, Prime Minister Abiy noted.
According to a statement issued by the Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia, the three countries negotiated on technical issues on the first filling and annual operation of the dam.
The chair of the previous day meeting recapped the issues on which convergence is reached, including the rules on the first stage filling, volume of environmental flow, guidelines for first stage filling, the drought management rules, rules on dam safety, environmental and social impact assessment studies, and entry into force of the guidelines and rules.
According to the minister, the harvest expected from 300,000 hectares of land this year would help produce 10 million quintals.
Even if it was possible to get more produce this harvest season, the flooding in Afar Region obstructed the effort to meet the target, he added.
Some 90,000 hectares of irrigated land has been covered with wheat, the minister said, adding that best seed, chemical, fertilizer supplies have been properly provided.
The Korea Forest Service has been expanding collaboration with Ethiopia to restore degraded forests through sustainable agroforestry.
The latest event was a launch ceremony held on Wednesday for a book “Re-greening Ethiopia” co-published by Korean Forest Service and Ethiopian Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
During the event, a memorandum of understanding was also signed for P4G, the Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030 which is an initiative with 12 middle-power partner countries including Denmark and South Korea.
Ethiopian Environment and Forest Research Institute announced a plan to cover the Abay Gorge areas ranging from Kere Goha to Dejen town.
Located on the boundary of Oromia and Amhara region, the Abay Gorge is a serios of gorges to a depth of some 1,500 meters.
A research that will serve as a roadmap for afforestation of the Abay Gorge has been jointly conducted by Ethiopian Environment and Forest Research Institute, Selale University, Debre Markos University and Forest and Climate Change Commission.
The Ethiopian Soil Information System (EthioSIS) project was launched in 2012 to transform the agriculture sector by improving the fertility of farming soil to support agricultural transformation.
The system has been supporting agriculture by developing soil fertility maps for more than 18,000 rural kebeles in the country and providing up-to-date soil fertility data as well as recommending the best type of fertilizer for soil in each region, Tegbaru said.
Geo-hazards are affecting agricultural products and human life in selected areas of Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNPR) of Ethiopia, according to Geological Survey of Ethiopia.
According to the study conducted in collaboration with Czech Geological Survey, areas around Arbaminch, Leku, Dilla and Mejo are highly affected by erosion, floods, landslide and rock falls due to occurrence of ground fissures, high gradient reliefs and intensive deforestation.
The National Disaster Risk Management Commission warned about a potential flash flood in some parts of the country due to torrential rains in the coming days.
In a presser he gave today, Deputy Commissioner Damene Darota said that some parts of Amhara, Oromiya, SNNP and Tigray as well as most parts of Gambella regional states are vulnerable to flash flood.
Areas close to Awash, Baro-Akobo and Nile river basins and tributaries are also exposed to flood risks, he added.
Several actors and experts in the wildlife sector, including from regional and international organizations partaken on the workshop, which among other things discussed on opportunities and challenges of the wildlife in Ethiopia.
Professor Masresha Fetene, from the Ethiopian Academy of Science, told journalists that despite its untapped natural resources, the country is facing some challenges in wildlife conservation.
Kenya’s firefighting helicopter that has the capacity to hold 1200 liters of water starts sprinkling on a blaze that rage the Semein Mountains National Park.
The helicopter and 12 Israeli wildfire experts have arrived this morning at the national park to support the eradication process of the wildfire raging in the national park.
As wildfire has been ravaging the Semein national park for a couple of weeks, Ethiopia has called the international community for support to contain and extinguish the blaze.
Ethiopia's Environmental Analysis conducted by World Bank, Forest, Environment and Climate Change, Finance and Economic Cooperation ministries and Ethiopian Development Research Institute was launched here today.
According to the Environmental Analysis lack of integration among the sectoral ministries and regional bureaus, problems of value addition in using natural resources and lack of strategy on green industry are identified as the main challenges that hamper effective actions against environmental climate change related actions.
The Addis Ababa City Administration Environment Protection and Green development Commission said that it has shut down two factories, which it accused of polluting the environment.
Environment Commission Director with the Commission, Bayu Tola, the two factorie–Hansen Glass Factory and Dire leather factors got closed after they repeatedly failed to warnings to make corrections.
Government Communication Affairs Office Minister, Bereket Simon, stressed the need to further consolidate soil and water conservation so as to protect the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam from silt and sediment.
Bereket, who is also secretary of the National Council for the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam Project, said soil and water conservation and natural resource protection should be undertaken in Amhara, Oromia and Benishangul Gumuz states towards the same goal.
Ethiopia and Djibouti have established a Joint Coordinating Committee in Djibouti to expedite the successful implementation of the plantation of nine million tree seedlings In Djibouti.
Ethiopia has pledged to provide one billion tree seedlings to the Neighboring countries in its belief that climate change and desertification in the region demands Regional solutions.
Ethiopia has planted 20 billion trees to build a climate-resilient green economy and assist the Global efforts to respond to the Earth’s climate change and its adverse effects.
The Ethiopian Metrology Agency said that the heavy rainfall is expected to continue in September, and warned the public over the sudden flooding incidents.
The weather forecast compiled during the month of August shows that there will be heavy rain in coming months. The Agency advised the people to be cautious of possible sudden flooding.
Flash floods killed five people in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa in the last two days, the city’s Addis ababa city fire and emergency prevention and rescue agency official said today .
Among the 11 people four were swept away as they tried to cross a river in the Nifas sil Lafto suburbs of the city Hana mariam particular area, Nigatu Mamu, spokesman for the city’s fire and emergency division said.
Stored agricultural and industrial chemicals at various institutions in Addis Ababa and regional towns are posing health hazard and environmental pollution, experts warn.
This was disclosed at a three-day training held this week in Addis Ababa on chemical weapons control and chemical safety and security management facilitated by Organization for Prevention of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for member states.
In the side line of the workshop, environment experts told The Reporter that with the increasing use of agricultural inputs and the thriving manufacturing sector, the threats of environmental pollution is increasing from time to time.
Visiting Addis Ababa this week, Sara Terry, senior policy advisor to the Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards under the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), has brought her team to initiate the work of air quality management system in the capital.
Speaking to The Reporter on Friday, Terry said that within the coming two years Addis Ababa is expected to devise a policy to institutionalize air quality management system under the city’s Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).
Officials of the Guji Zone in the Oromia Regional State has denied plans of transferring the Kenticha Tantalum Mine to youth associations saying that it was “merely an idea to entertain rather than an actionable plan” and that it had no intention of depriving the federal Mining, Petroleum and Biofuel Corporation off its mining concession and processing facility.
However, according to the head of the zonal administration, Tilahun Warda, the youth residing in the surrounding of the Tantalum Mine are posing series question as to their benefits from the natural resource and said that as long as the Corporation is willing to address this demand, there will be no problem.
A multi-sectoral stakeholders’ platform joined hands to rescue over 131,000 cattle on the verge of death in Borena zone of southern Oromia.
These cattle can stand and walk only with human support as deadly drought takes hold in Borena.
Over 71,000 livestock have already died since the drought began.
The current drought occurred in Borena, West Guji, Guji, East Bale, West Hararge zones, and it exists as an alert stage in East Hararge and Bale, according to Ketema.
Excessive level of water at Ethiopia’s giant hydropower dam, Gibe III, has prompted officials at Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP) to commence a controlled release of the water as of the coming week.
The hydropower plant that entered in to its commissioning phase six months ago was unable to generate in full capacity owing to the low level of water caused partly by the EL Nino induced drought in the country.
The aftereffects of the drought caused heavy rain falls in many parts of the country that consequently threatened overflow of the Gibe River on top of the dam.
Sandstorm has hit the city of Dire Dawa, in the eastern part of Ethiopia and its surroundings.
The sandstorm that hits Dre-Dawa and its surrounding lasts for more than an hour.
Assistant Prof. Yonas Tadese, a geography lecturer at Dire Dawa University told ENA that the phenomena is the result of a low air pressure that moved to the northern hemisphere.
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Resources warned farmers today to remain vigilant on possible threat of swarm of locusts during this rainy season.
Briefing journalists, Ministry Plant Conservation Director Zebdios Salato said fragmented swarm of mature locusts have entered parts of the country.
He assured farmers that the mature locusts do not inflict damage on the crops right now.
The station, which is constructed in the compound of the agency's Adama branch, is expected to provide data that will help to measure the level of the pollution trends in the city.
The data will also serve as a vital input for policymakers and stakeholders who work on air pollution and related issues, Abate Getachew, head of the Meteorological Research at EMA told The Reporter.
The new start-up businesses law and establishment of job creation fund would make Ethiopia preferable for beginners in technology, Dr Ahmedin indicated.
The State Minister also responded to questions raised by participants.
The 10 years old Ethiopian Soliyana Gizaw has been named the winner of the 2020 African Code Challenge (AfriCAN Code), a newly launched continent-wide tech competition where young people were invited to create an educational computer game.
According to organizers Soliyana’s submission called “Mathstainement” won the Pan-African prize leading participants from 54 countries.
Innovation and Technology Minister, Belete Mola (PhD) has conferred with UK Ambassador to Ethiopia Alastair McPhail on ways of enhancing cooperation between the two countries in the field of science and technology.
During the discussion, the Minister said Ethiopia and UK have been enjoying a longstanding and close relationship calling for further engagement to deepen the existing ties with multifaceted areas of cooperation.
The mobile application has been developed by the Consortium of Reproductive Health Associations (CORHA) together with United Nation Population Fund (UNFPA) and the Ethiopian Ministry of Health (MoH).
While launching the application, Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition Director at Ministry of Health, Dr. Meseret Zelalem noted that in today’s world adolescents and young people rely on their mobile devices as sources of information so that ‘Yenetab Mobile Application’, which is available on Google play store, is proving to be an authentic source of health information with a strong emphasis on adolescent and youth sexual and reproductive health rights.
Director General of INSA, Dr. Shumete Gizaw has presented the touchless hand sanitizing technology to Prime Minister Dr. Abiy Ahmed.
Having tested the automatic technology, Prime Minister Dr. Abiy described the innovation as an encouraging move calling for further advancements so as to fight the coronavirus pandemic avoiding physical contacts.
Coordinator of the innovation unit in the agency, Biruhtesfa Mulugeta said activities are well underlay to increase access of such touchless technologies in the country as a part of an innovating response to the pandemic.
The third in a series of competitions, Solve IT 2020 will be promoted across 15 cities in Ethiopia and seeks to support youth across the country to develop innovative projects, promote entrepreneurship, and solve local problems through technology.
Solve IT 2020 will be implemented by iCog Labs, with sponsorship from the US Embassy, JICA Ethiopia, the Federal Small and Medium Manufacturing Industry Promotion Authority, and the Federal Urban Job Creation and Food Security Agency.
Offering degrees in Business Administration and Computer Science at the graduate level, the American College of Technology (ACT) has been inaugurated in the capital.
The school located in the ICT Mart building in Arat Kilo behind Tourist Hotel came about an investment of 42 million Birr to help the “local Information Communication Technology capacity, as part of Ethiopia’s development agenda,” said Asmamaw.
Inaugurating the delayed Genale Dawa (GD-III) hydroelectric power project on Tuesday Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed (PhD) made an appeal to local investors to build the next phase of the hydroelectric project GD-6, in the same river basin that requires an estimated financial outlay of USD one billion.
According to the PM, the latest offer is issued for the first time to the private sector to get involved in the power production sector.
Facebook is teaming up with the Government of Ethiopia to help inform millions of Ethiopians with what it says will be “valid and up to date information on COVID–19.”
To that end, there is to be a WhatsApp Business API that will be used as a hotline with an online “chatbot”.
In addition, the new partnership is to have a number of components, including supporting health practitioners for access to information, supporting fundraisers, removing harmful information that it deems is wrong.
Nebiyu told The Reporter that the modern and efficient technological device to be installed in major streets of Addis Ababa are intended to give the exact locations of tourism spots both for foreign and local tourists.
He also noted that such steps would boost the city’s revenue from this sector by introducing new facilities to the existing tourism and cultural resources.
“What we need to do first is try to maximize the promotional activities and modernize the service,” said Nebiyu.
The state-owned telecom monopoly, Ethio Telecom, is fighting a telecom fraud committed by individuals using illegally imported VSATs and other telecom gadgets that bypass the company’s satellite network.
The individuals get payments for their services from foreign telecom companies which was supposed to be made to Ethio Telecom.
The state-owned monopoly is reportedly losing millions of dollars due to the telecom fraud.
Ethiopian researchers have introduced a new species of sorghum seed that could give yield multiple times per year.
Once the seed is sown, it gives output two to three times per year for 20 generations, if it gets water continuously, said Minister of Science and Technology that supports the research.
However, if it does not get water, the seed will give output once in year during the rainy season, said the Minister Eng. Getahun Mekuria.
Former National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) astronaut, Charles Bolden, gave a lecture today to space enthusiast students drawn from the Ethiopian Space Science Society (ESSS) and different schools in Addis Ababa.
The former astronaut told ENA that he was in Ethiopia in 2014 when he had discussions with government officials.
HubCity Live- Ethiopia brings a conceptual master plan to build the real “WAKANDA” in Bahir Dar city of Ethiopia.
The ministry, the federal government and Amhara regional government work together for the realization of the project that projected to cost two to three billion US dollars, he further stated.
The project is expected to be completed eight to ten years.
Speaking of the award, Ethiopian Airlines Group CEO Tewolde GebreMariam quoted as saying the award is “a testimony to the leading role that Ethiopian Cargo & Logistics Services is playing to the socio- economic development in Africa and the rest of the world with safe, secure, dependable and competitive cargo and logistics services.’’
The Ethiopian Cargo and Logistic Services is Africa’s largest network cargo operator and multi-award winner.
Ethiopia’s earth observatory satellite will be launched into space by November 2019 as preparations are finalized, according to Ethiopian Space Science and Technology Institute.
In an exclusive interview with ENA, Institute Director-General Solomon Belay said “we have completed about 95 percent of the satellite, and checking and launching will be conducted after September.”
Speaking at the 5th ICT National Innovation Competition Award Ceremony and Mini Exhibition Event held today, State Minister, Getachew Negash, noted that the government has paid due attention to ICT through support, inspiration and creation of internationally competent ICT engineers to excel the sector.
Negash noted that the government highly encourages and motivates women to join the sector.
Such actions will be continued in a well comprehended way in the future.
The LG-KOICA HOPE TVET College has graduated 51 students in 3rd and 4th levels on Saturday.
Head of KOICA in Ethiopia, Doyong A, also said that LG and KOICA (Korea International Cooperation Agency) cooperatively realized the establishment of the college and will strengthen supporting the college to make it center of excellence in information technology and electronics field of studies.
The second SolveIT! a nationwide innovation competition for Ethiopian youths, has been launched in Addis Ababa last Friday.
Sponsored by U.S. Embassy and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the program helps Ethiopian youth to develop tech-based solutions to address community challenges.
Mr. Tewolde GebreMariam, Group CEO of Ethiopian Airlines, says, “We are glad to introduce inflight internet connectivity with the latest broadband satellite technology, Ka-band, offering our passengers seamless digital experience as they fly Ethiopian.
The launch of the onboard wi-fi internet is part of our relentless efforts to further add to passengers’ comfort keeping pace with the technology of the day.
As customer-centric airline, we will remain focused on continuous service excellence, taking advantage of emerging technologies and infrastructure.”
Huawei installed the up-to-date telecom equipment in the AAU pharmacy campus for educational purposes. After 3 years’ know-how transfer, Addis Ababa University will gain 100% ownership of the ICT Practice Center.
The first to East Africa, the 2.1 million USD investment of the project includes a donation scope of 1.9 Million USD worth of equipment for training and demonstration, and the Train the Trainer program to Addis Ababa Institute of Technology (AAiT) teaching staff.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has handed over the national science, technology and innovation award to 194 winners today.
Of the total winners 15 are women.
Some 1,887 persons including today’s awardees have received the science, technology and innovation award since its commencement in 2010.
Director-General of INSA, Dr. Shumete Gizaw, for his part, said the discussion was focused on capacity building, technology, and system development to strengthen South Sudan’s information and cybersecurity.
During the discussion, the need to closely work together to ensure information and cybersecurity was accentuated.
In addition, the launch of Ethiosat will offer Ethiopians a larger offering of both local and relevant international content in the future.
Fissehazion said, “We believe consolidating all Ethiopian TV channels and broadcasting them from one orbital position will fuel growth in the Ethiopian media sector, as local networks will now be able to easily expand their audience reach.
This will foster healthy and growing advertising markets, which will result in a greater variety of content, and more localised content.”
Ethiopia has launched its first-ever remote sensing satellite into space on 20 December 2019.
The 72kg satellite of Ethiopia was developed in collaboration with the Chinese Academy of Space Technology.
Twenty one Ethiopian engineers got training in China and were involved in the design and development of the satellite.
This Multi-Spectral Remote Sensing Satellite is named Ethiopia Remote Sensing Satellite-1 (ETRSS-1).
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed yesterday announced preparation to award the second new nationwide telecom license with the necessary policy adjustment.
In 2018, Prime Minister Abiy’s administration announced commitment to liberalize the telecommunication sector and opened it up to domestic and foreign investments.
He called the decision “a major policy shift in Ethiopia”
Canadian Physicians for Aid and Relief (CPAR) and Global Affairs Canada are set to spend approximately 110 million Birr (4.1 million CAD) to help Ethiopia with sexual reproductive health (SRH) of women and adolescents.
This is to be a four year project and is to support Ethiopia’s priority in helping improve its national curriculum.
The project is to be in the Amhara and Oromia Regional States and will place Canada’s foreign agenda of feminism at forefront and will look at gender discrimination in areas of early and forced child marriage, female genital mutilation, and early pregnancy.
Inferior quality salt with low content of iodine produced traditionally in the Afar Regional State is flooding the local market, it was learnt.
The government has enacted a law that compels salt producers to iodize the salt.
The Ministry of Health in collaboration with UNICEF has been assisting the traditional salt producers associations to build their capacities so as to enable them to iodize the salt.
The Ministry of Health of Ethiopia has recommended that the postponed general elections can be conducted given the public’s awareness in the means of transmission of the coronavirus pandemic as well as the capabilities created in the country to produce masks and hand sanitizers.
In addition to recommending holding the elections by taking the necessary precautions, the Ministry also suggested economic and social activities be restored with proper precautions taken to prevent the spread of the virus.
Hence, such gatherings should allow enough ventilation, maintain social distance, mandatorily use face masks, enforcing frequent hand washing and other necessary measures.
After discovering one, Ahmedin Shafi, who was caught red handed while producing foods, beverages and preservatives using outdated ingredients this week, the Ethiopian Food, Medicines and Health Care Administration and Control Authority (FMHCACA) have issued an order to the company to recall all of its products from the market although some of the items produced by the food processor are still sold in some markets outside of Addis Ababa.
Over the past fiscal year, as part of its mandate, the authority said that it has disposed 600.8 million birr worth of drugs, medicine, cleaning products as well as foods and food ingredients which are declared outdated.
The illegal dental product,“Herbal Colgate”, was produced by counterfeiting a similar productproduced in Ethiopia and registered by the Authority: Dentplus.
DentPlus which is a registered product with FMHACA and produced by a company called Virginia Pharmaceutical Plc; an Ethiopian based company owned by local investors.
The Authority urged the public not to use “Herbal Colgate” as well as inform the concerned offices in case they notice the products being sold.
However, due to the outbreak of COVID-19 and other challenges, the malaria eradication campaign is not being implemented as expected, the State Minister said.
Dr Dereje underscored the need to identify strengths and weakness observed in the past and find ways to deal with them to eliminate the disease by 2030.
The Health Ministry yesterday graduated cutting edge medical laboratory machines in the presence of senior government officials.
Molecular testing machines inaugurated in the premises of St. Paul Medical Millennium Medical College and Ethiopian Public Health Institute are said to have a capacity of testing a total of 4,500 samples of TB, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, cervical cancer, various sexually transmitted diseases, and other cases in 24 hours.
On the occasion, the Health Minister, Dr. Lia Tadesse said the government along with various partner agencies has been undertaking different initiatives to enhance the laboratory quality and capacity nationally.
The medical supplies are part of the project entitled “Improving the quality of health care provided to newborn babies in two zones of Tigray and SNNP regions, Ethiopia,” launched in March 2020.
It covers 61 health centers, 229 health posts, and six primary hospitals in the two regions.
An estimated 94,000 pregnant women and newborn babies are expected to benefit from the project.
Minister of Health Dr. Lia Tadesse visited the reform activities of Felegehiwot Hospital of Bahir Dar City including Clean and Save Hospitals (CASH) project and Electronic Health Records implementation and the efforts to make the service areas patient centered.
She expressed gratitude to I thank the hospital leadership for their commitment to effectively implement the reform program.
Meanwhile, the 29th International Day of Persons with Disabilities has been marked in Bahir Dar yesterday under the theme “Building Back Better: toward a disability-inclusive, accessible and sustainable post-COVID-19 World”.
Deputy Prime Minister Demeke Mekonnen has held discussion with Director General of the World Health Organization (WHO), Dr Tedros Adhanom.
The discussion was held on the sidelines of the first Global Refugee Forum opened in Geneva, Switzerland yesterday.
During the discussion, Dr Tedros commended Ethiopia’s leadership in health for all program and its efforts to prevent non-communicable diseases (NCDs).
A high level event entitled “Impact for good; A cross-sectoral dialogue for strengthening partnership between Africa, Israel and the world Jewry” was held today here in Addis Ababa.
In his opening remarks, Israeli President Reuven Rivlin said that participants of both countries were aspiring to see a joint future to ensuring common concerns as food security, public health, infrastructure and energy.
Noting partnerships engender reliable changes; President Rivlin said “the agreements inked today will set forth to the ever growing ties between the two countries in addressing challenges in health, education and energy in particular”.
The Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI) announced today that the rapid spread of COVID-19 across the country, the positivity rate, mounting severe cases and high death rates are exceedingly concerning.
EPHI Emergency Operation Center Deputy Incident Manager, Dr. Mikyas Teferi said 227 people have died due to the COVID-19 pandemic during the past week alone.
Severe cases that need special Intensive Care Unit treatment in centers are also exponentially increasing and the pandemic’s positivity rate has reached 9 percent, he added.
Ethiopia announced an immunization campaign to vaccinate more than 7 million Children against polio next week, according to Ethiopian Public Health Institution.
The four-day campaign will take place in Oromia, Somali, Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples’ Region (SNNPR), Harari regional states as well as in Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa city administrations.
Ethiopian Public Health Institution (PHI) Deputy Director-General, Aschalew Abyneh told journalists today that the regions and city administrations are selected based on an assessment conducted throughout the country in December 2019 to see the prevalence of the disease.
The campaign is part of the on-going efforts to fight polio in the country, according to him.
Sahlework arrived today in Afar Regional State’s capital Semera to mark the national HIV/AIDS Day where discussions with various stakeholders are expected to be undertaken.
President Sahlework, who is also Secretary of the National HIV/AIDS Council, stated that the disease over the last 15 years has caused wide range of damages including social and economic.
Due to the attention given, the prevalence of HIV/AIDS had been declining, Sahlework said, and pointed out “however, the disease is starting to be pervasive again because of the negligence among the leadership and the public.”
Yellow fever epidemic has occurred in Wolayita Zone of the SNNPR, according to Ethiopian Public Health Institute.
Laboratory test conducted on blood specimen sent to Dakar, Senegal, has revealed the existence of yellow fever causing virus in the specimen, the institute stated in a press release it sent to ENA.
Some 35 citizens were suspected of carrying the disease during the last 3 months, it pointed out.
A national technical team headed by the institute and composed of experts from Ministry of Health, Pharmaceuticals Fund and Supply Agency, WHO, UNICEF and Center for Diseases Control is preparing swift preventive measures and control mechanisms to effectively stop the epidemic.
Ministry of Health has launched integrated measles, Vitamin A, and de-worming campaign for displaced people in Gedeo Zone of Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Region.
The measles vaccination campaign targets 928,000 children aged 6 months to 15 years among the internally displaced and host communities in Gedeo Zone.
More than 500,000 USD has been allocated from the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) towards supporting the preventive measles campaign, it was learned.
Dlamini-Zuma told the executive council of the 54-member body, meeting at the bloc’s headquarters in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa, of the urgent need to “craft a united, comprehensive and collective African response” to the outbreak.
The meeting came as hopes rose of a potential vaccine to provide temporary shield against Ebola.
A novel vaccine tested so far only on monkeys provided “completely short-term and partial long-term protection” from the deadly virus, researchers reported in the journal Nature Medicine.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and Ethio-American Doctors Group, Inc. (“EADG”) have signed a Memorandum of Understanding agreeing to locate the Regional Cancer Center of Excellence (“RCCE”) at the hospital and medical village complex being built by EADG in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
According to World Health Organization report (2008), 63% of global cancer death, or 56% of new cancer cases, are in the developing world.
Excluding skin cancer, 50% of the 10 Million people diagnosed with cancer annually live in developing countries.
The external assessment team that conducted the final Polio outbreak assessment in Ethiopia on 8-12 June 2015 confirmed that Ethiopia has successfully interrupted polio transmission.
This encouraging conclusion was received nearly two years after the outbreak was confirmed in the Horn of Africa and outbreak activities initiated to respond to and interrupt Polio transmission.
Honorable Dr. Kebede Worku, State Minister of Health, welcomed the the assessment team’s conclusions and recommendations, and assured the team that the Ministry will continue to implement its Immunization Program with due consideration of the recommendations to strengthen the immunization and surveillance system to sustain the achievements in polio eradication.
Canada is contributing $30 million to several United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations working to provide emergency humanitarian assistance to millions of people in drought-stricken in Ethiopia, federal minister of international development and La Francophonie announced Thursday.
Canada’s funding for Ethiopia will help meet critical food, health and nutrition, and water and sanitation needs in response to the deteriorating situation throughout the country, the document said.
The money Care will receive from the federal government will be spent on meeting the immediate humanitarian needs of drought-affected families in the West Hararghe zone of Oromiya state, he said.
The Ethiopian Minster of Health, Dr. Kesetebirhan Admasu has been nominated by the co-chair of the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation, Mrs. Melinda Gates for the 120 under 40 awards.
The award which launched on 26 September, 2016 recognizes and highlights the achievements of the next generation of family planning leaders worldwide.
Commenting on the work of Dr. Kesetebirhan on the nominee page, Mrs. Gates described him as a tireless advocate for family who has been instrumental to the training of various family planning service providers in Ethiopia.
“In Ethiopia, progress in fighting malaria has contributed to the remarkable reduction in overall mortality among children under five."
Through PMI, hundreds of millions of people have benefited from protective measures and hundreds of millions more have been treated for malaria.
In Ethiopia, PMI has procured about 20 million insecticide treated bed nets, 9 million rapid diagnostic tests, and more than 15 million treatments to prevent malaria.
In 2011, all the regions in the country except the Somali Region were validated for MNTE.
The 2011 validation mission made recommendations that would see the Somali Region progress to MNTE over time.
The recommendations were implemented especially corrective vaccination campaigns against tetanus in 2016.
Deputy Health Minister Dr. Dereje Duguma underscored that the delta variant Coronavirus is currently causing a devastating crisis in Ethiopia.
Dr. Dereje exclusively told FBC that number of new confirmed cases, intensive care patients and death tolls from the delta variant are alarmingly increasing putting socio-economic situation at stake.
Lack of adherence to precautions set to curb spread of the virus among the community and poor performance of preventive and control activities have contributed to an alarming increase of transmission of the pandemic .
Prevalence of unsafe social gatherings are also negatively contributing to the intensification of the pandemic, he noted.
Ministry of Health stressed the need for Health Professionals Competency Assessment and Certification to enable the community get access to quality health care services.
In a press conference held today, State Minister of Minisry of Helath Alemtsehay Paulos said the country has resumed evaluation and certification of health care professionals which was stopped due to the pandemic.
Evaluation aims to bridge skill gaps in health workers thereby realize quality services in the sector, Alemtsehay noted.
The state minister noted that the evaluation process deals with issuance of certification for first degree graduates who pass the required examinations and get qualified for standards put in place to improve the service delivery.
Ministry explained that the system helps screen out professionals who have skilled gaps, and help them get qualified through practical professional assessment.
President of the Ethiopian Islamic Affairs Supreme Council, Mufti Omer Idris in his goodwill message of the celebration of Mewlid urged the Muslim community to enhance their support to people who are affected by natural and manmade problems in the country.
The day was particularly marked in Addis Ababa at the Grand Anwar Mosque with various religious activities in the presence of religious scholars, residents of the city and government officials.
Tourists who attended the festivity expressed their happiness with the peaceful the celebration despite that fact that the country is in state of emergency.
They expressed their suspicion of instability before their arrival and also witnessed that the country is in calm and peaceful situation and suitable for touring.
Irrecha, a thanksgiving festival of the Oromo people, has been celebrated at Hora Finfine in Addis Ababa today.
The Oromo people celebrate Irrecha to thank Waqa (God) for the blessings and mercies they have received; and also to welcome the new season of plentiful harvests after the dark and rainy season associated with nature and creature.
Ashenda is a unique religious and traditional festival celebrated every year in Tigray and Amhara Regional States between 16 to 21 August.
Ashenda is a Tigrinya word meaning ‘’tall green grass that estimates around 80–90 centimeters minimum height.
In the tradition of this religious festival, blades of grass are strewn on the floors of homes and shops as a kind of welcome mat.
Unmarried girls and young women skillfully wove the grass into a bunch and wear them at their back while dancing on the occasion.
Abune Paulos, who died on August 16 at the age of 76 after an illness, was the patriarch of Ethiopia’s Orthodox Church since 1992, when he was elected to the highest order of the denomination.
His Holiness, Abune Paulos was also president of the World Council of Churches.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed called on Muslims to remember and practice the teachings of Prophet Muhammad while celebrating his birth.
In a message he extended in connection to the celebration of the birth of the Prophet, Abiy called on Muslims to practice what the Prophet has taught while celebrating the festival known as Mawlid.
Mawlid, the birth of the Prophet, is mainly celebrated with prayer, reading the Quran, singing spiritual songs that honor the Prophet, and offering food clothes to the poor.
Abiy noted that the Prophet taught that the world need four pillars to survive – teaching of the wise, justice of the elderly, prayer of the good and courage.
Religious fathers serving at Lailbela Rock-hewn churches appreciated the visit of French President Emanuel Macron and requested speedy renovation of the historical site.
After visiting the Lalibel Rock-hewn churches on Tuesday, President Macron had pledged to give technical and financial support for the renovation of the churches.
Some religious fathers who attended the welcoming ceremony for the president told ENA that urgent restoration is needed for the churches which are severely damaged.
Megabi Haylat Semayat-Semere, a spiritual songs teacher, said he is very happy that the president paid visit to the site; and urged the governments of Ethiopia and France to cooperate and respond to the urgent need.
The newly established Japan-Korea-Ethiopia Friendship Association held a concert in Tokyo, Japan, with the view to strengthening the people-to-people relationship among the countries.
Speaking at the concert which took place on January 14, 2021, Ethiopia’s Ambassador to Japan, Kassa Teklebirhan said the formation of the association would strengthen the people-to-people relation among the three countries and expressed the embassy’s readiness to work together with the association to achieve this goal.
According to a statement from the Ethiopian Embassy in Tokyo, he also called on members of the association to visit Ethiopia and explore the vast tourism and investment potentials of the country.
French National Order of Arts and Letters was bestowed upon the celebrated Ethiopian musician, Mulatu Astatke, today for his distinguished contributions.
French Culture Minister, Franck Riester said during the award giving ceremony that Mulatu has uplifted music to another level by combining Ethiopian and another melodies.
“His innovative contribution to music, particularly jazz, has earned him a global prestige,” he added.
Mulatu Astatke is an Ethiopian musician and arranger considered as the father of Ethio-Jazz.
Six delegates representing Ethiopia have finalized preparations to partake in the Cannes film festival including model and actress, Gelila Bekele as well as Film producer Mehret Mandefro.
Upon returning from Cannes, Tourism Ethiopia will establish a local working group to study the potential of the film industry market as a site for international co-production beyond job creation, she pointed out.
The working group will also produce a case study report that lay out the business for targeting the film industry as a job creation sector, she indicated.
Tewodros Kassahun (Teddy Afro), Ethiopia’s best selling artist, controversial, often times poetic, at all times talented, released his long awaited album – Ethiopia – this week.
It has since shot to number 1 in Billboard’s World Album chart – a milestone for Ethiopian music.
At home, relaxed, uplifting and vulnerable at all the same time, he hosted Samuel Getachew and Dawit Endeshaw of The Reporter as he opened up on his family, career, Ethiopia and what it means for him to be loved by millions of people around the world.
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has appreciated all those involved in organising a memorial concert in honour of Tilahun Gessesse.
The organizer contributed more than 80 million birr proceeds collected towards the ‘Dine for Ethiopia’ initiative.
“Thank you for leaving an indelible print on Ethiopia’s development,” the Prime Minister tweeted.
This is the second installment of African Film Week, the first launched in 2016 with the African Union Culture Department.
The Film Week hopes to bring African countries closer by showcasing each other’s works, forming a shared experience and creating opportunities for storytellers.
Leul Shoaferaw, local filmmaker and founder of Eerie Productions Inc., states the week is a tremendous platform to introduce the best of African films to the Ethiopian audience and filmmakers.
“I believe this festival will expand my regional and international professional outlooks, nurture my creative capacity and inspire to contribute to the African cinema portfolio.”
One of the uprising rappers, Lij Michael, is scheduled to perform on May 21 at Bole Fana Park.
At this concert Lij Michael will be featured with Michael Belayneh.
Organized by Yorka event organizer this concert is entitled “Addis Concert”.
This concert focused on having a mini festival in introducing the best album, best singles and also best DJs in the country.
They chose Lij Michael as their debut concert since his album entitled “Zare Yihun Nege” was well accepted among fans.
Especially his single “Zemenay Marye” was able to capture audience ears easily.
Mihret Dawit’s clay works exhibition was presented on April 21 at Asni Gallery.
The versatile artist who is highly drawn about three dimensional forms has been initially experimenting with materials such as gypsum and cement to create sculptures.
Later she moved on to recycled paper, cardboards and bottles.
“I was not fully convinced with the results until I tried my hand on clay. I must say it was love at first touch. Clay is a material that speaks to me. I am able to express my ideas, emotions and thoughts through it,” read the artist’s statement
Situated at the Gullele Botanic Gardens, the festival features a wide range of activities for first-time campers, festival goers or seasoned outdoor enthusiasts.
According to the Haileab Meressa, the organizer, Paugmé Shir-shir, provides a perfect opportunity to get out in fresh air, away from the grasps of technology and escape the hustle bustle of daily life, all in the great outdoors.
This monthly Paugmé Shir-shir event usually involves two days spent venturing off into the surrounding hillsides for various outdoor adventures and one night spent camping under the stars.
March 2018 was a big year for circus in Ethiopia as the second edition of the African Circus Arts Festival came to town.
Thousands gathered to attend the spectacle.
11 circus troupes from across the continent joined the festival to showcase their works.
Inside the largest circus tent to ever be erected in the country, the lights dimmed to welcome the South African troupe Zip Zap.
As the trapeze artist swung from a hanging horizontal bar, the crowd gasped, held their breath as she flew up into the air and collectively exhaled once she landed safely on the ground.
Ethiopian Muslims all over the country are celebrating the Al Maulid Al nabawi or Prophet Mohammed’s Birthday with various religious events.
In the capital, Addis Ababa, the Muslim Community celebrated Al Maulid Al Nabawi at the Grand Mosque with prayers and spiritual events commemorating the birth of Prophet Mohammed.
Jimma, Hawassa and Dessie towns have also witnessed colorful celebration of the Eid al-Adha festival with both outdoor and indoor religious events.
Eid al-Adha is the feast of obedience and sacrifice that remembers the willingness of Prophet Ibrahim to sacrifice his son Ibrahim based on a call from God (Allah).
The Ethiopian Orthodox Church Religious leaders and the clergy held prayers and masses at the Holy Trinity Church in the capital Addis Ababa commemorating the Holy Maundy.
Religious fathers and some clergy, while observing the holly day, made supplication to God to save the world from the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
Ambassadors of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Luxembourg, Norway, Finland, North Korea, Bangladesh, Russia, Australia, Venezuela, Czech Republic, among others, and a number of diplomats of several countries were in attendance of the event.
Some of the Ambassadors contacted by FBC said that the art exhibition is an exemplary event in promoting image of Ethiopia and enhancing its relationship with several countries in the cultural and people to people relationship.
According to Tourism Ministry, the celebration begins on September 22 to entertain assorted events including visiting Ethiopia’s rich cultural, historical, and natural attractions.
Various sport competitions, exhibitions and symposiums are also scheduled events of the festival.
Prime Minister Meles said, "War is not a Soccer Game!".
Recently, it is often heard that the main stick of criticism rested upon Prime Minister Meles during the TPLF/EPRDF evaluation session.
Meanwhile, it's widely heard that Prime Minister's private guards were changed by others, direct telephone lines to the Prime Minister were disconnected in the palace, and one can discuss about anything related to the present condition with the office of Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It's in the midst of this situation that Ato Meles gave an interview to voice of America.
During the interview there was a different position about Eritrean question among the TPLF leaders.
Due to the special favor the moderate and the conservatives gave to Eritrean government there was a great difference, it was said.
Responding to whether there was a significant difference between bodies of TPIF EPRDF with regards to the special relationship (special favor) Eritrean government receives he denied that there has been no difference in both TPLF as well as EPRDF,  and will never be, and more or less ruled out the issue of evaluation.
Asked about his relationship with president Isayas Afeworkihe responded "even though there were times when I observe unlikable behavior ... I have never thought he would take a decision merely made out of a game of chance with issues that affect the chances and benefit of people.
Actually, signs of obstinacy can't be said to have come yesterday.
They were there long ago.
And with regards to opposition parties, he answered, "At the time when measures are taken against the sovereignty of Ethiopia, her peoples' rights and benefits, every one cooperatively works in defense, and this was a common practice and it should be.
Our political difference cannot be resolved in a day's time.
One of the characteristics of democracy is the interplay of various kinds of positions.
And with regards to the present situation, he stated that war is not a soccer game, "we are not going to take part in such a game as ‘this one scored a goal before, so you, too, should score' kind-of-game.
we won't participate in such a game.
He said.
When he responded to the last question, what lesson did your government learn from this situation?.
"He said" although it is known that there's a concealed arrogance and conceit in Eritrea, never have we expected that he would gamble on Eritrean people.
I never expected this arrogance and conceit would reach as far as this level.
What I have learnt now is that the scope of arrogance and conceit of Eritrean leadership could be revealed in terms of gambling with people's benefit.This we saw.
From now on, it is something we will always remember that there are not only conceited individuals behind us, but also individuals who gamble on people's benefit," concluded his speech.
From Fiameta June 24, 1998.
Message of Fiamet.
Dogs that Bark wherever they eat!.
Although it is EPLF's demagoguery the cause for today's civil war, the reason for entertaining such bold arrogance on us, in one way or another, is undoubtedly the present administrator.
After Eritrea got "freedom" all the necessary measures were being taken to secede her people from Ethiopia.
After the referendum the Ethiopian government journalists were heard beating the ceremonial drum of secession.
Nobody for gets Ethiopian radio and TV have played mouthpieces of Eritrean leaders, broadcasting their deafening propaganda.
Leaving other issues, they preached us as if nothing happened to our fellow people when they were appropriated and evicted from Eritrea.
Individuals like "professor" Indrias Eshete gave press statement on radio and TV, saying not even one Ethiopian have been harmed by EPLF.
Similar propaganda was broadcasted in the following years.
When the security members of EPLF penetrated through Addis kidnapping who ever they want, dong what ever things they need, let alone government journalists, even officials deliberately closed their eyes, and gave their deaf ears.
But today is a different day.
The EPLF government apart from its boastful insults.
We never have doubted that all these came as a result of the encouragement we ourselves rendered.
Free press journalists who wrote are to this date under the legal process.
On the other hand, those government journalists who used to praise EPLF, giving their backs to the people and doing wrong to the people are to this date living comfortably.
Although these opportunists who played the role of a betrayer have not seen the power of the law, they have conscience and should learn from their past evil deeds.
It's mandatory we remind them what Mr. Meles Zenawi said at the outset for the journalists not to be opportunistic and boot lickers.
We also give them our Ethiopian and professional advice saying that they should not be pointer dogs that bark wherever they eat.
OK what's by gone is bygone, but from now on it's necessary to think like human.
From Fiameta June 24, 1998.
A Top Diplomat Deserte.
A top diplomat at the Ethiopian Embassy in Rome, Dr. Bekele, deserted.
Dr. Bekele's desertion was heard yesterday on the voice of EPRP.
The desertion of the diplomat didn't leave good feeling around the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, close sources indicated.
The doctor was head of the economic cooperation.
Italy gives a lot of aid to Ethiopia, and the doctor's desertion with many secrets may or may not put this aid in danger, it's not known.
Nonetheless, there are officials in the ministry of Foreign Affairs who are very much concerned about it, close sources disclosed to us.
In an interview he gave to Finote Democracy, EPRP's voice, he said, "In fact, I have served for 8 years; I couldn't simply accept what TPLF is doing especially the administrative injustice done on Southern people, and I have expressed my opposition may times in diplomatic meeting and in any other occasions.
I have never declined from stating that the constitution has been violated.
I expressed that some situations should be improved.
Regarding this, some EPRDF spies in the embassy reported to the ministry of Foreign Affairs; as a result, some punishments and threatening befell him.
Finally, I was ordered to withdraw my work and report by going to my country.
The situation as it is now would not only be risky for my security, but also I'm worried that I may not be able to contribute my share in the ongoing peaceful struggle for democracy and justified administration.
Here in a foreign land, I could, without any worry, contribute my share in the struggle to bring abut a better regime and to enable it come soon but now I have been obliged to distance my self from the diplomatic work I very much like.
Mr. Meles' government couldn't keep the promise it made to Ethiopian people even after 10 years.
The peace and stability, democracy and development that were talked over by EPRDF for the last 10 years have only remained to be a clamor of words.
The constitution which EPRDF gave to the people by itself has created a problem to it.
The individual and people's rights that are written in the constitution have become futile.
As the 1995 constitution has many articles that give precedence for the benefit of the ruling groups, I think struggling or its correct interpretation is the right strategy for struggle and the direction for struggle.
As I am a national from Southern people, I would be willing to contribute my share in the struggle in this direction".
He said.
From Satenow January 21, 2002.
"Sheraton Addis" opens next Saturday!.
It was disclosed that Sheraton Hotel which is given high prestige all over the world would ceremoniously be opened next Saturday on March 1, 1998 in Ethiopia, Addis Ababa after its successful completion of its buildings.
In relation to this, "The Addis Forum", a body that is making an effort to draw great business people to Africa, would make discussion in this hotel on March 9 and 10, it was disclosed.
In this discussion, Meles Zenawi, Yoweri Miusevini of Uganda and Joseph Willson from White House would be Present.
Fiameta February 25, 1998.
Jiji was Praised in Several Mass Media.
The new album of Jiji got good market, BBC indicated, while the New York Times newspaper on its part said that the album was not sold as it deserved and categorized it in the first place under those who did a good album but didn't get their proper place.
BBC which disclosed that world class very popular trumpet and saxophone players including Herbe Hankok participate in Jiji's new album, and said that there were suggestions that Jiji's music excels those which have been done for years by Ethiopians.
BBC pointed out that Jiji's album have got good sale, and said Jiji was satisfied by the sale of her album.
The New York Times on its part said the sale of the album wasn't up to the standard of the music.
The New York Times which stated that each year more than 20 thousand albums are produced, and due to its enormity, some music remained without getting as many listeners as they deserve, it said.
The paper's analysts of pop and jazz music listen the number of albums produced in 2001 who didn't get as much sale as they deserve, and mentioned Jiji under number one.
In the suggestions the analysts wrote about the album, they praised the tunes of the music, Jiji's voice and the musical rhythm.
On the other hand, many articles written by many American journalists and magazines praising Jiji are coming out, widening her popularity, and by now she's showing concert going round the entire country, hence, the coming three months are occupied by programs, it was disclosed.
The following are among the mass media who wrote about Jiji.
"With one inner feeling – ten beats, Jiji has now excelled the very marvelous great new African singers".
Afro Pop World wide  "Although you don't understand the poems of the music, you can well comprehend the feeling.
She's beautiful!!
The Herban Network.
Jiji sometimes with a voice that steals feeling in a mysterious force and in an uneasy one, at another time with a charismatic strongly audible voice, but always in a voice that flows freely crystal clear, she firmly holds (grips) your feeling.
Rythm.
Jiji's pacific advanced mezzo-soprano voices easily go to and fro between a flirting girl's voice and that of a wonan's pride, a symbol of an instrument of beauty.
CD Now.
From Addis Admas January 12, 2002.
Statement Given From King Haileselassie Memorial Organizatio.
King Haileselassie Memorial Organization gave a press statement on February 24, 1998.
Following is the full text of the statement.
Some individuals thought out of the public's interest of transferring his majesty's corpse to Holy Trinity cathedral and have now and then been giving press statement about the situation.
The reason for this was being unaware of the memorial Organization's responsibility, its duties and activities as well as being oblivious of the fact that it needs a lot of time and preparation to honorably transfer the corpse, so we believe that this statement is needed to show the true picture.
Before anything else, to honorably transfer his majesty's corpse and establish the appropriate memorial statue, king Haileselassie memorial organization is give the sole responsibility.
Since His majesty king Haileselassie is the higher protector of Ethiopian patriot's association based on the question the association had put forward to the then Ethiopian Transitional Government and the latter's cooperation and effort the corpse of his majesty, after a two-day search, was cautiously taken out on February 16, 1992 from the not-so-good hiding place it was put earlier, which Ethiopian people were aware of.
As the great king's corpse was found, it was urgently making preparations to lay the corpse in Holy Trinity Cathedral, when the committee which was assigned to set up the program received a letter questioning "His majesty king Haileselassie corpse should lay honorably and in order to have enough time for the preparation, let it temporarily rest at Taeka queen Baeta Mary Monastery" form the public and since the king's family agreed on this idea, through the letter written from patriots' Association, has now been six years since His majesty's corpse laid at Taeka Queen Baeta Mary Monastery.
While the other Ethiopians who were killed and their corpse thrown else where by the ruthless Dergue regime were with the kind permission of the transitional government, gathered again and honorably put to rest safely, and, as needed, put on memorial statue, this majesty's corpse has still been found in Taeka Queen Baeta Mary Monastery where it laid temporarily, despite the then transitional government president's permission.
Although the contribution His majesty king Haileselassie made to Ethiopian's development in his long years of leadership would be widely explained in the future, it's known that he made continual efforts especially, to make Ethiopia's freedom and unity remain intact, to reveal her long time freedom history to the would as well as to enable the enrichment of the social living and to enable it develop educationally and knowledge wise.
When formerly the country faced hard tests from foreigners, in the battle field and later his political struggle and firm faith produced fame and appreciation for himself and appropriate pride for Ethiopia.
In the struggle conducted to bring about freedom for African Unity and peace, his majesty was the one who had registered highest results.
For the great leadership services he conducted, and the roles he played in negotiation, establishing a permanent legacy and memorial for His majesty who was a great leader and father to Africa, is a holy task to be done by the owner of the history, the Ethiopian people.
That's why the people, at first opposed the transfer of His majesty's corpse to Holy Trinity cathedral, with such deficient organization.
For the organization was also established accepting the people's question, all must cooperate for this good cause.
Since His majesty's corpse hasn't honorably laid to rest up to now in its appropriate place with proper procession, not only international and famous person age who appreciate his deeds, have aired their voice of resentment, regret and complaints, but also it has become troubling to their conscience to those Ethiopians who beloved in honor of humanity, justice and fairness.
In order to be saved from historical judgment and a regret that lives forever, the corpse has to honorably transfer to a grave yard at Holy Trinity Cathedral that had already been prepared while the king was alive, and building a memorial that is appropriate to a nation's pride and a benefit for the people obviously would be the major timely deed.
The Ethiopians who were present in the first meetings in order to enable this honorable cause accomplish, after the discussion, family of the king, peoples and the Ancient Ethiopian patriots Association attending as members established "His majesty king HaileSelassie Memorial Organization" as we explained before in Tobia newspaper, March 6, 1996 edition.
We have attached the establishing document and presented it to the appropriate government office in order to have officially registered.
The established organization is led by 21 members of management committee now and under it organized seven technique committees, actively operational by now.
We hope that Ethiopians who love their country and foreigners who are friends of His majesty have the right awareness of the organization through this press statement.
The His majesty king Haileselassie Memorial Organization has no doubt would have wide financial and material support as well as constructive ideas from Ethiopia and overseas who like justice.
With regards to the public's participation, recording, contributions and about its future activities, the organization would usually give press statement, and each of the newspaper on its part is believed to publish and show the right picture.
Until nation wide branches are built after having completed registration of members we kindly request that all true and rightful friends discuss on the issues wherever they are and prepare the way the individuals who will lead the branches in the future, as well as send constructive suggestions through P.O. Box 5616 Addis Ababa.
Bitweded Zewdie Gebre Hiwot.
His Majesty kind Haileselasi.
Memorial Organizatio.
Executive committee.
From Fiameta February 25, 1998.
"The Construction work of Kotebe Saint Gabriel Church has not been Discontinued" It was said.
In accordance with the information it reached us from the area Earlier in Fiameta No. 118 March 24, 1998 it was stated that the construction work was discontinued but the deputy chairman of the preaching assembly of Kotebe saint Gabriel church, major Tadesse Seifu in report he sent to our office stated that the construction work was not discontinued.
According to the statement, although the previous report was presented in the name of priests, more than 5 thousands Christian laity of the area, have been visiting day and night, didn't stop offering help.
As to the previous report that was written in the name of he priests, the priests were asked whether this was true, by the district head of priests, and responded that they didn't write that report, the one who wrote that report are not more than 3 or 4 people who are addicted to power they unanimously denied, the report stated.
These priests wrote was far form the truths, the report.
Under the title "From nine quintals of fake one gram of truth weighs more", issued a firm denial stating that it's completely far from truth that the construction has been discontinued for a year.
Until winter came in July and August when we stayed for collecting money, the building had been under construction up to June 1997, and after the winter, the newly elected building work committee continued its work.
It's now being under construction amazingly.
The report which stated that the construction work was discontinued because of the administrator and deputy chairman was just defamatory campaign, condemned those group who wrote the previous report.
The report also praised the deputy chairman major Tadesse stating that he has been a good Christian who has remained firm in his faith on the fleshy God.
A man who brought the building into reality, and his dedication can be proved by priests and the laity; they explained the strength of the deputy chairman.
The report that detailed its statement form 1-5 stated that there's no problem observed in the construction of the building and the rumor is just the talk of the devil, and those people who wrote fake stories are propagandists form around Arat Kilo, Merkato and Eri Bekentu areas.
Lists of people who contributed a total of "67.689.32 Birr to the church was written.
The list didn't show their names although they had contributed a lot of the church.
As to the claimed 300,000.Birr (three hundred thousand) which was said to be kept for investigation in the future...perhaps these people who condemned us, if truthful investigator is found, would have been in debt", criticized by adding that those who judge others would be judged.
From Fiameta April 29, 1998.
World AIDS Campaign was Celebrated in Our Country.
The 1998 World AIDS Campaign which is underway under the motto "Babies and Children who live in the would where AIDS Spreads" has been celebrated in our country with different ceremonies.
In a ceremony held at the ministry of Health's hall, bureau head of Addis Ababa Health Office Dr. Abera Kume, spoke that the disease mostly attacks the youth who's part of the community's backbone and ‘as a result' has a negative impact.
Particularly in the region, to curb the spread of the disease, a coordination committee was formed in collaboration with different government and non-government organizations, great efforts should be made, especially to bring about a change of behavior on the youth, Dr. Abera Pointed out.
To control the spread of the disease, he pointed out that working in unison is crucial, and in the prevention in order for the community to be kept for from the disease, not only those who are involved in the health sector, but also other organizations and association, community bodies who are poplar and are listened to, others, too, should work hand in had for it is believed to have a great contribution, he pointed out.
At this ceremony, mentioning the recent figure, in our city close to quarter a million people are infected by the disease, while 20 thousand people are caught by the disease and waiting for their death.
In addition, the death of 25% of the productive youth has been AIDS disease and, above all, out of the babies born forms the victims of the disease, 30% remained without parents.
World Health Organization Ethiopian Bureau head Dr. Mombaze Widson on his part said that especially babies who die of AIDS disease are increasing from time to time, and he said this year focus was given for babies and children who live in the world where AIDS spreads.
In relation to this he also reminds that African countries should give great concentration to the effort that is to be made vis-à-vis the protection of the disease.
In the ceremony celebrated for the 10th time in our country, various research papers, songs and literary papers were presented pertaining to the date, presents were given to the winners of the competition.
From Addis Zemen Dec. 2, 1998.
Editorial.
A Country That Needs Resurrectio.
On the morrow of TPLF/EPRDF's control over this country, it had many dreams.
Seceding Eritrea, Establishing the great empire of Tigray, suppressing the Amhara and other nationals, belittling ... condemning, making others denounce ... the honorable flag of Ethiopia, are few of them.
On top of that, they had sort of night mare-play that said, "we would be able to provide five meals for this people who only eat once day", it was Meles Zenawi ... who said this, who's not dead even today.
The individuals fulfilled few of their promises through their sacrifice.
They have Eritrea secede, divided the people, imprisoned the elite, and chased them away killed them; have them killed.
Without finishing having seceded Eritrea, and beating their drums, a new history is made.
The EPLF individuals whom they claim as closest turned their guns towards the TPLF indivduals..
They vowed to destroy "the great empire of Tigray" ... shot guns at them ... continued even today.
As if they didn't say, "we don't care about the piece of cloth" referring to the flag of Ethiopia, today they are obliged to fly the flag.
The nationals whom they wanted to divide and kill each other, have in an unexpected condition strengthened its unity, becoming warp and weft, stood for its county's existence, more than anyone else.
The people, whom TPLF never thought and expected of having such a nature, have proved to display their greatness.
It showed its sacrifice.
It strengthened its unity.
The creator taught them through miracles they never dreamt nor ever thought about before.
Yet, after all these, they are still living as they used to.
They seriously cling to their acts of chasing the elite and condemning others, having them condemned.
This country needs resurrection.
She seeks a leader and a government who honors the people.
She needs a force that acts in accordance to people's feelings and spirit.
Otherwise, we would be heading towards the twenty first century like slaves of government whose hands and mouth are fastened!!
Hey! Bravo compatriot ... if we forget what we were said, what were enacted up on us, we may have been in deep sleep, so wake up.
Next year, it's told now that an election that includes opposition forces would be conducted.
It's wise to know before hand who could work for us
We don't need someone who, would once and for all, kill the already dying country.
Instead, let's think about her resurrection!!   .
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
Arrangements Were Made for Ethiopia to Get Gasoline from Sudan, it was Disclosed
By buying eighty-five percent of the total gas supply Ethiopia needs from Sudan arrangements were made to reduce a seven-million dollar expense, Ethiopia Gas Organization disclosed.
Mr. Yegzaw Mekonnen the general manager of the organization disclosed the day before yesterday that Ethiopia imports 10 thousand metric tons per month which is 120 thousand metric tons gas per year from Sudan as of the beginning of the coming Gregorian calendar.
In addition, she would get 3 thousand metric tons per month which is 36 thousand metric tons of kerosene per year.
The manager disclosed that the gas that' found from Sudan would enable her reduce her cost by seven million dollar than her annual expense she used to disburse while buying in would market.
The supply of the gas would cover eighty-five percent of the countries needs while that of kerosene fully covers the consumption of northern and north-western part which covers twenty percent of consumption of the entire country.
Mr. Mekonnen pointed out that Ethiopia gets 25 thousand square meter area from the government of Sudan with a minimum annual payment in order to build gas depot that enable her receive and store the gasoline, and when the depot is completed and arrangements are made for the gas to enter our country, there may be a situation where its price get reduced he explained.
When Ethiopia starts importing gas from Sudan, not only would it make it possible to save foreign exchange expense, but it would also create an option to the previously limited doors of Asab and Djibouti and make security of gas supply assuring.
The two countries signed a cooperation agreement June 7, 1998 in Khartoum that enabled Ethiopia get gasoline from Sudan as of the Gregorian New Year.
From Addis Zemen June 22, 2001.
The News EPLF Disseminate about Ethiopia was Groundless and Far form Truth
The news that the Ethiopia army getting in to the temporary security zone by the direction of Asab-Bure road and attacked a police station was groundless and far from truth, a higher official from the ministry of foreign affairs disclosed.
The official disclosed yesterday that the attack was launched by the EPLF opposition organization, the Red Cross Afar Democratic Organization, According to the statement it released yesterday..
While the attack was mounted by its own opposition, and EPLF couldn't resolve the problems within, it won't be a remedy to claim that Ethiopia was to blame, the official explained..
It's usual for EPLF to carry out such every propaganda, and Ethiopia has always been peace-seeking and obedient to the Algiers agreement, the official pointed out.
From Addis Zemen June 20, 2001.
Price Reduction has been made on Gas Products .
There has been reduction of retail price on gas products as of today for the coming three months, Ministry of Trade and Industry  disclosed. .
The ministry, in the statement it released yesterday pertaining to the amendment of price disclosed that in accordance to the approval of the council of ministers and the price tag that's going to be practical for the coming three months, since gas products showed price reduction, it's expected to see reduction in other retail products and services, too.
Based on the present price amendment, in Addis Ababa retail price of gas products, petrol /gas/ would be four Birr and four cents, Kerosine, one Birr and 80 cents, white diesel, two Birr and 62 cents per liter, black diesel, two Birr and 14 cents per liter, the statement disclosed.
Based on the price amendment, the statement reminded that all gas stations should make this practical, the statement disclosed.   .
From Addis Zemen April 3, 200.
Statement and Decision Given from the Ministry of Education
It's known that the administrative questions the Addis Ababa University raised are being given appropriate responses.
Even if the questions are questions of he campus students, illegal activities are underway in Addis Ababa City under the pretext of the question of the students.
At this time when the students' questions are being properly answered, there's no reason why they could be causes for disrupting the peaceful living condition of the people and government work, violence and looting.
Due to the disturbance instigated by the university students at around Arat Kilo University campus the day before yesterday, as it was disclosed in the mass media, ministry of education, commercial Bank, Tourist Hotel and other work places and organizations were struck.
Window panes were broken.
Not less that 10 cars which were the properties of National Examinations Organization were burned.
Had these been a place where petrol /gas were available, it would have been exposed to a severe damage.
And yesterday, too as a result of the intensification of this anti-people activity, several properties were destroyed.
All these illegal and anarchic activities were perpetrated in order for some political organizations which through free panel and peoples' votes last acceptance, to accomplish their political aim, using higher educational institutions as forums.
Although many students of higher institutions at this time, completing their education want to help their countries, people and their families few students who have political missions want to impede this aim and seek to have the former parade with them in their illegal aims and various crimes.
Ministry of Education wanted to remind that higher institutions are places where skilled work fore are produced but not hiding and gathering places for criminals.
Hence, to curb the problem that is being created, it was necessary to pass the following decision.
1. The Addis Ababa University is closed indefinitely as of yesterday April 18, 2001.
2. We warn other higher institutions not to be blindly led by groups who have special.                 political missions and be reserved and follow their education in an orderly fashion.
3. Ministry of Education strictly reminds that parents being cognizant of the situation should.           make the proper contribution in the effort government is making to keep the                       community's and their children's security..
Ministry of Education.
From Addis Zemen April 19, 2001.
Hussien Iydid was Asked His Eviction From Ethiopia.
Due to his statement made in an interview he has given recently stating that Somalians in Ethiopia and Kenya should be mixed with Somalia, the Somali people Democratic Party asked his eviction from Ethiopia.
The party's chairman, Ambassador Mohammed Dirir in the statement he gave yesterday expressed that he was so sorrowful to hear Hussien Iydid's speech and said Ethiopian Somalis live in Ethiopia, their rights being respected and are proud of their Ethiopian ness.
Moreover, he said Somali is one of the Ethiopian nationals.
He also asked Hussien Iydid's immediate eviction from Ethiopia.
The ambassador said that he was very sorry that Hussien Iydid's statement which said that including Ogaden, all areas where Somalis live in Ethiopia are bodies of Somalia; Somalis should be seen like the Germans who were separated by Berlin wall, are spoken being in Ethiopia..
The ambassador strongly reminded that such kinds of ideas should not be repeated, that everybody has to do his own work and asked Iydid to leave Ethiopia..
In the mean time, the Kenyan newspaper, the Daily Nation, the speech of Hussien Iydid is that of Warriors and in order such kind to people not to crate problems in Kenya, Kenyans should always be cautious, it reminded.
From the Press, February 6, 200.
In Eritrea the Youth Incited Rebellion – they are Getting into the Desert
In a disturbance that occurred at an annual church ceremony, at a district that included, in the new structure, partial siray and Akal Guzay southern zone, at an area nearby Adiquala, several youngsters destroyed government properties, it was disclosed..
On the date the different machineries the government prepared to construct a dam at a nearby village named Una Gebeten have become useless, the news added;
Among the many reasons that drove the youngesters to do this, the main one was believed to be the national military service that's going on in Eritrea.
The administrator of Adiquala sub-zone whom the news reached not only put the youth behind bars but also gave strong warning to their parents;
It's to be recalled that previously, too, many youngsters put forward questions refusing the proclamations the EPLF government alone passed on land, nationality, flag and administrative division;
In the mean time, at a time military clashes that surfaced in Eritrean western low lands became strong many youngsters are heading to the desert to fight EPLF, standing beside the Eritrean Islamic Front, it was pointed out.
Since many of them, among the youth, used to be members of EPLF and were reduced; those returned from National military service and former members of ELF, are believed to strengthen the military capacity of the oppositions;
Although the youngsters do not necessarily support the Islamic front, they joined the war in the principle "the enemy of my enemy is my friend..." and this is a great danger of for Eritrean people, the news it reached us explained.
The Eritrean government officials who were afraid of the situation, focused on building military training centers and purchasing modern ammunitions, the news that reached us pointed out. .
From Tobia September 25, 1997
The Presence of the hands of Religious People were said to contribute for the Strengthening of OLF
OLF which is additional enemy of our country, Ethiopia, and which has been showing its assistance to EPLF, for its growth and strengthening, the hands of religious people were present, it was disclosed.
As one report expressed, "Petros and his associates,who have been organizing support for EPLF's office in Switzerland up to recently, and who have been an impediment to the movement of Ethiopian sovereignty, and who were also taking shelter at the Orthodox Church in "the guest-house", and who have been in responsible position under-cover of Eritrean Orthodox Youth bureau, were helped by the priests and officials of Lutheran Federation to go abroad for they were supporters of EPLF."
It said.
The report that expressed in detail that Ethiopia is known for defending the internal and external enemies who rise against her in every generation, mentioned that the victory that was attained yesterday in Adowa and today in Beademe is a testimony, and among these internal and external enemies, EPLF and OLF are to be mentioned as having changed themselves from being comrades during the struggle, to an altogether enemies; "Previously, it was the office of Mekane Yesus...who sent abroad Edosa Gemichis and Shemsedin Abiyu, OLF (ABO) central committee members," and mentioned that not only once but twice were Mekane Yesus head office priests were caught sending gold and valuable stones to OLF agents through Kenya, the report pointed out.
The report which expressed that the Addis Ababa police knew the situation, pointed out that even now, police should follow the situation ..
From Fiameta September 8, 1999
"If Initiating Unrest and creating conflict were Yardsticks for Political Victory, No one would Excel Eritrea."
Professor Endrias
In a public meeting organized by ECA on December 9, 1980 under the motto legislative forum for Peace, Professor Endrias stated that the Eritrean government and Eritrean Peoples Liberation Front's leadership, who after a long struggle for freedom and great victory has now started moving towards a ravine, and it would really be difficult to think that they would almost instantaneously fade at the time of their birth.
Only five years old, how could she become trouble-maker and longing for war amongst her neighborhood? Who could expect leaders that came from a society of farmers and pastoralists, who toil each day to meet ends, would have, within a short span of time, a designating characteristic of military obstinacy and lawlessness.
In connection with the elite, he commented that the intoxicated and confused Eritrean action and leadership, to make matters worse, seemed to get unwavering support of the elite, and hence, both the leadership and elite seem to cooperatively feast in Unison over their death.     .
Professor Endrias returning to the present problem mentioned that it was not only Eritrea who could be accountable in this case, but the requirements for referendum should have been clear, admitting the errors committed with regards to this..
It was possible to make official agreement as to what kind of relationship Ethiopia and the freed Eritrea could have, and clearly decide the border demarcation, situations of economic cooperation, as well as the legislative rights Eritreans residing in Ethiopia may have..
Moreover, when explaining about the referendum since its legality and out come called for Ethiopia's common consent, and in order for major issues to have been solved fairly, it was easy, from the outset, to make Eritrea willingly abide by some kind of stringent pact.      .
This kind of pact gives citizens of both countries /including Eretreans residing in Ethiopia/ a strong base upon which they hope for.
Concluded his comment..
From Fiameta January 8, 1999
Ethiopian Airlines is to start Flight to Hargesa/Somali.
The Ethiopian Airlines disclosed that it would start its 44th international flight to Hargesa recently.
In the statement the airlines send to ENA yesterday, this flight is expected to serve both to those who go the Hargesa from Addis as well as to those who continue their flights passing via Addis Ababa..
In its aim to make African Countries Closer, the flight that starts as from march 26, 2001 to Hargesa, would take place twice a week on Tuesday and Thursday.
From Addis Zemen March 13, 2001
Editoria.
In Order to Wipe the tears shed around Judicatur.
People of the law say instead of arresting one individual unjustly, it is better for criminals to escape.
It is known that in a country where justice is to serve revenge, hatred, and politics, the truthful individuals and community's existence doesn't have any security.
Because of this, today in areas where armed oppositions are said to operate, especially in the Amhara and Oromia region, the family of a member of opposition parties are put behind bars.
Crime is individual by nature and in its not hereditary that passes through blood.
This is not alone.
Today the number of people who are imprisoned with one or the other reason have increased tremendously.
In addition, due to shortage of judges, the working procedures of courts have been shackled by crippling obstacles.
The security of government's perseverance, the protection and mainstay of the people are assured when bodies which carry out justice could work Freddy from any interference and influence.
We think that getting justice without waiting patiently and getting it as a gift is a right.
They say, "Delayed justice is injustice" (justice delayed is justice denied).
Especially, today in Federal courts where due to shortage of judges, courts of session are seen compact and issues are being postponed for later times.
The absence of the justice that used to be in the former governments, the fact that Ethiopians have been undergoing pain for they don't get justice at all, etc – created a big problem between the people and the government and history has registered it..
It made us encounter a problem that has not get calmed down and resulted in greater tension.
In short, the search of the people for justice struggle and hastening hasn't approached a legitimate answer.
Instead, the characteristic of the politics and the ruling party's stand has taken us very far from what the people wished for long.
It also made the struggle harsh.
The free judiciary system which should some as a tool for maintaining basic rights and a bridle for officials, has only been seen as a propaganda, which hurts us very much.
Free judiciary system is said to have got constitutional security.
But it is shackled by chain not to work
Since the current regime held power, just like the earlier one, many thousand citizens are cooped up behind bars.
But it's impossible to say that all that have been imprisoned are criminals.
Yet if this claim are said to be true, then it means sentimentality, revenge and hatred stood before justice.
From the perspective of law, no one is criminal unless he/she is made to dispute in a free court and verdict is passed on hem/her.
No one can be called criminal.
But when the present truth is viewed, our country' prisons can surely be said to have become places for stuffing free citizens.
How long will they stay behind bars those who don't know the entrance of the court, who were just called on the telephone, gathered by a radio call, took from their houses and the road, etc?
When justice's delayed it's hated like injustice;
This regime, the stand and activities of which are questionable, the moral strength of which is usually mentioned in its negativity, has been responding to the caused for the long arrest of prisoners of conscience, journalists, political individuals, and the like, the lack of judies, missing of prosecutors, opening files taking its time.
This is its won problem and pretext.
It is not acceptable in the face of the public and justice.
Those who put great faith in the judicature, citizens who were put behind bars in the different prisons, urgently need to hear a verdict in favor or against them.
We were told that certain people were taking training for the judiciary tasks.
Although we say that it's not proper the fact that judges are being trained in cadres training centre, but months have passed since it was told that 30 judies are prepared to be predated to the council of peoples' representative for promotion.
They were expected to be appointed before the council's break for summer recess.
But it didn't happen.
The council was expected to make the appointment of judges its first priority.
The expectation didn't work out.
People with cases are still unjustly treated.
The files which used to be postponed are being thrown again to be seen for 1999.
The judges who were said to have been trained with new outlook and belief would be seen in the days ahead as to what kind of faith they have to justice and their loyalty to the people, but we believe that they, even if to some extent, would be able to wipe the tears that are shed to day around the judicature due to excessive files an shortage of judges.
From Tobia November 6, 1997
On the Aftermath of the Oppositions Ceasefire, Mr. Meles said "The Door is open"
Ethiopian United Front (EUF) which has disclosed in its various statements made as of recently that it has been conducting military activities, passed on directives to its army for a ceasefire..
In the press statement he gave on September 20, 1999 regarding the peaceful activities Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, too said it was encouraging..
The Ethiopian United Front who declared ceasefire a week before Mr. Meles' speech in its statement of September 14, 1999, stated that in order for unity that should be established among opposition forces during this time, for the strengthening of sovereignty of our country which is at stake, for enabling EPRDF to investigate its policy and take necessary and appropriate measures, they've reached a ceasefire decision, it explained.
The Ethiopian United front arrived at this decision after the September 9-12 1999 summit meeting of the opposition forces in Paris..
In this Paris conference, those forces who had military wings chose peaceful and democratic strategy for their struggle, sticking with the ceasefire decision..
It's disclosed that these opposition forces were Afar Revolutionary Democratic Unified Front (ARDUF), Ethiopian Medhin Democratic Party (MEDHIN) and Ethiopian United Front (EUF).
While there was nothing clearly stated decision about whether these opposition forces would get into the country and take part in the upcoming election, some sources indicate that in the 2000 election opposition forces would get into the country and take part in the election..
Although the Ethiopian United front disclosed that it would stop its ongoing activities in northwestern parts and continue its struggle through peaceful means, up to recently it has been conducting armed struggle and on September 2, 1998 in Chilga District at Kuara area, one soldier of EUF had 45 minutes gun fire exchange against EPRDF search troop, not less than 10 died and 6 injured on EPRDF side where as no casualty was mentioned on EUF side.
It's after this that a ceasefire decision was reached at. .
And Prime Minister Meles Zenawi said from now on "The door is open..
Furthermore, he stated that now that getting rid of edgy feeling that was among opposition forces in Ethiopia, a foundation has been built that enable to interplay their political positions peacefully, opposition forces in the overseas, too, could get into the country as they hold their differences and operate within the legislation and regulation of the country; for this conducive environment has been laid to interplay their political aim, disclosed Meles in his recent statement. .
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
The Process of Returning Ethiopian Obelisk was Asked to Be Speedy
The EFDR president reminded to Italian Government to make its own effort to return swiftly to its native land the Ethiopian obelisk which is found in Rome.
While bading farewell to the Italian Ambassador, Mr. Marchelli Ricovirin, yesterday who completed his work time in Ethiopia, president Negaso told him that he was aware that Italy is found in the last chapter to return the obelisk but reminded that the effort be speedy, a spokesperson of the ministry of Foreign Affairs disclosed..
The president also admired Italy for the effort it made to peace fully resolve the clash between Eritrean and Ethiopia in her interest to make stable the peaceful condition in the horn of Africa..
The ambassador on his part reminded again that his government recently put in a bid on Europe level for the contract of transplanting the Ethiopian obelisk, transporting it to Ethiopia and fixing it at the preferred location..
From Addis Zemen May 18, 200.
Eritrea is Threatening to Wage a Serious Attack
Reportage
The condition of the Front
The Eritrea leadership claimed to have accepted the proposed suggestions for the agreement and executive strategies, but its said to the current chairman of organization of African Unity, president AbdulAzia butef Lika of Algeria that Ethiopia had earlier expressed her acceptance yet, now she said she declined so the war is inevitable, and reminded saying you'd better find short-cut resolve, calling his people to be initiated for war, wearing his other and real clothes of his identity.
Not even stating for a week after he had called his people to protect itself form Ethiopia's wide-range attack, he was defeated, on what he called could be the last chance, of serious attack at Zale Ambessa.
This showed that the peace effort that is being made at present doesn't have acceptability on the side of Eritreans and what they considered a solution is only a war.
The Eritrea leaders don't ever like the diplomatic way and only think that the only solution for everything is war, and they don't know that there are other options, so it is not useful from now on to be eagerly expect Ethiopian and Eritrean problem resolved peacefully.
So, Ethiopia has but one choice-to once and for all resolve her problems through defeating the war victoriously. .
Although it's a great loss for Ethiopia to enter in to war, discontinuing the development campaign that she had already started due to Eritrean's intriguing leadership, it would be loss after loss unless he, in a very short time, became victorious in this crucial battle, defeating Eritrea's force, for it's the only option for her.
For this campaign, Ethiopian children have risen determinedly to sacrifice both their lives and financially, which all Ethiopia from all quarters are speaking about it.
The Peace proces.
The peace process that had started earlier was discontinued.
U.S. America and other powerful governments have attempted to pressurize Ethiopia to execute the peace plan and the strategic implementation of it.
Ethiopia was needed to sign first the cease-fire without any precondition based on the request.
Not only willingly but forcefully did they went he to implement, for which case Antoni Lake and Suzan Rice came to Addis Ababa and talked to Ethiopian leaders.
However, Ethiopia disregarded the request unless the exact location the Eritrean army leaves was known, and their effort became futile.
This showed that it's not Eritrea that has become an obstacle for the peace process now but it is U.S.
So Ethiopia should be cautious about America, as well as the people should rise knowing its international enemies, it pointed out.
Special Cautio.
It's to be recalled that last week the EPLF leadership made a serious attack on Zalambessa front, but it was in vain.
Although the attack can not be said to have limited by that attack, we would like to remind that the most heavy attack could be on the eastern front.
The anti-Ethiopian forces who want to enter through the eastern and southern front are especially the Oromo Liberation Front organization, which had already become insurgents through the other front, so we expect that great focus should be laid on the arias of insurgency.
From Fiameta September 8, 1999
A Journey to a Historical Site
Among the ancient church found in Lake Tana, one is Yenarga Trinity church on the island of Dek.
This church was built for Queen Mintiwab (1730-1755) a religions father whom we met at the place told us.
We saw that the holy wall just like those churches found in the neighborhood was decorated with ancient pictures.
We also came to know that the grass roof to which became ruined in the 1981 and was not allowed to undergo renovation has now been substituted by corrugated iron sheets.
After we visited the Barga Trinity church we retuned to our ship..
And making our way to Bahir Dar, we went to Zege.
We were told that the kebran Saint Gabriel church which was built in the 15th century and Ura Kidane Mihret Church which was built in the 17 century was found on Zege island.
In the ship Beers and Soft drinks and sold with not-so-cheap price.
Travelers have opened their services..
The smell of tasty chicken sauce opened most people's appetite for food.
Travelers next to us asked us if we wanted to share their food which they kept in the traditional food bag that is made of leather skin and dry grass..
But we apparently declined..
Expecting they would insist saying "please".
But they didn't say so..
So we didn't eat despite the good smell that pours in and our insatiable appetite.
As soon as we reach Zege Island we heard on hand-held micro phone news that is not good to the ears.
It was the voice of the guide of the Travelers' club whom we accustomed to so soon..
Since it's going to be evening we were told that the captain of the ship couldn't go to Zege.
The calm that reigned within travelers suddenly transformed to disturbance.
Although the travelers' club has already charged thirteen Birr from each traveler promising to show the four monasteries, many said that completion of the day's visit with only 2 monasteries was not appropriate..
Some suggested that it's not necessary to indulge in to such an argument while cruising on a ship.
Later, one monk was sent to ask the captain to go the Zege.
The captain replied that since it's got dark he wouldn't take any responsibility.
Many argued that their money be returned.
But the ship didn't stop.
Advancing forward, the ship stopped as if it completed its journey at about 5:20 at a place we first aboard.
The captain was made to aboard and talk to passengers.
The captain stood before the people folding his arms and told that he took the measure for the sake of the people's peace and security..
It was obviously seen that the joyous feeling many of us had at about the beginning of the visit, gradually turned into sadness.
One of our colleagues who met staffs of the organization which is responsible for the ship talked to them with regards to our program..
But these workers were seen shying away from it claiming that they were not higher officials..
Anyway, this journey was completed regardless of its contract..
But in our belier, the situation should not continue in this way..
Just as the former schedule, traveler ought to have visited the historical places as long as they pay their money.
Other wise it would be better if the advertisement clearly states that the visitors are to see those, places as time permits..
After our return from the visit of Lake Tana, we spent the night in Bahr Dar..
On the morrow, we left for Gondar from Bahr Dar, Azezo, which is found 739 kilometers from Addis Ababa seemed to say to us, at the outset of the city ... welcome.
Most of the residences that are found at the right and left of the road are dilapidated and it's obvious that they longed for renovation..
If towns had tongues to speak that they need renovation perhaps Azezo would be the first one to utter.
We reached Gondar at about evening after having traveled in neither a gravel nor asphalted road.
The town was not built on a suitable location..
Perhaps it was because of this reason that her development was not so obvious as her establishment.
Many of the hotels are old..
In order to find a hotel to stay the night in this ancient city it took us more than an hour.
Don't ask me the hotel payment.
It was finally that we got rented bedroom with fair payment in a certain house that has wide premise.
I remember the music that says, "There's no coffee, but had there been some, there's no place like Gondar."
And is it true that there's no coffee in this town?
It was a question I asked myself.
However, in the morning together with my friend we ordered coffee at a café and proved there was coffee.
While sipping the coffee I imagined what the ancient Gondar might be.
Then, when Fasil stood overseeing the erection of the building, Tewdros being in the grandstand talking to the people.
I imagined visitors and researchers coming from Europe, crossing the Red Sea, through the lowland, I remembered those Jesuits who came to widen the catholic faith..
Any way, after discussing with the representative of Gondar Danger protection and Preparedness commission, for it was our purpose of going there, and then continued our program to Gondar castle.   .
Although we know from our education that the ancient city, Gondar, which is the reflection of Ethiopian history and culture and was the seat of Ethiopia kings after the 16th century, and have many long cultures and customs, we had to get some other person to do additional briefing..
The zonal Information and Tourism Department assigned an adult man who was eloquent speaker.               .
This guide told us that Gondar was a very small town in the 16th century and king Fasil who reigned in 1640 made Gondar its permanent seat, built a huge palace in the center of the town.
Showing us the palace from a near distance.
(continued)
From Addis Zemen September 2, 1997
Ethiopia Disclosed that Eritrea Planned to Open an Attack
In her appeal she put forward last Wednesday, Ethiopia state that Eritrea planned to attack industrial and historical sites in the northern part of the country, African News Service GS disclosed.
Ethiopian government spokes person Solome Tadesse in the statement she made expressed that Eritrea is prepared to attack the historical heritages of Axum city and the industrial town of Adowa from her military base in Southern Tsorena town.
"We got intelligence information that Eritrea moved one brigade army from Sudan and based it at Tsorena, planned to attack the Axum historical heritages and industries in Adowa," reuters stated quoting the spokesperson..
On the other hand, it is to be recalled that one Eritrean border administrator said to the BBC radio that Ethiopia has 55000 troops at Tsorena.
At present, the troops of both countries are facing each other at the strategic location of Tsorena, 30 kilometers from Deke Mehari..
Melitary sources disclosed that if war breaks, it could be at this hilly and strategic location, Tsorena, and even now it is known that there are sporadic gun fires around the area.
United States need to show her position clearly t Eritrea who has repeatedly been disobedient to execute the peace plans of the OAU, while Ethiopia accepted and is waiting to enforce it..
Simply trying to mediate the two countries can't resolve the prevalent problem which resulted from Eritrea's rigidity, so United States is expected to clearly show her position..
In the mean time, the statement United States President Clinton made on January 22 that said the two countries should not go to war at this time where Ethio-Eritrean border tension escalated doesn't precisely show her position except as a recommendation.       .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
Mamo Wolde has been Offered regular Salary by the International Olympic Committee
The Mexica Olympic marathon gold medalist captain Mamo Wolde has started receiving monthly salary from the International Olympic Committee, it was disclosed..
Since the EPRDF government took power Mamo Wolde was accused of red terror and he is under arrest; although the International Olympic Committee several times had a discussion with the Ethiopian government officials to effect his release, the question couldn't get acceptance..
Although the president of the International Olympic committee Mr. Antonio Samaraz, talked about this issue on the phone for the release of Mamo with Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenewi the response offered from the Prime Minister was that it's only the law that could release Mamo, and hence didn't accept his question..
The International Olympic Committee not only hired him a lawyer for the court proceedings, it has now offered him 300 dollars monthly salary to help his family.  .
In a statement given to one Inter sport paper, his wife Mrs. Aberash told that he's doing well and recovering from his illness, he has been in the hospital case for 6 weeks but now he's out..
Moreover, Mrs. Aberash explained that due to his increasing age, he couldn't withstand the bronchitis illness he has had, and she is hoping that government would release him or give speedy justice, she disclosed..
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
The Real Picture of the Looting of the Church was Exposed.
The money collected from people who made vows by the laity development committee on an anniversary of Abune Aregawi (Gebrechristos church) disappeared before the controllers from National Preaching identify it.
The case has been very much aggravated by the incident and the controlling official of the church was sacked from work while the church administrator was made to transfer to Diredawa..
Although the National Preaching Office has taken some measures, the money that disappeared hasn't yet found and gotten in the ledger, and this has been a talking-point..
The response that was given from the special office of the patriarch to children of the church, who exposed this incident and was taken up on measure through administrator, was not known for the time being.
The letter presented to the patriarch and for the office of National Preaching, however, explained about the looting..
When we present this full text of the application letter, it is belief that they would get better understanding.
To the Ethiopian Orthodox Monophysitism Church, Addis Ababa Office of the National Preaching,
Addis Ababa
I, Mrs. Atsede Degafe whose address is district 24, kebele 15, House no. 614 and who work as an accountant of the Abune Aregawi Gebrekirstos Church, apply the following.
On May 22, 1997 in the afforested Church 7986 (Seven thousand nine hundred eighty six) Birr was collected for the purpose of asphalting the road in the name of development, but to avoid the payment of the ten percent income that's to be paid for the Addis Ababa National Preaching office and from being detected by the controllers of the office, the money was hidden by the church's chairman of preaching congregation..
Nevertheless, it is to be recalled that out of these Birr, 2500 (two thousand five hundred) has gotten in to the ledger by Model 64, the rest 5486 (five thousand four hundred eighty six) Birr had not entered through model 64 and since I don't know as to the where about of this money, and since I asked orally time and again, though of no use, I wrote an request letter to the church office on July 17/8/97..
Hence, if you don't clear up this issue soon and let me know, I had already make a copy of this letter to the office of National Preaching and the Special Office of the Patriarch, and since there was no response from there, I am now obliged to rewrite to this office.
Applicant Mrs. Atsede Degafe
Copy, for Special Office of the Patriarch.
Addis Ababa         .
While this is the letter of the accountant, the administration had taken a measure up to suspending her from work..
Nobody seems to ask about the money that as wasted by the chairman of the preaching congregation.
Although the Addis Ababa office of National preaching proved the case through witnesses, they were not seen to take measures to have the money back..
From Fiameta December 17, 1998.
The International Monetary Fund Approves 112 Million American Dollar Debt for Ethiopi.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) in its new program of poverty avoidance that would bring about development and make Ethiopia beneficiary, approves a 112 million dollar debt in principle.
The debt enables to carryout this program of poverty avoidance that bring about development in the country for three years, it would be practical as from the day before yesterday, the statement that was released from the organization disclosed..
22 million of the debt would be payable immediately, the statement of the organization disclosed.
The International monetary Fund decided to give the money to the country because the economic policy the Ethiopian government designed to bring about economic policy the Ethiopian government designed to bring about economic stability was found able to avoid poverty it said.
Taking out the economy form war and leading it to poverty avoidance economic policy and submitting itself to the peaceful principle that bring about lasting peace, are improvements that have been seen recently by the Ethiopian government..
In related news, the organization disclosed that in a plan that it previously held to implement and in writing-off-debts program the organization permit for the very poor countries, Ethiopia was, in principle, embraced..
From Addis Zemen March 22, 200.
The International Olympic Committee is to offer an Important Honorary Award to Athlete Haile Gebreselassis.
The International Olympic Committee decided to give an important honorary award to the two-time Olympic Gold medal and owner of a four international record, athlete Haile Gebreselassie.
Athlete Haile received a call to go to Switzerland (Suzan) city where the committee's office is seated after a month to be present in an award-giving ceremony.
In a telegram call the International Olympic Committee sent, it stated that it was decided to give an important honorary award to athlete Haile due to the fantastic results he registered for the last eight years and for the contribution he made for the development of Olympic sport.
In the Olympic museum which is found in Suzan City and which has undergone extensive renovation and improvement and that is to be opened in June, an honorary award named the "Olympic order" would be given to Haile, it was disclosed..
Haile who have been far from competition after Sydney's Olympic victory, has told that he started limited training and was extremely happy to be elected for this honorary award.    .
Haile who has been known for breaking 15 world records in eight years is now the holder of four records..
From Addis Zemen May 4, 2001.
EPLF Should not be given another opportunity!.
Isayas Afeworki expressing his peace-seeking ambition, and yet, side by side he's secretly aggravating his warrior aims and not only one but twice had he attempted to make repeated attacks on Ethiopia, though they weren't successful, resulting in great harm on his army, and causing an intentionally now and then attack on Ethiopia so that the fight couldn't subside soon, making Ethiopia and Ethiopians couldn't look up to peace.
Although he was heard as fully accepting the Algiers' treaty proposed by leaders summit, he took this measure in order to buy time, and organize his army, and continue the war, this should not be forgotten and can be understood from his recent diplomatic activities.
Diplomatic Campaig.
Isayas Afeworki went to Washington, Us America last week.
The reason given for his journey was reported from Eritrea to be a call make from Eritreans living there.
However, according to the disclosure of diplomatic sources from the area, Isayas went, not because he was made a call but he went there to conduct the usual diplomatic campaign, it was disclosed.
While on the one hand, Eritrea accepted the Algiers proposition and strategies of implementation (resolution), he condemned Ethiopia for presenting pretexts not to accept it and make an effort to speak convincingly as if Ethiopia is a warrior, on the other hand, since Ethiopia would continue the war, in order for Eritrea to defend her sovereignty from the aggressor, Ethiopia, Eritrean citizens it is a campaign to make all Eritrean citizens urgently contribute money that could be of use to their country's defense force..
Side by side, Isayas Afeworki and his active and misleading diplomats are hiding their own intrigue and widely propagating that at the time Eritrean showed her resoluteness to execute the peace effort, Ethiopia is not willing to accept it and they are making an effort to make their international community condemn Ethiopia.
Nevertheless, it should be expected from the experience of EPLF leadership so far that they may try to attack with their unchangeable strategy once they had had sufficient time for preparation.
The situation that can be seen in relation to this is that Ethiopia has raised question with regards to the technical execution looking into the proposition forwarded to her (resolution).
She raised this question to the present chairman of the Organization of African Unity and the Algerian president, AbdulAziz Buteflika and experts of OAU met last week to respond to the question.
Ethiopia expressed that if she doesn't get a response to her question, she would be in a difficult position to officially disclose her standpoint.
The Algiers expert team accepted her question for it was appropriate and said it would give an urgent response after consultation, last week.
On the other hand, there are sides who are putting pressure on Ethiopia to accept the case-fire without any condition, it was disclosed.
In this regard, the International Monetary Fund is putting pressure on Ethiopia to stop the war for she is losing the economic development she had already registered.
On the other hand, it didn't look in to the conspiracy Eritrea is up to and take any pressure on Eritrea.
In this case, if Ethiopia doesn't cease-fire, she wouldn't get debt or aid money..
Not only this, the writing-off debt would also be in the same package, there's a proposition.
Since this is a tough test, it needs cautionary decision.
Recruiting and Trainin.
Although the Eritrean people came to understand the present intrigue of Isayas' leadership and realized that Ethiopia is not an aggressor, and wouldn't offer its children for such a war, as it was disclosed from some Medias, the leadership of Isayas is speeding up its recruiting and training, it was disclosed.
While he used different obstruction methods to stop the soldiers from retreating the war front, they are, unlike previously, going to Sudan in many numbers, reports from Sudan disclosed.
Although their combatant feeling and moral is not known and their future condition is unpredictable, his effort to strengthen work force is not to be seen lightly.
On the side of Ethiopia, conspiracy of EPLF's leadership has long been detected and so it disclosed that Ethiopia defense force is make ready.
This preparedness would give the necessary greater opportunity to defend the sudden attack of EPLF and attack..
The Attack process of the second Fron.
After the strong defeat of the Esayas' leadership in the northern front, even after its repeated attacks, they came to realize that they couldn't attack any more the Ethiopian army, and so trained and armed soldiers led by Hussien Iydid, the Somalian war leader and through him the Oromo Liberation Front, Al ITHAD and Tokichuman fighters, and led by EPLF commander-in-chiefs waged a terrorist attack repeatedly in may and July and second week of August on eastern Ethiopia, though became futile.
On Bademe and Sheraro front, the EPLF army waged a sudden attack on Ethiopia while the latter was deceived by false friendship forgetting their stand and caused damage, and EPLF had similar plans on the eastern front to cause severe damage.
However, what EPLF and Hussien Iydid conspired in Somalia was exposed by the opposition faction of Iydid, Rehan Woyn opposition forces and gave the information to Ethiopia, where the latter, force, even before they get organized, dismissed their soldiers including their military bases, by getting in to Somalia, causing a great damage..
These anti-Ethiopian forces revived and at first in May, later in July passing through Ethiopian border and while attempting to disrupt the peace, were dismissed.
Especially on the second week of August, entered Ethiopia with lots of force and in their attempt to disrupt the peace, they were dismissed, particularly the Oromo Liberation Front was hit almost once and for all, the statement given by ministry of Defense disclosed last week.
The leader of this anti-people terrorist campaign of warriors, Beredu Biru was killed by the defense force, the commander of the campaign who used to give orders in the fight, Shentema was taken captive, and it was disclosed.
In general, 425 were taken captives while more than 600 were killed.
This defense force's efficient measures taken on the second front have made Isayas' aim failure.
The measure taken was to be appreciated for it took immediate response using reliable information.
Nonetheless, since the anti-Ethiopian force that entered that direction is not to be limited by that attempt and since the pressure of EPLF would continue, the preparedness of defense force should not be taken lightly, political analysts gave their suggestions..
In order that anti-Ethiopian forces not organize and prepare for another damage, swift information digging has to be done, chasing them away and hitting them so that they won't ever revive, and sterilizing all the situations that are conducive for them, military specialists who have experience in gorilla fighting consulted.               .
Analyzing the Future Situation
The Eritrean leadership has no willingness to implement the agreement it signed in Algiers, political analysts are suggesting..
If Eritrea claimed that Ethiopia had once again wanted to colonize Eritrea and, hence, waged aggression on her, after having accepted all treaties up to now, the people would rise against them and fear of losing power, so they would prefer to get into war, political analysts told.
In general, so as to be victorious in the war, Ethiopia has to make efficient preparation and be able to dismiss the enemies in both fronts, they are suggesting.
However, it would be the primary task to patiently analyze the comments that could be forwarded by the westerners and expose the plot of Isayas' warrior ship.
For this it calls for presenting tangible evidences and waging high diplomatic campaign.
The commander of OLF, shentema, could be a peculiar example of testimony for indicating that EPLF's leadership have participated in this campaign, for he would testify that it was EPLF who trained, organized, gave him arms and sent him to fight against Ethiopia.
The other evidence was their plan to make the Oromo Liberation Front disrupt the peace and security of Ethio-Kenyan towns, and claim the responsibility to Ethiopia, paving ways for Kenya and Ethiopia to go to war.        .
The problem was resolved because Kenya made a search and found ten armed soldiers of OLF; recently in Djibouti, too there was found an individual named Kasim, a leader of anti-Djibouti group, made an attack on Djibouti, militarily supported by EPLF, and as a result, there are may who say diplomatic campaign should be waged against him, for he's found playing a dangerous role in the horn of Africa.
If Ethiopia holds upper hand in the diplomatic campaign and convince the international community, avoiding the pressures that come before her, the military measures she takes would be practical without a hunch, political analysts suggest.
From Fiameta August 25, 1999.
Netherlands is said to cut Down Her Ai.
Netherlands's foreign minister announced that out of the 80 countries his government used to assist, it has now announced that it will continue providing aid to only 20 countries, making high reduction.
This was announced in Hague by Director of Development Cooperation in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Brham Van Ogie..
According to the statement made by Mr. Ogic this measure of reduction was taken so as to make the small number of countries who are in desperate need of the aid more beneficiary..
He pointed out that a resolution had passed after a long heated argument took place in the parliament, and the next step is to decide which countries should be chosen and that was to be decided in a few months.
The selection would be made on three major requirements: the country must be poor, it must desperately need the aid, and it should have good governance, follow democracy..
In my opinion, Ethiopia fulfills this requirement, and there's no chance that makes Ethiopia out of the list, he said. .
From Fiameta January 8, 1999
Higher Officials of Our Defense Force were not Clean from Corruption and Anti-Democratic Working Procedure
Corruption and anti-democratic dangers that are blocking the way of our regime were seen at different level and bodies in higher management of our defense force and are ropes that tie them with TPLF factions, higher officers in the management disclosed..
In an interview they made with journalists yesterday in the ministry of defense about the prevalent conditions of the country sine corruption and anti-democratic working procedure were seen at each level, it is impossible to say that our defense force is clean from it.  .
In their relation with higher management of civil institutions as well as government authorities there are members who are involved in corruption activities, and a committee was organized and has started its activities to investigate corruption crimes in the different levels of our defense force, they disclosed..
As soon as the committee completes its work it would bring the criminals to justice.
In addition to corruption crimes there were members who held anti-democratic thinking and block transparency and free flow of ideas among the army, they pointed out.
Our defense force should have strong faith, transparency and free flow of ideas should reign among themselves in order to perform its constitutional duties, and, there fore, it is appropriate to dismiss these people who have anti-democratic thinking from the management and create a motivating environment for work, reminded these higher officers.
Sine management bodies who had crucial role but couldn't go along with new thinking and change were dismissed from their position, some groups especially members who are faction of TPLF are talking as if our defense force became weakened. .
In a related disclosure, they assured that our country have produced and prepared high officers who could make the army go along with new mode to thinking and direction of change, and, therefore, there couldn't be any worry of becoming weakened.
The division among TPLF leadership hasn't produced any problem in the defense force and such kind of problem could be created in the army when there is a problem only in its own leadership and organization, they said.
According to the explanation of the officers, no individual or any organization can't use the army as its own stick.
We are the one who led the battle against EPLF.
Those who claim that the army is divided because it lost our leadership are the factions who tried to use them but failed.  .
There was an attempt to make the army stand for certain groups' aim out of its constitutional duties, and by isolating the leadership that tried this, a conducive environment has been created to make it continue maintaining its strength, they explained.
Our defense is not an institution that is pulled by other body but its an experienced one that moves in its own thinking and as long as there is no force that compulsorily change constitutional order, it won't aggravate political crisis that are brought by individuals and groups, they disclosed.
Answering to the questions journalists raised in relation to whether they discussed on the document prepared by EPRDF, they said the army has a responsibly to defend dangers that hinder its constitutional order, journey and direction, and in order to efficiently carryout this responsibility, it should, first of all, know the document that points out the direction of the order, they explained.
In related explanation, this army which is entrusted a great government and people's responsibility, not only as an army but as citizens it's its rights as well as duties to discuss upon the prevailing conditions of the country' they underscored.
Pointing out that the war against EPLF was victoriously concluded by Ethiopians, and that a glittering conquest was registered, they said the people's support, the efficiency of the army and leadership of the government played decisive contribution for the achievement of resounding victory; but the faction of TPLF didn't have operative thinking of combat that enable it victorious through efficient leadership, they disclosed.
Moreover, the higher officers said that the claim of the factional group in stating EPLF was dismissed by our leadership was just snatching and confusing the history of the people, and it wasn't able to give a leadership that enabled victory, which was a fact that the central and front leadership was aware of, they said.
At this time the defense force as a national defense army its found capably and is ready to carry out the responsibility entrusted upon it by the people and government to protect the constitutional order, and enemy forces that at different concurrences dispute the sovereignty of Ethiopia and challenge constitutional order, they assured.    .
From Addis Zemen June 19, 2001.
The Final words of Tale Geta Leul who was Forced to Testify against Dr. Taye
Tale Geta Leus who testified to Dr. Taye Woldesemayat on the afternoon of October 27, 1998 who appeared as the 4th accused, moved all in tears as he spoke the suffering he underwent while he was investigated by the police..
Tale Geta Leul explained his sacrifice for the truth by saying that my religion and conscience which brought me suffering and anguish won't allow me to testify falsely and I didn't have the courage to testify falsehood..
Before he testifies that day, the central judge was observed warning him not to speak about others, except about himself..
In our last edition, we expressed how Tale Geta was secretly taken and the paint to beating he underwent..
He expressed to the court the suffering and anguish he underwent after he went to central police prison as follows..
At that time, due to the electric throbbing, my body hurt and swelled..
While I was in this state, they asked my name, age and address and forced me to sign on a paper which I don't know what is written in it.
Then, I was sent to police Hospital for medication as my pain was unbearable..
The hospital doctors saw my condition, the swelling of my body and my inability to pee.
They were shocked and sorrowful..
By inserting thin tube through the opening of my penis and sucked blood and urine.
And I was relieved somehow..
They sent me back to the central criminal investigation.
I stayed for four days without visitors after the medication.
On the fifth day I was called to appear at a higher investigation official.
I appeared at the investigation official's office..
Talegeta Leul, can you hear me, we have nothing from you.
You are a destitute guy; we know that you're responsible for your family and work here and there to lead your life..
What we need from you is to cooperate with us to control and bring to justice Dr. Taye Woldesemayat and Mr. Kebede Desta from Ethiopian Teachers Association (ETA) and Mr. Gebretsadik from all Amhara People's organization (AAPO) who has been troublesome to the government..
If you cooperate with us and do as you are told by investigative police officers, we promise fulfill whatever you need..
He put off a golden necklace from his neck and said I'm a Christian, showing me the cross.
If you give lessons on the radio and TV as you're told by the police investigators and called for the young, I will promise you by the name of 15000 brothers who sacrificed their lives for the struggle.
So, we would give you by writing what you would say on the radio and television about Dr. Taye Woldesemayat..
There won't be any problem that you would face.
They said..
And I told them that I can't do it, I don't know the persons and the organization whom you callas Ethiopian National Patriots and Ethiopian National Front, expressing that I didn't charge my position.
The second investigator told me that it's because they sympathized with me and thought about my future, other wise he said, we could prepare another person that testify against you.
Instead, release yourself..
He said.
I want the honorable court to understand that I saw the individual named Yoseph (Biresaw) who claimed to be head of military wing of Ethiopian patriot's front, first when he was whipped turning upside down at a certain investigation scene, and secondly when he testified here.
But the others, Dr. Taye woldesemayat, Mr. Kebede Desta and Mr. Gebretsadik I saw them here on August 7, 1997 in this court session for the first time..
The other thing the I want the court to view is that due to the hardship falsehood investigation I underwent, I have had a broken bone on my chest and skull and on my lap and on my ankle, and as a result of the harsh beating I'm suffering from the swelling, explained the covert sacrifice he paid for the froth.      .
The center judge said, "What hood would it give you if we see your brokenness and boy hurting? If you didn't finish your testimony we would give you another appointment.".
Writing his suffering, they give appointment for December 11 1998.
From Fiameta November 26, 199.
Fourteen Journalists Are in Prison
In the fifth anniversary of the press proclamation that took place at National Theatre by the government-organized Ethiopian Journalists Association, with empty hall and few supporters of the regime, the fact that it didn't mention the imprisonment of 14 journalists and the 3 papers which were out of publication, and the fact that it didn't take any standpoint exposed itself that the association was organized by those who desire to earn their living by deception and not by those who stood for the honor of the profession.
In a meeting in which the association commemorated the day, the stand point of the government that "Free press become the press of the oppositions" have emphatically reflected, and the hate propaganda that have started to be exercised as of recently indicated that there's a preparation to attack also other free press products.
"Ethiop" and "Wenchif" were among the newspapers that are supposed to come out this week but they were obliged to be out of publication, Mr. Sisay Agil, Publisher of "Ethiop" and the editor-in-chief Tewdros Kasa and, editor Tesfa Tegegn of the newspaper have been in region 14 police commission and central criminal Investigation.  .
The editor-in-chief of Wenchif newspaper Tamrat Serbesa and his deputy Admasu Tesfaye have been in jail at the central investigation since October 12, 1998.
The editor-in-chief of Urji newspaper Solomon Nemera and the deputy, Tesfaye Deresa have been imprisoned since August 14, 1998.
In addition to this Nega Tariku, Wondwosen Mesele from Keyet newspaper, and Andualem Mohammed have been improsoned since August.
At this time in Addis Ababa prison, four journalists, that is, Sisay Nigussie from Agere Newspaper, Samson Seyoum from Tequami newspaper, Abay Hailu from welafen newspaper, Tolera Tesema from Meda Welabo newspaper were judged but couldn't get guarantor and weren't able to go out from prison on bail; together with these fourteen journalists are in jail.
Although it's appropriate to legally ask journalists when press crime is committed, arresting and imprisoning editors, a campaign to weaken the free press would hurt the democratic process, too and so all human rights organizations and democratic forces should make heard their voices, most suggested..
From Tobia October 23, 1997
President Negasso Giddada Left from the Council of Central Committee Meeting of EPRD.
While the council of central committee regular session was about to complete its discussion on economic issues, President Negasso Giddada left the meeting, the council of EPRDF disclosed.
Dr. Negasso Giddada who is executive body of OPDO's central committee and executive committee member of EPRDF left from the membership of the council on a ground that there was pressure upon him from the leadership, the council disclosed.
According to the members of the council, especially OPDO members of the council and participants said on their part that Dr. Negasso Giddada's reason for leaving the session on the pretext of pressure was groundless.
The main reason for Dr. Negasso's leaving the session was his unwellness to accept the ongoing reform, the members disclosed.   .
Since Dr. Negasso was found to be in favor of certain groups during the debate in EPRDF executive committee and later on of the activities conducted by the faction groups of TPLF, he simply expected that strong criticism may be forwarded to him in this committee and he preferred to leave the session, the council explained.
After the economic evaluation was completed, it was agreed that dangers of narrowness and arrogance would be evaluated, where as Dr. Negasso left before this agenda was taken up for discussion, which showed nothing but his escape from struggle of ideas and evaluation.
The EPRDF council would make the discussion it held with regards to this issue official in the pubic media in a few days, it disclosed.
In the mean time, in the meeting the central committee of OPDO and the organization's cadres held, they disclosed that they dismissed Dr. Negasso Giddada, the organization's executive committee member, EPRDF's central committee executive member and the Federal Government's president from its membership of the organization's central committee.
In a statement it released yesterday under the title "our reform journey won't be hindered by opportunists", the OPDO central committee stated that although forgetting the responsibility the public entrusted upon him, Dr. Negasso stood loyally by the side of the faction groups, and while he could entertain his differences in idea being in the organization, the organization is obliged to take a dismissal measure for he attempted to impede organizational activities in anti-democratic ways. .
As of yesterday, Dr. Negasso Giddada can in any forum represent OPDO, and the organization would like to disclose that OPDO would continue the ongoing reform process in such away as to deep fully our people's right and benefits.       .
It called for the Oromo people and all OPDO members to give support end stand by the organization so as to make this reform measure a success.
From Addis Zemen June 23, 2001
The Ban on Six National Team Players was Lifted
The Ban on six Players who returned their Country out of the 16 who escaped at the transit in Italy while the Ethiopian National Football team was on its way to play a game against Morocco there on January 20, 1997, was lifted after some six months..
The indefinite ban imposed by the Ethiopian Football Federation on the player was lifted last Wednesday during the meeting of the management committee of the federation.
The six players are Ethiopian Coffee's forward attacker Getachew Kasa (Bubu), Omedla club goal keeper, Ali Redi, as well as Sain George club's players, Fasil Tekalegn, Anteneh Alamerew, Ashenafi sisay and Tsegaye Bati..
The federation lifted the ban considering that football is the boys and their families' mere income, their young age and their previous contribution to the national team, the federation disclosed..
The six player's were banned from playing football because they deliberately escaped with ten others in Italy, and after knowing they wouldn't be successful, and since they asked an apology, returned home they were just passed with warning hot to commit similar act in the future..
It was known that the decision doesn't include those ten players who remained in Rome, and since the ban was lifted, they can play in any game. .
As long as it is believed that the boys are capable and skillful, the mistakes they had committed won't prohibit them from being selected in the national team.          .
From Addis Zemen August 8, 1997
Aba Paulos was said not to Continue Being a Father of the Ethiopian Orthodox Monophysitism Church
Teachers, priests and laity of the Ethiopian Orthodox Monophysitism Church disclosed that "Aba Paulos" couldn't continue being a Father of Ethiopian Orthodox Monophysitism church due to the deep rooted problem..
Due to the religious and administrative problems the patriarch and Aba Gerima created, there has been an open opposition since 1996 and situations have transformed from bad to worse, for the patriarch and his friends despise everything and everyone, the priests and the laity took a unified stand by claiming that Aba Paulos shouldn't be the leader of the Orthodox Monophysitism church..
1. The Ethiopian Orthodox monophysitism church Association of the laity,
2. The Ethiopian Orthodox monophysitism church teachers, priests and workers fellowship (followers    of principle of monophysitism) an.
3. The Ethiopian Orthodox monophysitism church coordinating committee of the laity in unison wrote a letter to office of Beatitude Archbishops and Holy Synod explaining the problems in detail that as long as these creators of problems are present, the church couldn't exist, the letter explained.
The dignity of the ancient church has been degraded due to the patriarch; her belief order flawed, pillaging and demagogy reigned love and peace vanished, and Aba Paulos has humiliated the honor of the holy people, mocked at God, ridiculed the laity and priests boldly violated the church's belief and dogma, did injury to the Christian laity, the message of the priests an laity broadly analyzed..
Many Wise men, priests and various workers have been exiled from the church they grew up and lived, and Aba Paulos who claimed everything just as "Baalak" called Balam to curse the people of God and proved his selfishness, he's proving his cruelty, and those priests and the laity who came to understand this have been continuing their peaceful and unified efforts for the Orthodox Monophysitism..
As if he were free from any misdeed, these were times when he was heard claiming to amend the spoilt administration, to correct the religious fallacy and violation of dogma and flatly accusing all who stood against him stating that they hated him because he is Tigrean, people who hated me are Amharas..
But since the "truth will eventually win" his claim as being Tigrean was proved to be far from the truth since Tigrean priests an laity have disregarded him.
From now on there's no pretext he could give, observers told..
The associations of laity, wise men and priest have come to the final conclusion that Aba Paulos couldn't continue being a religious leader because they came to understand who the Patriarch is and what he does, and because after having repeated consultation, they couldn't be heard, the message explained.                   .
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
New visa Offering Has Started Between Ethiopia and Sudan
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs disclosed that new and better kinds of visa offering order has started.
A spokesperson of the ministry of foreign Affairs in its disclosure yesterday stated that in the agreement reached at the fifth meeting of the ministers of both countries a working producer has been laid since last May 3 where citizen of one of the countries who has a diplomatic service or special passport can enter another country without a visa.
Moreover a working order is to be laid as from the coming July for citizens of both countries who have ordinary passports so as to enable them get visa efficiently..
It's to be recalled that the fifth mutual plenary session of Ethiopian and Sudan ministers was held in Addis Ababa and Sodere, from April 30 to May 2.
From Addis Zemen May 31, 1993
The council Approved the Question of Infidelity Raised by the People
The establishing conference for Endemehoni District council in the Tigray Region approved the question of infidelity raised by the people on Mr. Solomon Tesfaye who was the MP representing TPLF.
The establishing conference which raised the question of lifting Mr. Solomon Tesfaye from his position of MP was approved yesterday on the basis of ruses and regulations of National Election Board, that is on the document 15 thousand people signed and presented..
The Southern Zone office of Election Board on its part disclosed that the legislation states that if the people lose faith in the elected member, it has the right to lift the individual from his post..
The decision of the establishing conference on Mr. Solomon Tesfaye would be operational when the National Election Board approves, the Zonal election board explained..
It's known that Mr. Solomon Tesfaye his served in the central committee of TPLF and recently has been among the defected group.    .
From Addis Zemen May 10, 2001.
The Outburst of Violence in East Congo is Feared to Bring About an All-out clan clash.
The Congo Democratic Republic disclosed that it controlled the northeastern town, Asiro, after having fought with Ugandan regular soldiers who crossed the border to seize the area..
The Ugandan government ruled out this allegation although foreign news agencies reported that Asiro town was controlled by the rebel group which is led by Tutsi Banyamulunge who wanted to oust President Kabila..
In another news, BBC reported on September 22 that the former Mobut soldier and those from Hutu clan who are now dispersed at different areas in the bushes attacked the Tutsis on the morning of September 21 at their strong occupancy, Goman..
25 civilians were killed in the violence though the fight has now ceased temporarily.  .
These ex-Hutu soldiers attacked the Tutsi rebels in he same town 11 days before and they were sent out, BBC reported.
While nothing has been official as to whether the Hutu joined the combat with the government's consultation, the Hutu have began struggling so as not to enable the Tutsi rebels control Congo.
On the other hand, since some of the Hutus who now started fighting in Congo would cross Uganda and Rwandan border to commit terrorist attacks, Ugandan and Rwandan governments wouldn't stay calm, for the former would become an obstacle to Tutsi Rebels, giving way to costly combat between Tutsi and Hutu pervading the area, political observers stated.    .
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
Higher Dergue Generals were Suddenly Release.
Members of Ethiopian Air Force and Ground Force Dergue higher commander-in-chiefs were released on the day before yesterday on August 25, 1999.
Close sources reported to Fiameta that they were suddenly realeased from their imprisonment.
After having imprisoned for seven years, not only was known as who commander their release or why they were released, but also the situation was sudden and unexpected.
The order they received was, "Today you won't spend the right here."
It's to be recalled that starting from the local officers up to higher ranked commander-in-chiefs were imprisoned at kaliti prison.
Although we couldn't know the names of all the released officers up to the time this news was organized and we entered for publication, the former southern Army Division Commander-in-chief, General Kinfe Gabriel and 15 other former officers were said to be released.
While it was not possible to know in detail about the number of officers in Kaliti prison, there were twenty-one Air Force members who were said to be prisoners, and three Generals in Alem Bekgagn Kerchelle prison.
Names lists and the place where they were imprisoned are presented in an overall report here.
1. Lieutenant Jelcha, Lieutenant Mekuanent Made, Lieutenant Asnake (nick named 'Shimaglew', which literally means 'the oldie', Lieutenant Getenet, Lieutenant Mered – US America
2. Colonel Nebiyou, Captain Belayneh Tegegn, Lieutenant Simeneh Tigegn, Saudi Arabia
3. Captain Sintayehuy (Scandinavian Countries)
4. Captain Iyasu (Europe)
5. Colonel Wagari Gemechu, Colonel Mengesha Hunde, Lientenenant Dawit, Wondiyferaw              Ugendu, are found. (Source: - Ethiop Mahezine)
Those who rejoined the army
1. Colonel Abebe Wubshet
2. Major Bahru who returned from Uganda and was (sacrificed).
3. Captain Eshetu – from Addis Ababa
Those who were imprisoned at Kerchele
1. Major General Alemayehu Agonafer – Air Force commander-in-chief
2. Brigadier General Haile Michael Biru – used to be a commande.
3. Brigadier General Mesfin Haile, are found.
Those who were imprisoned at Kaliti
1. Brigadier General Teshale Zewdie
2. Colonel Berhanu Kebede
3. Colonel Tilahun Nebiyou
4. Colonel Asrat Tekalegn
5. Colonel Berhanu wubneh
6. Colonel Tegneh Haile Ghiorgis
7. Colonel Teka
8. Colonel Gezaw Derib.
9. Colonel BerhaneMeskel Haile
10. Colonel Bekele Zegeye
11. Colonel Admekew Mamo
12. Colonel Lema Tekalegn
13. Colonel Ambachew Wube
14. Colonel Lule Gebremedhin
15. L/Colonel Desalegn Mebratu
16. L/Colonel Gezahegn
17. Captain Getachew Maru
18. Captain Fisseha Melese
19. Captain Tilahun Bezabeh
20. Lieutenant Solomon Kifle
21. Lieutenant Abayneh are found..
From Fiameta August 25, 1999
The Establishment of Temporary Security Zone Couldn't be Effected Due to the Stand Eritrean Government and Delegates Took
The meeting held by Ethio-Eritrean Mission Military Integration with regards to the establishment of the temporary security zone couldn't be effected due to the stand Eritrea government and delegates' took, United Nations mission for Ethio-Eritrea, the Ethiopian bureau disclosed.
According to the coordinating bureau's disclosure, in the meeting held yesterday in Nairobi and led by Major General Patrick Kamart Commander of United Nations Mission for Ethio-Eritrea in the seventh meeting of the military Integration commission, it was believed that the establishment of the temporary Security zone once and for all would get finality.
It was to be recalled that the Ethio-Eritrean mission presented a map that shows the temporary security zone southern and northern borders to both sides at the end of last week, on June 22 and 23, 2001.
The Eritrean government hasn't made clear its suggestions while the Ethiopian government asked for amendment especially on the mistakes seen on two areas, Bure direction, and southern line and Irob direction northern line.
In the meeting, the Eritrea delegates expressed that they generally don't accept what was in the map regarding the southern security zone line and pointed out it would recently make its response official.
The other main thing that was seen in the meeting referred to the Eritrean police and militia that was engaged in the temporary security zone and Eritrea was asked to reduce the number at least the total number she had had before the war and clearly indicate its figure, it disclosed.
Regarding this force, it stated that it's just because the Eritrean delegation met shortage of recruits but otherwise they would have included additional police and militia, and by doing so, gave deaf ears to the international community, it disclosed.
On the other hand, the Eritrean delegates rejected the proposition the melting forwarded to form a subcommittee of military integration commission that would control and investigate issues being in the place the pressure Eritrean police and militia would have in the southern security zone lines, it said.
The importance of this establishment of zonal military Integration Commission was thought to resolve the ongoing problem of the region and put in place an even previously believed by the secretary General of the United Nations, who presented to the Security Council before the peace keeping force came operational, the report reminded.
According to the report's disclosure the other issue raised in the meeting was enabling the peace keeping force free movement according to the Algiers' agreement, Article 13.
The peace keeping force mentioned that it couldn't carry out the entrusted responsibility of controlling the region in and around the security zones, due to problems and the side of Eritrea..
It's reflected that although the Eritrean delegates were asked to urgently resolve the problem by the commander in-chief of the army, it could be judged from Eritrea's previous deeds that its preparedness on the side of them is minimal, it said.
The commander-in chief said he didn't face such difficulties regarding this on Ethiopian side, the coordinating office pointed out, and the Ethiopian delegation promised to stand beside them, making greater efforts to enable them work in the forth coming times.    .
From Addis Zemen June 28, 2001
Id Tahir Would Get its Final Due
The Frontiers are disturbed by Clan Politics and Oppositions -- Except one region development weakened.
In eastern Ethiopia Somalia and Afar regions, south eastern Bale areas, Gambela region, Benshanul Gumuz region up to regions in the northwestern border are disturbed by clan politics and the activities of the oppositions, while in Tigray sincepower was held in clan criterion and efficient people are not there for development, the proess of development is found in a weakened condition.
Two big Fronts found in north western area claiming that the peaceful political dialogue has been closed by EPRDF, made it official that they started armed struggle.
The first front is EDFC which lost mainly of its EPRP members, organization of Benshangul Gumuz, the Ethiopian United Front (EUF) which one of Kefagn Patriots' Fronts established. .
The other front is "Ethiopian Democratic Unity of Patriots' united Front that was established by one team of Medhin's party, one wing of Benshangul, one wing of Kefagn, Ethiopian patriots' front and Gathering Ethiopia Organization united their fronts.
Both fronts made official in their programs that they struggle for clan-free national politics.
Why didn't they unite.
This question is still not answered.
The fronts have started releasing victory statement..
But on the side of the government, there has been no official statement except carrying out military activities around the area.
On the other hand, Afar and Gambella leaders are being changed now and then in a peace and democracy conference.
Although budget is said to have been allocated from the central government, no tangible development is being carried out.
The Somali region which has for long been getting used to gun fires, the political crisis has relapsed recently.
Since the attempted coup de tat that was carried out on September 25, 1998 by his deputy Mr. Mahidi Ayub Guled, against the president Id Tahir Farah was said to have violated the constitution and failed by the central government intervention, the regional council to conduct a consultation on the matter would meet tomorrow for its 2nd urgent session, it was disclosed.   .
Id Tahir, who is said to have the support of the Prime Minister Meles Zenawi and chairman of Ethiopian Somali Democratic League, Dr. Abdulmejid, on the morrow of the ailed coup, on September 30, 1998 ousted 5 officials from his political oppositions, inclusive of the police commissions, Mr. Yunis Abdulahi, it was officially disclosed.
The cause for the dismissal of the police commissioner as stated by the president was he illegally imprisoned people using his power and despite the last warning given to him last year he couldn't improve his deeds.
Although Id Tahir said this, in the statement he gave in the evening of the same date regarding the coup, the police force who were ordered by the commission were waiting attentively to assassinate the president in his car, but wrongly fired on the vehicle of the defense army, which, in other words, made it clear the cause for his dismissal from job.
Dr. Abdul Mejid in his explanation stated the reshuffling, based on the regional constitution, the meeting had to be called by the president or by the person whom he represented, and yet the League wouldn't pressurize to make the president stay in power unless he has popular support, but it opposes the illegal measure that was taken.
In this reshuffling that was said to have taken place without the 31 executive committee members, including the president, where 2/3 (21) members were not present and with a meeting held by only 16 individuals, the League held a meeting in the regions capital Jijiga town, on October 4, 1991 to take a standpoint on it.
While we didn't include in this report the standpoint the League took on the issue for it didn't reach for publication, from the perspective of the intervention of the central government in this issue and from Dr. AbdulMejid's statement, they are expected not to accept the opposition's stand for the council's falling apart is also the league's weakness.   .
Nevertheless, since the council that constitutes most of the members of ESDL, doesn't trust one another and is full of contradictions, the amendment measure that are expected to be taken by the League may restore it for a short time, the reshuffling the president had started, especially his act of transferring old-timer teachers who are said to have been highly active to the sub-regions, would provoke more his opposition, it was told.
The deputy president Mahidi Ayub who attempted the coup being an enemy to Id Tahir, has gotten a rough relationship with the latter since he led the peace and democracy conference held in Degehabur, internal sources disclosed, would be expected to give an explanation about the measure he had taken to get the majority vote, in the 2nd urgent session of the council that is expected to be held in Jijiga town for four days starting tomorrow.
In this meeting where all members of he council of the nine zones are said to participate, it's disclosed that the ex deputy president Abdulahi Hassen and his secretary Ahmed Ibrahim, who were members of the executive committee, members who have now and them been ousted from their powers in pretexts of not carrying out their responsibilities, gave priorities to their benefit rather than to the people', were all not expected to become simple enemies.          .
Although the League had expressed through its chairman that as the ousted executive committee members accepted their faults and the evaluation was conducted in their presence and hence, it would respect the decision, it didn't say anything about those 72 officials at different level who have been ousted this year alone without including these ones, and without their presence, as it stood for Id Tahir, showed favoritism in sources pointed out.
Unless the discords in the council get resolved soon, together with the instable security of the region would transform the situation in to a worsened level, and the session that was to be held in October 8, 1998 would remain splitting headache to Dr. Abdulmejid and the federal government, observers stated.  .
In order to control the tendency that occurred in 1995 in the Somali region, the central government united the Democratic Action League, Ethiopia Gobiye Democratic organization, Ethiopian Somali Democratic Front, Gurgura Liberation Front, Horial Democratic Party and Esa and Gurgura Liberation Front and together formed the pro-EPRDF, Ethiopian Somali Democratic League, it's to be recalled.
In relation to the establishment of the league the former president flassen jire Kalinle and his deputy Ahmed Ali stepped down form their power and were made to be arrested, while in their place Abdurahman Abdikeni and Ahmed Mekahil Hussien were replaced.
This operation itself, after having traveled for sometime, due to the prevailing political unrest, and during the 1995 regional election which was postponed from May to June out of the 139 seats the regional council have the Ethiopian Somali Democratic League got 76, while Ogaden National Liberation Front, 31 west Somali Liberation Front, got 11 seats, for which case ESDL got the majority seat and Id Tahir, president, Abdulahi Hassen, Deputy and Ibrahim was elected secretary of the council, it was to be recalled.
These clan elites who organized themselves in parties and fronts and who claim to have stood for the people have contributed nothing in terms of changing the poor living condition of the people.
In fact, the living standards of the people have transformed to abysmal poverty from time to time, some observers said.
From Tobia October 9, 1997
Eritrea's Port was Not Affected by Ethiopian Sanctions
It was reported that Mitsewa's Port, Eritrea's main port General Manager, Araya Tsegaye told Reuters on June 17 that the port was unaffected and in fact would plant new equipment and renovate Mitsewa and Asab ports with the 57 million dollar that is to be given by World Bank..
However, he declined to comment as to how much is allocated to the two ports which need renovation of equipment, road and other building services.
Ayte Tsegaye said that Mitsewa Port for ears had been given merely Military services for Ethiopia and since Eritrea got her independence in 1993, gradually changed in to a fully trade center.
No one considered to make it modern.
The service-giving equipment of the port was on the verge of obsolescence.
The infrastructure was highly damaged and almost nothing was functional.
So, we had to start from scratch, said Tsegaye.
Tsegaye also stated that before the conflict surfaced between the two ex-friendly nations, Ethiopia, more than any other nations, used to store her goods for a long time without any service payment, he never thought they will reach such a stage.
Reuter's reporter Manoh Esipew quoting city officials asserted that although there's a fight between Eritrea and Ethiopia within 70 kms radius from Asab, trade transactions were going on as usual..
Ayte Tsegaye told stated that although Ethiopian ships or ships that carry Ethiopian cargo all of a sudden were made to turn their direction away from Asab and Mitsewa, and advance to Djibouti, it has brought no damage on their economy, and meanwhile, northern transport fare is said to increased by 3 fold especially for Ethiopians whose goods used to come through Metsewa..
Ayte Tsegaye also stated that out of the total load Ethiopia imports, 15% of it used to come through Mitsewa while more than 50% comes through Asab..
In 1991, it was only 500,000 tons, last years it grew to 800,000 tons, but this year it was expected to rise 900,000 tons..
The fact that last year the amount of goods that Ethiopia imports through Mitsewa was 119,000 tons, which was higher than the 83,000 tons in April, show that the port could go well with out Ethiopia, Ayte Tsegaye said.
On average, 3 to 4 ships per day arrive in Mitsewa,the cargoes mostly contain cereals, agricultural equipment, industrial, and construction and trade goods..
Tsegay didn't want to comment on the loss that incurred as a result of Ethiopian sanction.
However, he expressed his regrets by saying If they thought that the port of Mitsewa would close just because their ship does not use it, they are very much mistaken.
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
Netherlands and Canadian Soldiers Completed their duties, Indian Soldiers Started Their Wor.
The Netherlands and Canadian peace keeping forces who were engaged in United Nations Mission for Ethiopia an Eritrea, completed their duties and pass over their responsibilities to the Indian Soldiers who substitute them, Netherlands embassy in Ethiopia disclosed.
In a disclosure the Embassy made yesterday, the commander-chief of Netherlands and Canadian Battalion, Lieutenant colonel Ton Van Ede, who's Netherlands by citizenship; hand over the mission's central wing at Adigrat town last Monday to the Indian colonel Sanker.   .
The Indian soldiers, who substituted the Netherlands and Canadian Peace keeping forces who completed their six months' duties, started their duties as of Tuesday midnight, it disclosed.
The Netherlands and Canadian peace-keeping force were the first batch of soldiers since last December who completed their duties, although the temporary security zone was formed last April, the soldier were carrying out their duties even before hand without a hitch, it disclosed.    .
They were able to carry out their duties due to the cooperation of the Ethiopian Civil and military commanders, the embassy explained.
The Netherland soldiers who are prepared to leave the region are about 1,100, it also disclosed.
From Addis Zemen June 14, 2001
Germany Cancelled the Aid Agreement Dialogue!
Germany Economic Cooperation and Development ministerial office released a statement from Bon on June 19 that the more then 10 million mark aid-offering agreement that was about to be signed with Ethiopia has been cancelled due to the border conflict with Eritrea.
The spokesperson of the organization expressed that unless this country which is found in the horn of Africa, resolve her disputes with her neighboring countries through peaceful means, Bon won't have a dialogue again.
Germany gave 160 million marks in 1997 while this year's plan was a little less than the previous year, where as with Eritrea, no aid-agreement has been signed.
Since Bon started economic aid program for overseas in the 1960's the aid to Ethiopia has reached 1.9 billion marks..
Although peace talks have started to resolve Ethiopian and Eritrean border disputes through peaceful means, the two countries have different positions on the peace initiatives proposed by United States of America and Rwanda, the statement from Bon said, quoting close diplomats.
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
The Court of Bahren Postponed Yeshiwork's Appointment
The Bahren court which was viewing the case of miss Yeshiwork Desta who was accused of killing her employee and his been under arrest, postponed its appointment to September 18, 2002 the Embassy of Ethiopic in Kuwait disclosed. .
The ministry of foreign affairs quoting the embassy yesterday expressed that the court believed that she take psychiatric examination with a chosen translator and the result presented so that it would be able to give the decision, so for the court believed enough time is needed and postponed the appointment date..
The Minister disclosed that after the appointment date was fixed an Ethiopian who knows better Arabic was selected and discussed with the lawyer on whatever things to be done..
Addis Zemen May 31, 2001  .
The Proclamation doesn't refer to those who chose Eritrean Citizenship.
The proclamation that was drafted by the ministry of Foreign Affairs entitled, Enabling Ethiopian-born Foreigners to benefit from various privileges of their native country" was approved by the council of ministers; presented to the council of peoples' representative on Thursday, January 9, 2002 and was referred to the legislative standing committee..
This proclamation that was divided in to three parts eighteen articles, details about the benefits of rights that could be gotten from being born in Ethiopia but took other citizenship and those who were not born in Ethiopia but either their parents or grandparents, or great grandparents, one of whom had Ethiopian citizenship, the draft proclamation described.
In part one of the proclamation article two sub article one it translates them meaning, "Ethiopian born foreigner" doesn't refer to those who took citizenship of Eritrea, it clearly indicated that.
However, in the proclamation there is not only a gap in the written statement of clarification the ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared, but it obviously indicated that the Eritreans would be beneficiaries of the opportunity.
Article 2 sub-article 1 of the draft proclamation that translates "Ethiopian-born foreigner" reads as follows.
1. Ethiopian-born foreigner means an individual who had had Ethiopian citizenship before he/she had other country's citizenship or a foreigner whose parents, grandparents or great grandparents, at least one of them at any time had Ethiopian citizenship, but it doesn't include those individuals who left Ethiopian citizenship and chose Eritrean citizenship," it said.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs gave an explanation regarding this sup article and it said as follows.
As it is known since Eritreans changed their citizenship due to their secession from Ethiopia an establish their own country, and since giving them the prerogative to the various rights and benefits refer to the overall people of the country, assigning this meaning to them is not appropriate.
The experience of India not to include Pakistanis and people of Bangladesh who used to be her own bodies, explained the same thing; there fore, these people are clearly exclusive in the execution of the proclamation," strengthened the sanction and then, it opened a door for them with an adjective, "However"..
However, it must be proved that Eritrean-born Eritreans had chosen Eritrean citizenship to lose his/her Ethiopian citizenship.
Moreover, Eritrean-born individuals who didn't take Eritrean citizenship but took other country citizenship could be said in the proclamation Ethiopian-born," it said; for the question raised by MPs as to why didn't it say those who participated in the referendum, the house speaker Dawit Yohannes argued the issuance of referendum is not related with citizenship.
Observers criticized that this explanation indicated that there was an interest in benefiting Eritreans in the proclamation.
All Eritreans who participated in the Eritrean referendum, since they have temporary identity cards from the outset, according to the legislation decreed in 2000, and still today practical proclamation of citizenship, they lose their Ethiopian ness; since this should that all Eritrean citizens leaving Ethiopian citizenship and chose Eritrean citizenship are clearly implicated here; leaving aside this clear legislation of the country, the ministry of Foreign Affairs, gave a statement that said, "However, it should be proved that the Eritrean had chosen Eritrean citizenship to lose Ethiopian Citizenship," which may give a green light for those Eritrean business people who were sunken after the Ethio-Eritrean conflict to regain control the business, there is a worry.
It would also give a chance for foreigners to involve in banks and the like which are forbidden for them, and it would make the screening of Eritrean citizens difficult for there's no list in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of those who took part in the Eritrean referendum.
At the time the draft proclamation was referred to the council of peoples' representative, the sentence that says if one of the spouses is Ethiopian and the other a foreigner, the later would be given identity and even if he/she is not Ethiopian, had been questioned.
This has also raised an opposition claiming that it would pave a conducive situation for evicted Eritreans.
Although what initiated this statement, was said to be the questions the Eriteans who were said to have come from abroad raised to the government officials in Hilton Hotel, from the perspective of the urgency and the gap the proclamation opened, it seemed to benefit the Eritrean business community, there are some who claim this.
The people whom this draft proclamation refers to, apart form being forbidden to work in defense, security and foreign affairs, as well as robbing off their rights to vote, or to be elected, they would be beneficiaries of all other privileges a citizen has; they would be given identity cards to show that they are beneficiaries of these prerogatives.
This draft proclamation is expected to be approved by the council soon after the Legislative issues, Defense and foreign affair standing committees see to it..
From Ethiop January 23, 2002
General Gawena is to be Accused
Fenote Democracy, the voice of EPRP, relayed the following message.
As it was repeatedly expressed in the TPLF regime there's no situation where embezzlement was not rife.
Above all, it's doubtful to get someone innocent in the ministry as big as defense ministry.
The sources that reached us from the defense ministry recently explained that the accounts of the organization was attempted to be audited by external auditors.
In these accounts documents where the income and expense were completely unmatched, the strict investigation conducted showed at least 200 million Birr missing.
This missing money was found only by documents that were found in the proper income and expense voucher, but if the money that was missing is calculated in terms of money that was expended without registering it as income or expense, it could have been much more, the sources disclosed.
As Defense Ministry is the highest institution in the country, it would get budgets in millions.
The organization, in which the allocation of budget is in billions every year, collects a lot of money by allocating many fund-raising under it.
Among these, the officers' club, where many expatriate and government officials entertain and the Golf club, the army shops and entertainment houses that are found in every division or army unit, the fuel transport trucks for ministry offices and other heavy frocks for rent as well as ... the income from dry load transporting company has no controller; auditors have never seen them.
Moreover, the money in millions collected from people in the pretext of organizing the army was not known for what purpose it went, no body asked them.
There won't be anyone.
The places which are suspected of these are commander-in-chief of the army, Administration and security of Ministry of Defense, organizational or Logistics Department, Engineering department, Ground Force Finance and Agitation Department as well as Air Force are the ones to be mentioned, the sources disclosed.
The individuals who can be considered accountable for the embezzlement conducted earlier, General Abebe Teklehaimanot and Commander-in-chief of the army, Tsadkan Gebre Tensay were retired.
The one department which could be accountable more, its head General Alemshet Degfe has now become Commander-in-chief of the Air Force.
One officer who's suspected as the forerunner of this embezzlement has been changed to a civilian.
Since the present officials of the defense ministry directly or indirectly are not in disagreement with Meles were appointed, regardless of their malfunction.
Among the former defense officials who didn't want to share to Meles and others, the head of educational administrative department, General Tadesse Berhe was not allowed to take his retirement, but was ousted from the army and now he's going to be charged in relation to the purchasing of ammunition during the war with Siye Abrha, the information our sources sent point out.
In general, as has been pointed out repeatedly earlier, as the anticorruption campaign of Meles Zenawi focused on political benefit, rather than economic ones, the officials who were imprisoned up to now and the ones who would be taken into custody would be related to the case of Siye Abrha and others who stood in opposition to Meles, most people came to believe this from the suggestions given."
It reported.
From Satenaw, January 14, 2002 .
The Mutual Forum Assembly for Political Parties was postponed to Monday.
The mutual forum Assembly for electoral candidates of political parties that was to be conducted in the coming Friday was postponed to Monday, Ethiopian selecoral board disclosed.
The board disclosed yesterday that the mutual forum Assembly was postponed due to the coming consecutive holidays.
Therefore, the Mutual Forum Assembly for political parties would be conducted on the coming Monday May 1, 2005 starting at two o'clock in the afternoon at the meeting hall of the office of the board. .
The board reminded that members of the mutual forum parties should send their representatives and perforate in the meeting..
It also pointed out that the board chairman and responsible persons of the office would give press statement to foreign and local Medias regarding the activities of the election.
From Addis Zemen April 28, 2005
Immigration Office Took Measures on Foreigners Who were Found Illegal, It was Disclosed..
Ethiopian Immigration Office disclosed that imposed a total of 80,800 Birr levy on foreigners who were found illegal..
Those foreigners whom imposition were laid upon were the ones found entering through illegal borders, and whose visas or residence permission is not renewed, the top official of the organization, Mr. Gezachew Adane informed.
The report also stated that last year his office gave passports and visa for 1.45 million Ethiopians..
Stating the need for amendment of immigration laws that have been in use for over 30 years, he said in order to update the law and make it applicable to the present time, a panel consisting of five experts is conducting a sturdy..
If the study went according to plan, it would complete next year around February, he also mentioned..
On the other hand, the borderlines are so wide along various frontiers of the neighboring countries that it is not conducive to manage and control the infiltration, the situation is, hence, there are as many cases where people are seen coming into or going out freely other than through the frontier toll stations..
Especially people with lots of money, after reaching the border, would give a good amount of money to the area officials, and go out of or get into the country without being noticed by immigration workers, the people who know the areas spoke with regret.  .
The presence of toll stations would serve best to control the people who go out of and get into the country if the borderline is only one and the rest were topographical impediments..
In particular, the districts around the border between Ethiopia and Somalia as well as between Kenya and Sudan are free for anyone to enter from any side, so, the toll stations serve only those who abide by the law, said the people who know the areas..
Related to the illegal infiltration of people of people in and out of the country, are the valuable resources and cash crops which could serve the country earn hard currency such as gold, coffee, incense and ‘chat' that are sold cheap in bulk in the neighboring countries, being a good means of getting foreign exchange to them..
Northern Somalia or Somaliland Republic which is famous in the world for its export of Camel and horned cattle to Arab countries gets hard currency in return as a result of the illegal trade of these animals which go from Ethiopia, it was indicated..
Unless appropriate control and management are put in place after passing and amending the law, there would be nothing that prohibits the flow of plentiful products which can bring in return a lot of hard currency to other countries, and infiltration of anti-Ethiopian as well as terrorist elements to the country; so alongside with the amendment and passing of the law, many believe that it would be wise and effective to consider the means of strengthening to border security.
From Fiameta September 6, 1998
The Prosecutor was ordered to Give Suggestions on Professor Mesfin's Case
The Federal High Court ordered the prosecutor to give suggestions on the requested additional date and granting of bail, and held another appointment for the case of Professor Mesfin Woldemariam and Dr. Berhanu Nega who were accused of agitating students for riot.
The fifth Criminal tribunal gave another appointment to see the case of the accused two individuals who were said to gather Addis Ababa University students and agitated to instigate opposition based on the application the EFDR Investigation Coordination Department put forward saying that it didn't complete its investigation and asked for 14 additional days..
The Investigation and Coordination Department presenting various written statements and documents, applied to the court that when the search of the residence of the accused individuals was made through the order of the court these were unknown cassettes an computer disks whose investigations have not yet been completed, so the present it to the court after the investigation is complete, it needs additional days, it disclosed.
The department disclosed that it found a document about program of a political organization which is not known as to whether it may or may not be operating legally, and needed time to present to the court session after clearing up..
In addition, the department disclosed to the court it hasn't yet captured individuals who are suspected as having relations with the accused..
The defendant lawyers of the accused on their part explained that since investigation center has already disclosed that through the court's order it had previously claimed to have searched and found documents of papers, cassettes, and computer disks form the residences of the accused individuals and office of EHRF, they asked the court for the accused rights to be released on bail to be respected..
The defendant lawyers also asked the court to rule out the investigation center's request for additional day for it can not be believed that the accused individuals would be engaged in dismissing documents away form their teaching and engaging in research works..
The court, after investigating the appeal presented by the investigation department and the defendant lawyers, held another appointment ordering the prosecutors to give its suggestions..
From Addis Zemen May 19, 2001.
Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam had Suddenly Disappeared His Where about is not known
It's to be recalled that the former Ethiopian president colonel Mengistu Hailemariam left Ethiopia on May 21, 1991 and started living in Zimbabwe, and recently there was a plan for him to transfer from his villa at Gunhell to the newly prepared and highly secured residence at Garvin close.    .
The recently published Ethio-News newsletter in its 3rd No. 3 edition reported that colonel Mengistu suddenly suddenly disappeared from Harare; although there's no official report so far as to where he went, it was expected that he might have gone to the refugee residence arranged for him formerly in North Korea..
Since Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam arrived in Zimbabwe, his full accommodation expense and, especially, telephone bills have been paid by the government of Zimbabwe, which brought about different criticism, it's to be recalled..
As we, followed and reported the situation in Fiameta newspaper before, we have pointed out that president Mugabee was gave political refugee for colonel Mengistu Hailemariam since 1991, has been unable to control his political moves for the last few months, and to protect colonel Mengistu Hailemariam if difficult situations are created in Harare he has been discussing the matter with different countries.
Among these he asked North Korea for the colonel's refugee as she was a good ally of Ethiopia during the 17 years of colonel Mengistu's reign..
Colonel Mengistu was in a situation were he was ready waiting to urgently go any time to North Korea.
The sudden disappearance of Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam from Harare has become controversial, and except suspecting that he might have gone to the previously arranged place of North Korean, it hasn't been known as to where he went.
It's to be recalled that the North Korean Embassy in Addis Ababa previously denied that the country didn't give refugee for Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam..
Where could colonel Mengistu go? It is expected that the answer to this question could only be given by Zimbabwe's president Mugabe..
The crime of genocide colonel mengistu Hailemariam was claimed to have committed while he was in power is currently been viewed in absentia in Addis Ababa Court, and the case was going to seen in the court again in the coming September, 1999.
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
288 Million Dollars was Written off from Ethiopia's Debt.
288,100 dollars was written off from Ethiopia's foreign debt, Ethiopian embassy in France disclosed.
The embassy as it disclosed yesterday to ENA, out of the 430 million dollar Ethiopia was supposed to pay up to March 31, 2004, the written off debt constituted 67%.  .
The agreement was reached after the International Monetary Fund (IMF) passed a decision recently supporting the poverty reduction program.
These lending countries who signed the writing off & rounding off agreement with Ethiopia are found among the developed nations of the group named the Paris club.
At this occasion, the minister of Finance, Mr. Sufian Ahmed who is the leader of the Ethiopian delegates, mentioned that the lending countries took the measure supporting the development policy Ethiopia designed, and the money that was supposed to be paid would be expended on the economic and social development, the embassy disclosed.
It was pointed out that French, British, Sweden, United States, Russia, Japan, Italy, Finland, Germany and Belgium delegates participated..
In a message they relayed in the meeting, the International Monetary Fund, (IMF) African Development bank an United Nations commission for Trade and Development (UNCTAD) they assured they would stand beside Ethiopia in her effort to reduce poverty..
It is to be recalled that the Paris Club countries similarly signed an agreement to write off Ethiopia's debt in 1992 and 1997..
From Addis Zemen April 7, 2001
The Discovered Tablet of Wood Brought About Trouble
Bishop Aregaw's Church was Trouble.
The bishop TekleHaimanot tablet of wood that was said to be found in our city, at Zenebework around ALERT hospital, created a lot of trouble that had lived long.
The tablet of wood was discovered in 1998, on December 25; through the cooperation of district 23 police station, the matter was made to reach office of the clergy, and the latter arranged the tablet's stay at Bishob Aragawi church at Zenebework.
The then General administrator of the church Melake Tsion Aba Wolde Hawariat Demisse (Koms) wrote a letter to the assistant administrator of the church ordering that the tablet of wood (Tablet of the Law) should be placed cautiously.
In our effort to investigate the matter.
However, Melaketsion Aba Hawariat Demissie was made to be dismissed from his positions, and in his place, Aba GebreKidan Gebrehewot troubled the administrator claiming "the owners of the stolen tablet of wood came, and, so let it be given to them" illegally trying to give it back, as a result of which the people were troubled for long, internal sources explained.
People asked to take the tablet of wood claiming that "It belongs to Maichew Debre Tsige Teklehaimanot" and asked to produce evidence that proved it to be theirs they said the tablet of wood has an inscription carved on it "Ze Tabot Ze Debretsige Maichew TekleHaimanot", and particularly one of them gave his word that he had said the mass in this tablet of wood in 1973 and 1974; but the said inscription was not found and the tablet of wood was inscribed in 1979, internal sources disclosed.
The administrator on his part said that at first he told the assistant repeatedly orally administrator that the people who claimed that it was theirs, gave false words that proved otherwise, and this created trouble among many; the church administrator took his annual leave, but suddenly came to the church on August 11, 1998 for a day, without completing their annual leave asked the assistant administrator "show me the tablet of wood" and saw it up side down and later went to those who say "we lost a tablet of wood, it's ours", seemed that he told them all the information that when they came back from the office of clergy they mentioned some real signs the tablet, internal sources disclose.
After this, leaving aside the order of the word of month, he wrote a letter a file number of which was D/K/A/106/14 '00 on November 4, 2000 ordering the deputy administrator of the church.
According to the order, the tablet of wood was able to be taken out of the church, but the problem it created was not as such easy.
Few laity of the surrounding area who saw the scene when the tablet of wood came out from the church on November 9, 2000 rang the church bell and called the people filling the church premise and shouted that the tablet shouldn't be taken from us, and if the real owner is found, people should be called and should be seen off with publication, not like this secretly, this made the tablet to be taken back to the church, they disclosed.
In related news, it was disclosed that due to an accusation charged against the church administrator claiming that he wasted the church, investigation committee was formed and started its function.
The administrator was filed many charges.
We'll disclose it after the result.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
Ethiopian Coffee and Saint George were Defeated and Disqualified from the knock out Competitio.
In Ethiopian knock out games conducted yesterday Berhanena Selam defeated Ethiopian Coffee 3 to1, Trans Ethiopia defeated Saint George 11 to 10 /in a penalty shoot out/.
In a Trans Vs Saint George game conducted at Addis Ababa Stadium, Fekadu Belay scored a goal for Saint George in the 18th second while sintayehu Getachew (koche) inserted the ball into the net, which he received from Tewdros (Bokande), and made his team lead 2 to 0.
Trans on their part coordinating their game scored their first goal at the 23rd minute by Tsegaye Girma..
The game was full of determination to win and colorful.
Tasew of Trans contributed greatly in serving good balls from the wing.
The game went animated and at the 42th minute Sintayehu Getachew scored the 3rd goal for his team and the 2nd for himself.
Trans who showed a lot of activities not to be excelled during the first half and after the 3rd goal was scored upon them by Sintayehu Getachew, in less than a minute's time, they passed over the ball to each other towards the goal area and scored the 2nd goal through the no-11, Ephrem Zeru, which completed the first fourty-five minutes.
Returning from recess with a score 3 to 2, Berhane of Trans cast the ball in to the net and made them equal.
Following that Haile (Tigana) of Trans thrust the ball into the net and Transe 4 to 2 started driving in the front seat.
Saint George on its part got a goal at the 75th minute that made them equal by Ashenafi Sisay who was changed by Fasil Tekalegn..
For Saint George, the attempt made by Sintayehu Getachew, Fekadu Belay and Mulualem Regasa getting in to the goal area were made ineffectual by the goal keeper.
Not more than three balls couldn't become goals for they went out on the top of the goal pole.
Since Trans got a lot of support from the people, too it could finish the game being 4 to 4 with Saint George..
In the penalty kick given to differentiate the winner, Trans won 7 to 6.
Therefore, Saint George was defeated by Trans 11 to 10 and disqualified from the knock out competition.
In a different game, Berhanena Selam got an unexpected victory over Ethiopian coffee – 3 to 1.
The precedence for goal was taken by Ethio-coffee through Michael Walelegne..
Michael is the team's star goal-scorer..
After four minutes, at the 24th minute Abebe Getachew scored the first goal that made Berhanena Selam equal, the balance of the game inclined to Berhanena Selam.
After this goal was scored Berhanena Selam repeatedly checked coffee's goal.
At the 48th minute Muluken Yohannes scored the second goal beautifully.
The 3rd and the winning goal was scored by Henok Abebe at the 64th minute and as a result, Berhanena Selam made coffee disqualified from the knock out cup game.
The games continue today and tomorrow at the Addis Ababa Stadium, it was disclosed..
From Ethio Sport February 4, 2002
Out of the 41 Commercial Bank Officials 6 of them were Arrested, 7 escaped.
In a charge the Anti-corruption commission pressed against 54 bank officials on January 8, 2002, those who are under control would appear today in the higher court that is situated at Lideta area.
With regards to this surprising and menacing accusation, we presented a wide coverage in a special edition of Medina newspaper that appeared on January 15, 2002.
Now, we brought you special reports of new developments in relation to the charges from our sources and our news reporters.
Although 41 officials were suspected and their names were presented to the court under the commission's file charges, we ideated in our special edition that only 26 were arrested.
This was because two of them died and the other 13 didn't appear to the court due to various reasons.
It was to be recalled in our report that out of the suspected thirteen merchants, Mr. Tedla Yizengaw was in Dubai, and Mr. Temesgen Mehari was in America, so they were not arrested.
The court had already ordered that police should bring all these suspects who were not arrested to the court on today's appointment or explain the legal reason why it couldn't bring them.
Based on this, police arrested 6 individuals last week, our sources explained.
The identity of these 6 individuals is as follows:
1. Mr. Said Yimer (Commercial Bank Head of Debt Evaluation).
2. Mr. Assefa Abshiro (Former D/president of the bank and who left the bank 2 years ago.
3. Mr. Alemayehu Haile Michael General Manager of the Mexico Region which leads eight          branch offices, under the bank's structure);
4. Mr. Abrham Aregawi (Four years ago, admin of branch offices);
5. Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye (who served as head of Debt Evaluation and was ejected from    the       position 9 years ago);
6. Mrs. Zellelash weyen Assefa (D/president of the Addis Ababa region since 2 years ago,    who      has been appointed in place of Mr. Assefa Abshiro)
The sources added that Mr. Assefa was hired by Nib Bank after he left the commercial bank.
Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye was working in Awash Bank, it was disclosed.
Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye said except reading from newspapers that he was included in Anti-corruption Commission's accusations, he didn't receive a subpoena, it was disclosed.
It was to be recalled that based on the Anti-corruption commission's charge Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye and Mr. Seid Yimer, having collaborated with other bank officials, were suspected to have given debt, illegally, 190 million Birr to star Business Group and Mina Trading, it was to be recalled.
In addition to this Mr. Seid were pressed charges on the 23 million Birr debt given to Abrham International Company.
In this debt, other than Mr. Seid 15 bank officials were accused, among whom the arrested Mr. Assefa Abshiro, Mr. Alemayehu Haile Michael and Mrs. Zellelash Weyen Assefa are to be found.
These are individuals who were also pressed charges on the 27 million debts given to Mr. Asnake Jembere, together with other 13 bank officials.
While Mr. Abrham Aregawi's name was mentioned among the list of suspected bank officials, it was not mentioned to which charges his case was related.
Although Mr. Seid, Mr. Assefa, Mr. Alemayehu Haile Michael and Mr. Abrham Aregawi appeared on the higher first criminal bench on January 14, as well as Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye, on January 29 Mrs. Wellelash Weyn on February 2, 2002 they were ordered to appear to the court of session today February 6, 2002 with the rest of the bank officials and merchants.
Based on this, the number of suspected bank officials who are arrested and found in Addis Ababa prison has increased to 32, our reporters disclosed to us.
Regarding the rest suspected bank officials, police is expected to present today death certificate of the two suspects from their district office.
With regards to the rest seven, although we were not able to know what the decision it passed, our sources explained that they are found overseas.
The seven bank officials left Ethiopia before and after they were told of the curt appointment (between January 1-3), it was disclosed.
From Medina February 5, 2002 .
The Protest Against the Patriarch is Mountin.
Since the protest against the patriarch of Ethiopian Orthodox church, Aba Paulos, from bishops, different officials of the clergy and the laity has been mounting, he is said to be in great trouble, internal sources disclosed;
The same sources informed that the previously arisen conflict was assumed to be instigated by non-Tigrean speakers, but by now the patriarch is at loggerheads with speakers of Tigrina who are officials of the clergy and the people of Tigray, too, and he's performing all the works of the church with Aba Gerima and his nephew Mr. Yared, they condemned him;
The people of Tigray dismissed Bishop Mekarios for they couldn't get along with him, while the patriarch ousted bishop Timothios who used to serve as Development Commission Commissioner for many years and transferred him to Tigray.
It was told that Aba Timothios didn't accept the transfer;
According to internal source information, the cause for the conflict between the Patriarch and Aba Timothios was that the development commission was asked to pay for the house rent it used, and because the patriarch, at different times, improperly requested for money.
The internal sources informed that up to now he took more than two million Birr (750 thousand of the car inclusive) form the commission, and since the now and then requests put forward to the commission by the patriarch couldn't get answers, he not only dismissed the manager but also scattered the development commission board altogether one of whom was bishop Gabriel, they pointed out;
It was told that the patriarch, other than the synod, works forming sub-synod that consisted of his friends, and in order to investigate the matter about bishop Mekarios who was dismissed by the question of the people of Tigray and other issues, the general manager of the church's development commission Mr. Tsegaye Berhe, the secretary, Mr. Wosenseged as well as brother of sibehat Nega, Mr. Belay Nega went to Tigray and talked to various members of the community.
It was possible to understand that the development commission not only substituted his supporters, but asked the government to give him workforce, the sources pointed out;
Aba Paulos who removed his opponents from the development commission not only substituted his supporters, but asked the government to give him workforce, the sources pointed out;
There are sides who say that the reason why patriarch couldn't succeed by what he does and why he repeatedly gets in to contradiction with others, is because he has a mental disorder;
In our attempt to investigate the problem in the clergy, an official of the clergy whose name wanted to be anonymous said that the Head of the development commission was Father promoted to a level of an archbishop of the National preaching but not ousted, and further explained that there's transfer in any work place and it should not be considered as wrong to see transfer exercised;
Responding to the question we raised with regards to the working procedure of the synod, he expressed that the synod is concerned with transfer of bishops, but regarding the control of department head, manager, different work sectors, it's what the patriarch does with his subordinate officials;
The financial spending of the church has been orderly and it is followed by the church and donors' auditors, and has legal procedures, so the patriarch cannot take money as he wished, and if anyone claims that money has been taken improperly, the situation would be investigated by auditors, making the givers as well as the takers accountable, the same official pointed out;
It is proper for the development commission to be asked for payment of house rent for the different institutions under the church are made to operate independently, and hence, it's legally appropriate to pay house rent.
The official said, "the development commission is not dismantled, perhaps it has substituted members for missing ones," and the team which was sent to Tigray had no special mission except investigating the problem, he explained.
From Tobia September 25, 1997
Uniformed Amharic Alphabet Usage Avoids Working Problems
If Uniformed Amharic Alphabet were prepared for computer users and service providers, it would help avoid the working problems they may encounter, it was disclosed..
Coordinator of the establishing committee for Ethiopian Computers Standard Association, Dr. Dawit Bekele, explained that preparing Amharic Alphabet chart avoids problems that could be faced during information exchange, preparation of research works and gathering of data..
In a statement he made to journalists during the meeting of the establishing committee for Ethiopian computer standard Association, Dr. Dawit explained that since the arrangements of Amharic key board is not compatible with the English ones, it would have an impact on workmanship, so establishing the association would help avoiding this problem..
Doctor Dawit uncovered that unless professionals of the sector, beneficiaries and service providers cooperatively agree and approve to prepare uniformed Amharic alphabet chart, the difficulty wouldn't be overcome..
On the other hand, since the working language of our country is Amharic, preparing the alphabet chart would have great advantage both for the beneficiaries as well as for service providers, he unveiled..
In Ethiopia one of the stumbling blocks for the widening of computer technology is the vacancy of this uniformed alphabet chart, said Doctor Dawit, and as to the gossip that there would be no computer after the year 2000, he underscored that this is simply incorrect and should not worry anyone in our country..
Dr. Demissa Gemeda, Associate Professor at AAU, in has speech doing the opening session of establishing Committee for Ethiopian computer standard Association, he said the establishment of the association is timely and it has oblong contribution for our country's development of information exchange.   .
From Addis Zemen August 27, 199.
In Tigray
The control over Eritreans has been Strengthene.
TPLF army took all the farm yields for itself by collaborating the area people in western Tigray Zone at place (where Tigray and Eritrea meet), North eastern reporter of Tobia disclosed.
The measure was taken passing the Mereb River at a location nearby Tigray, the reporter explained, and the harvest was taken away from them for they encountered opposioti from Tigren farmers before they planted the grain, but they went a head in a despotic manner, the reporter explained..
Although the farmers whom their property was taken disclosed the dispute to Eritrean government that was created in Kohay and Bademe area, the TPLF area, the TPLF army is still camping in the area after having gathered the harvest.
The TPLF army is said to have a stand that "As log as the Mereb river is the one that separates Tigray and Eritrea, it's always our land."
In the mean time, Eritreans living in Zalanbesa and its surroundings are forbidden to have what so ever belonging they have passed to Eritrea, but also are made to sell permanent properties, such as houses only to Tigreans. .
The TPLF soldiers who have ramped also forbidden things that go to Eritrea from central part of the country through Tigray.
A part from grains, nothing could go.
Because of this, Eucalyptus logs and the like things are returning from the border.
And the license of some business people, who are said to be the main supporters of EPLF owners of groceries, snack house and public houses are being snatched from them, it was disclosed.
On the other hand, the Eritrea Saho national members got in to Tigray and pillaged cattle and other properties while the Erobs of Tigray started getting in to Eritrea and killing people, bearing their grudges.
Behind the two sides, EPLF and TPLF forces are found confronting each other, the news we receive from the place explained.
Asked about the situation one Eritrean official believed that there's a problem but since shepherds are the ones who created, it won't be difficult.
The Eritrean government is at the moment being attacked by forces that oppose the regime and leaflets requesting the arrival of democracy are being scattered and stack on the wall around public squares, schools, and prayer houses, it was proved.
On the other hand, in Eritrea, at this time, theft, killing, circulation of hashish and raping females have become widening.
The Eritrean government is saying that the perpetrators of this act are Tigrean nationals.
EPLF is saying this to facilitate the eviction of Tigrean youth from Eritrea, observers expect.
Mereb River between Eritrea and Tigray had brought about war earlier with ELF, and at that time EPLF said it would give whatever land needed to TPLF so the question remained secretly unanswered.
At this time, the Eritrean government in western Barka district, military front had been opened against it, and it is concerned whether another front would be opened by the side of Tigreay.    .
Due to this, the Akale Guday district which was a meeting point with Tigray and, an area which didn't accept the new administrative division is said to be the seventh zone, on its own.
But according to observers, the measure, rather than being a remedy, would enable other small districts to maintain their earlier questions, creating a great administrative crisis to EPLF.
From Tobia October 30, 1997
Some Days!
The event took place in the capital Addis Ababa last few days..
After long years of stay a lovers, the opposite sexes are now prepared to get married, with extravaganza wedding..
The relatives of the spouses are looking forwards to their children's happiness..
The nears and dears have been busy here and there in the preparation.
As an indication for the proximity of the wedding's date, wedding songs are heard form one corner to another..
The drums are beaten by girls who gathered from the neighborhood..
Saturday, the eve of the wedding, the day when the spouses are at their climax ... when the traditional wedding song is heard loudly, now reverberating in the spouses mind..
On Sunday, the huge tent is planted ... in the microphone it's heard from afar, that song "my bride ... my bride ... my grape flower, don't worry my bride, the bride, the bridegroom is being awaited..
People have become restless..
But when all this happens, the bride is thinking deeply, when finally the "sad" news was heard that the bridegroom was arrested..
With other Eritrean spy's it was heard he as captured on Saturday eve..
The wedding extravaganza became spoiled.
The groom as the prison, enough food for lunch was brought to him from the extravaganza..
He, there, afar, she, here ... they were separated ... not to see each other anymore ....
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
Where is the Remedy?
While Ethiopia is known for many favorable characteristics, her early civilization, tourist attractiveness, ancient governorship, as of recently her name become illustrious for drought, famine, disease resulted from famine, etc.
It has become a common practice to look for aid from the rich countries in order to fill whenever we are hit by drought which is considered as an angel of death.
Since the end of the kingship regime the feet that our politics is mostly related with begging, aid and alms made the proud citizen shameful and taciturn.
This can not be denied.
As one writer expressed a year ago in this newspaper, for the last twenty-four years, the Aid and Rehabilitation Commissioner was more popular than the foreign secretary.
As one western journalist mocked, "you (Ethiopians) do not need a Foreign Secretary.
If any need arises, I think one sub-department under Aid and Rehabilitation Commission would suffice.
If you want to enter the political game like other countries, first of all you have to change your attitude towards famine.
It would be fit if your politics is termed as the politics of famine and disease," he said.
Just like the previous regimes this one also claims, "I'm concerned about Somalia, I'm worried about Rwanda, I have such and such plans," it said.
But when the news alone is mentioned about Ethiopian famine and victims of famine, it becomes a sin.
It seems a crime.
Due to these and related awareness problems, inefficiency of administrative and leadership, distribution of development and lack of justice, budget and economic allocation, basic poverty of knowledge and incompatibility of plans before actions, all these exposed our people to famine.
It is not God's fury.
Nor is it natural calamity.
As always, for the public's wretchedness the cause is the political order.
Two months ago, the former American President Jimi Carter visited the place where he was told as producing abundant yield, the Prime Minister being host of touring the area.
If not new for the two individuals the area has since long ago been very blessed by nature.
This government has added nothing to it.
Nor has it contributed thousands of tractors several hundred machines for cutting and gathering grain (combine harvesters).
Instead, since the current government, just like the former ones, doesn't come out of begging should have asked aid showing the victims of famine.
But that didn't happen.
Because government usually takes it for granted to beg in the pretext of poor citizens and victims of famine.
On the other hand, it has concluded that the problems of Ethiopia should have been resolved by foreign forces.
But what this people want to know is that are foreign governments accountable for the people's miserable condition or is it the one who sits as government officials in Addis who are responsible for it?
It's worrying to heat that five million people are exposed for famine.
The city people and those fellow people haven't become victims as yet would like to see it in its own eyes.
The victims are within the fenced barbed wire of five, either not to get in to immigrate to the neighboring countries..
Our fellow country people who used to be said "would spoil the city it wouldn't get into the capital for it would leave black point on the politics" is still having the same fate today.
Worst of all, in 1995 while the famine was a big concern for many fellow people, a statement was given, "The famine's not so dangerous as to risk human lives," proving the regime's heedlessness to its citizens' suffering.
The fellow people who are victims of famine are the products of poor leadership.
The problem that arose due to land distribution among farmers in Amhara region is to be recalled.
The source of the resulting difficulty is there fore poor administration and its policy the in human regime and its stand.
Even then, temporarily at least, the rest of the world and its brothers should come to its rescue and save him.
However, the lasting and only solution is the democratic and public order itself builds and should actively involve in this direction believing in it..
From Tobia October 16, 1997
Ethiopia – Quarrelsome?
The Sanction Applied on Sudan would Collaborate the Arab World Even Better
From reporter of Tobia (Washington DC.
The sanction no Sudan which was orchestrated by the newly appointed African Affairs Deputy Minister, Mrs. Suzan Rice, and which was to apply on Sudan as from the beginning of last week, would collaborate the Arab camp even better and would make Sudan headstrong to be a safe haven for strengthening opposition forces, the not-so-few Arab diplomats of United Nation members disclosed.
Senator John Ashkroft, the Senate Foreign Affairs sub-committee chairman, saying "a policy that's acceptable" the sanction that President Clinton ordered in his signature, approved and after that strongly praised in the ministry of Foreign Affairs, Deputy African Desk Minister Suzan Rice who was appointed in place of Mr. Robet Mus for her efficiency in this task;
At the beginning of last week, President Clinton not only imposed all kinds of American investment sanctions but also ordered to stop most of the bilateral business transactions.
According to the disclosure of higher officials this kind of measure was taken on Sudan because she hasn't stopped international terrorism and human rights violation.
The measure of Clinton seems that of the stands shown by his country on Iran, Burma and Cuba.
The Sudan government on its part retaliated on its part (Nov. 5, 1997), it was disclosed that America had 70 million dollar business relations per year with Sudan.
Sudan is the main gum supplier to America.
Spokesperson of State Department, James Rubin explained that there's no interest to discontinue diplomatic relations with Sudan.
There was no need to push up to the end the plan that was designed last month to return American diplomats to Sudan.
Among the Islamic states Iran, Iraq and Sudan as well as Libya being victims of the attack of administration would let most members of Islamic State Association continue collaborating, diplomats found around UN disclosed for our reporter.
Moreover, America accuses Sudan of training anti-neighboring state government forces and spreading them, though sources close to Sudan also disclosed that the measure taken on her would make sudden ready, more than any other time, to arm oppositions against Eritrea, Ethiopia and Uganda.
This measure of sanction is the last of all atrocities.
It's to be recalled that when the Eritrean, Isayas and Meles Zenawi trained and armed up to the brim the anti – Khartoum forces, the American government allocated more than twenty million dollars.
Was this not widening terrorism?
One political observer disclosed;
It is expected that the Sanction imposed on Sudan's dates (date fruit) product that comes out of the thorny tree have a great impact on America on her products of Perfumes, Juicy beverages and candies.
Nonetheless, state Department officials started saying "permission would be granted for those who would like to bring this product of tree".
Out of the 20 million dollar products Sudan sell to America, 9 million dollars would be gotten from date fruits, Washington Post pointed out.
Sudan has for long stopped widely treating opposition forces of Ethiopian and Eritrean governments.
Instead it was widely talked of Sudan's willingness to hand over opposition forces in the talk that was held between the Ethiopian Security head and his Sudan counter part.
However, many were surprised at how America's sudden change of stand has became acute.
The American government uses dictatorial rulers in Angola, Eritrea, Uganda and Ethiopia in order to establish countries that would follow its policies, experts who know the direction of American policies (       ) pointed out that the remaining agenda is to topple down Sudanese government.
In general, however, America would enter in to diplomatic wheedle tomorrow by putting aside Sudan today, many have underscored.
It's believed that this putting aside of Sudan would gradually enable the latter to rally support from the Arab World, and would serve as an impetus for seriously helping opposition forces of different governments.
Most politicians assumed that on the side of Ethiopia, too, entering the international political affairs that doesn't concern her, from her geo-political perspective, would be like becoming "quarrel some"..
From Tobia November 13, 1997
The Order of Bail Release of Mr. Siye Abrha was Decided to be Temporarily Banned
The Federal High Court first criminal bench in its yesterday court session received an appeal form investigation coordinating department and decided to temporarily ban the order of bail release of Mr. Seye Abrha, the Federal Police Investigation coordinating Department disclosed..
Mr. Bitew Belay's case was also given a ten-day appointment..
The Federal Police Investigation Coordinating Department disclosed in the evening today that the case between Federal Higher court first criminal bench court session appealing investigation coordinating Department and the response given Mr. Siye Abrha, who was allowed a bail release by the court order, would remain banned until a different order is given from this court. .
In the meantime, the Federal First tribunal which seated yesterday to see Mr. Bitew Belay's case gave 10 days for police to present the evidence it claimed to have..
The lawyer of the suspect on his side produced a charge against police stating that the Federal Police could not investigate regional cases without having representation. .
Besides the Federal Police doesn't have the legal authority to see regional cases and it can be given no time, so the lawyer asked the court to respect the bail right of the suspect.   .
The Federal Police on its part said that the budget allocated to the Southern people regional Administration through the Office of the Prime Minister which had to be reimbursed wasn't operational and the individual was unnecessarily involved in this case, which left a shadow of doubt.
In relation to this the Federal Police said that if the suspect is released documents could be lost so asked the court to give it appointment.  .
The lawyer of the suspect asked the court to release the suspect stating that while the document was on the law, it would be inappropriate to appeal for another appointment..
The Federal First Court 1st tribunal on its part said although the lawyer of the suspect had put it as if the case was beyond the authority of the Federal Police there are documents which show that the action took place in Addis Ababa, so in order to see the case it gave appointment for June 22, 2001..
From Addis Zemen June 12, 200.
EELPA and GUNA play in Nairobi and DareSelam Tomorro.
EELPA for its African club championship game with the Kenyan OSERIAN went to Nairobi on Wednesday.
While GUNA went to DareSelam on Thursday for the game it has with the Zanzibar's police.
They will make their return games after a fortnight.
Since both team wanted Sunday, the federation talked to the committee of the clubs, and decide that EELPA plays its return game Friday February 16 at o'clock in Addis Ababa for it will go to Zanzibar for east African games, while Guna was decide to play Sunday February 18 at 4 o'clock.
It's better if the federation facilitates a fund-raising game allowing the entrance fee to allocate it for prizes of motivation, for the two teams, after they return to Addis either on Sunday or Monday.
GUNA is the firs team from Tigray clubs to participate in an international game..
Wouldn't the game be strange for you for it in new.
This was the question the team's coach Mr. Abrham Teklehaimanot was asked, for which he replied, "In fact, GUNA is participating in international game for the first time.
However, the players are not new for international game.
Showel and Tsehaye played for children and Youth team.
Mikele has also played for children, Youth and national team.
Since these players have experience playing international games it won't be a strange thing.
In order to get good results for the following game, we would come narrowing the result in the game we play in Zanzibar," he said.
The winner of the two games would play with Tunisia.
The supporters and nationals of the region who live in Addis Ababa have contributed a lot of money to GUNA for the international competition the feam has..
In addition to this, the club has got 60 thousand Birr in the fund-raising competition held in Makale.
The team would take 18 players.
Since one player got sick, they presented Sileshi Gedey to be registered last Tuesday.
The opponent team, Zanzibar police had only once met Ethiopian clubs.
And that was there in Zanzibar in 1998 with Ethiopian coffee at the competition held among East African games.
And in the game coffee won 3-0.
As coffee had an extraordinary activity then, it was not difficult for the team to defeat Zanzibar on its own land.
Since the then coffee and GUNA teams had different styles of playing (one based on individuals skill, the other on team activity), there was a difference in exceeding playing.
The team leader who represented the federation that went with Guna was Mr. Solomon Derse.
Mr. Markos was made to go with EELPA.
This is its second time for EELPA to go to Kenya.
In 1994 it played against Gormahaya and was beaten 2-0 in Nairobi.
In a game that took place a year ago, Oserian and Saint George ended in 1-1 draw, and in a penalty shoot out to identify the winner, Oserian won. .
At that time since Saint George tried to play in a special way, it was found quite difficult for its opponent team.
How about EELPA?
We asked the coach, Gulelat Ferde about the game that is to be taking place in Nairobi, "We will try to play the best of our playing.
Our aim is to win and come.
We haven't seen the Oserian team.
But they are said to play long.
We are expecting to win and come with good result," he responded.
EELPA would play its return game in Addis Ababa and go to Zanzibar to play the opening game on Wednesday with the same team, Oserian.
It is indicative that EELPA would have redundant games.
From Libro February 2, 2002
We Follow Our Own, not Eritrean Policy
Meles Zenawi
Due to the sudden clash surfaced between Ethiopia and Eritriea, the citizens of both countries are found in extreme worry.
The roads that enable Ethiopians in Eritrea to return to their country have become narrow..
With regards to Eritreans in Ethiopia, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, in the press statement he gave on the May 28 Occasion, more or less put them in some worry..
When the Prime Minister spoke in relation to this It has been an issue we have been discussing time and again.
We had believed we would get solution for this problem in a short time..
The important thing is there is a common working procedure.
With regards to living, foreigners who live in Ethiopia as long as they make Ethiopia their living place could work in any sector they close, registering as dwellers..
Similarly, Ethiopians living in any country, as long as they made that country their living place, they would have the opportunity to work in any sector..
These are many Ethiopians who make America their living place..
Even though they don't have American citizenship, they are allowed to work privately and in some government works for they have permanent residence permit..
There fore, there's a residence permit, and citizenship right..
Being a foreigner, it is not possible to participate in elections.
One cannot participate in defense forces.
In such sensitive areas any body who doesn't have citizenship right can not be assigned.
Hence, we see citizenship right and residence permit being mixed up.
Between Eritrea and Ethiopia.
In order to put this in order, stage by stage, for Eritrean citizens who live in Ethiopia, respecting their right of residence permit and their right to work, even those who have residence permits, but because they are not citizens if these may be places where they are not allowed to enter, stage by stage, to let them leave we were discussing on issues pertaining to this.
More or less, these were situations where agreements reached upon.
This problem that surfaced now may be an impediment to implement the situations that were more or less agreed upon..
However, later the fact that this thins should be put in order is the issue government took position on.
Citizens and dwellers should be identified there are works limited to citizens.
For instance, in relation to investment and finance issue, issue related to journalism, is restricted to citizens.
And it means they can not work in such fields.
But in any other works, this includes all other foreigners living in Ethiopia.
The Armenians, Eritreans can work in the same status.
The other is there are government works where foreigners could be employed.
For instance, there are Indian teachers whom we brought from abroad; there are consultants of foreign teachers.
There are government works not limited by citizenship.
These would, as necessary, when the professions and skills are not access able, there would be an opportunity where foreigners would participate.
What ever the case might be, there are areas where foreigners would never participate..
For example, defense, parliament, security and some sensitive areas; these are areas that should be limited only to citizens..
We divide them in these stages so as to implement it orderly; we discussed this issue with Eritrean government..
The problem that is created now took the issue back..
Anyway, the Ethiopian government based on in its own direction and its own law, as well as world wide common working procedure, would be a situation to resolve this complicated problem ...
It is known that "Ethiopians in Eritrea are done some injustice..
We have been making effort to resolve this through discussion with the pertinent Eritrean government bodies up to now..
Well the present problem may aggravate this situation..
Nevertheless, we're following ours, not Eritrean policy..
When the Eritrea's turn left, there is no reason why we turn left..
Just because the Eritrean government did injustice to Ethiopians, there can not be a suggestion that says the Ethiopian government should do injustice to Eritreans.
We are led by our law, we have our own ethics, we have our own outlook..
We are led by our law and ethics but not with tit-for-tat mentality, repeating what one has done," he responded..
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
The Eritrean who were Evicted form Ethiopia were Warmly Welcomed with Ceremonies of Drum Beating and Offering of Popcorn..
No Force Can Stop the War!
Issayas Afeworki
The Eritrean President Issayas Afeworki expressed that they won't leave from the areas that had already been under control of EPLF, from Beademe, Sheraro, Alitena and ZalaAnbesa, and he also claimed that the region is Eritrea's..
Unless Ethiopia stops the sanction put on trade ships and airplanes, he warned that he could bomb central Ethiopa.
And he made it official that no force could stop the war..
In the mean time, the Eritreans who were evicted from Ethiopia were warmly welcomed by over 100,000 people with ceremonies of drum-beating and offering of popcorn, when they reached Asmara in the dusk on June 21, 1998, the voice of America disclosed..
Caron Pino's full report is as follows..
Thousands of Eritreans were parading through the railways of the city applauding and complimenting the people who came through fourteen buses saying "Welcome to your country!" receiving them warmly..
The majority of them were holding leaves of a palm tree..
Many welcomed them holding bread and throwing popcorns as sign of affection..
Behind the buses, the 30 years war victims and children who were in wheel chairs were stuffed on trucks and were seen following them..
Although there has been tension since the clash started between Eritrea and Ethiopia at the beginning of May, the eviction of the Eritreans has created frantic worry..
3 ex-fighters who were waiting for the buses were expressing their ideas, "The execution of such an act is bad..
We didn't do like this..
It has enraged us..
The fight was between soldiers and not between civilians..
We observed many bad things acting up on us by Tigrean people.              .
And this has no acceptance internationally..
From now on, we do not need them..
We will overcome all by ourselves.
They said.
The Eritrean government was against the eviction of its citizens form Ethiopia..
These Eritreans have been working for Ethiopia for the past years, as well as fighters who stood beside the gorilla fighters to overthrow the authoritarian leader, Mengistu Hailemariam, it said..
I am deeply hurt for not hearing the international community expressing their opposition regarding the eviction of Eritreans form Ethiopia..
After the clash had started the feeling of the majority of Eritreans was surprise and astonishment wondering to fight in a war..
The additional statement which the Eritreans gave to foreign journalists surprised many..
Be it to my children or any Eritrean, we will teach them to know about the Tigrean people, what they did to us before and what they have done now..
We will teach them to be cautious about them through out their life."
They said, sadly.
It is expected that these and other reprimands would make many sorrowful and overshadow the next peaceful times.    .
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
Message of Fiameta
In order to stop EPLF's insurgents the control of all the people will be Decisive (from the stand point of military science).
Insurgents cross the national border of a country and enter another country whose aim is to bring about terror and suspicion on the prevailing government, gather military, political, economic and social information, and disseminate propaganda by studying the people's grievance and burning questions, attack military and civil areas as well as communication and various economic sectors, conduct kidnapping and assassination..
The entrances the insurgents who come form foreign land to the country use the dwelling places of their clans. .
Before they engage in their work, the hide in their clans. .
As has been mentioned above the wide range duties of the insurgent groups, since the Eritrean army who are in confrontation with the Ethiopian ones around the border couldn't go forward, as an option, it may send insurgents in to the central Ethiopia in order to continue its destructive mission, so all the people in the city or country should stand ready to protect. .
Since EPLF leadership are joined with the defected group OLF, and OLF is said to have started relations at the level of leadership, EPLF can use these defected members to in surge especially within the people of speakers of Oromifa an accomplish its destructive mission, the people in the city and countryside should identify and control there forces.
When insurgents engage in their mission, they have easily identifiable weak points, therefore, if controller from the area is assigned at village, district, town, or countryside level they can easily put them under control..
The following are the weak points upon which insurgents could mainly be identified..
Most of the time insurgents can be identified by their clothes, general facial expressions, language or style of talking..
In addition, there are facial, way of dressing and eating behavior, walking situations that can serve identity each insurgent, so the dwellers of the area or security guards could take notice and catch them..
When they pass by the countryside, they leave footprints so it's indicative of a strange person had passed by..
Their footprints also remain noticeable in sandy areas..
Insurgents could not pass without feeling suspicious and staring when they pass by through enemy people..
Whatever trained they may be they feel frightened for their activities are underground..
This worry and fear can be read from their facial expressions; so far one who made a good follow-up it would be uncovered..
* Since people who conduct dangerous attacks make their movements during the night time, they could be traced make their movements during the night time, they could be traced by taking a sudden curfew measures..
In order for insurgents to do their duties they have to be embraced by the people..
Insurgents who have no public support would be like a fish out of the sea. .
Hence, if government and the people work hand and gloves insurgents could not do their missions, and if the police village, farmers' association and individual dwellers cooperate a work by creating relations to one another, it is possible to about the plans of the insurgents of EPLF, so let's cooperatively control them..
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
Abune Gabriel is Forbidden to meet People
Beatitude Bishop Gabriel member of the Holy Synod and Archbishop of the west Shewa Office of National Preaching due to his request for warded to the Patriarch Paulos "to have mercy and reconciliation with God and the laity, return the Holy Synod power you held" was forbidden to get access of food from outside and not to meet with families and other people as from October 1, 1998, internal sources disclosed; Mebruk newspaper in its 30the of September, 1998 edition, 2nd year No. 52/104, has the 6 page text of the bishop's call for negotiation, which was said to discuss at length the overall problems of the Orthodox church and had a 7-point remedial suggestions, the sources disclosed.
These are
1. Your Holiness, remembering that you were imprisoned unjustly, let you remind the      government to release those who were arrested through your pressure.
2. Your Holiness, remembering that you were sacked from work and retired in 1982 unjustly, let       you sympathetically bring back to work those wise people, priests and workers who were          sacked from their job with out doing any harm in the office of the clergy and in various           churches;
3. The Book of Religious Dogma that was published two years ago in two languages which has      brought great criticisms to our church, in page 15 of the English version says, "God is      three in divinity and character" an since this brought about great condemnation, let it be      urgently corrected; an if it has already been corrected let enough explanation be given      on the radio, television and newspaper.
Let the formerly published book be gathered;
4. The Holy Synod legislation that was approved on May 8, 1996, in chapter 8, Article 23,           divested the rights of the Holy Synod, abused the power of the Holy Spirit and so be             cancelled and your holiness return the Holy Synod power you took;
5. Let an office be opened that overlooks and controls the archbishops, wish people, priests and      deacons as well as the rights of the laity are respected; .
6. Let a new Synodic law be drafted by the General Assembly Drafting committee and then          approved that would make the patriarch work in accordance to the law of the apostles and        wise men, so that it can make the patriarch withdraw from a dictatorial power and only be        limited to the power bestowed upon the holy synod; .
7. Let the activities that had, for five years, brought about criticisms not be repeated;  and let       us not be, any more, laughing stocks of readers of various newspapers, and let a main          peace and reconciliation conference be conducted.
Let us reprimand one another; let's discuss; let's reconcile, in that conference.
Let God helps us to do this, Amen," they were saying.
Bishop Gabriel who made his home and office in the Headquarter of the Office of clergy just like the others, on the morrow of this call of his, that is, as from Friday afternoon, he was forbidden lunch and diner, and those with cases were not able to meet him, for the security workers at the gate couldn't let them pass, as this sources disclosed, the deacon who closely help him was also forbidden to get in to his room, they explained.
It's to be recalled that last year in January, bishop Gabriel had a similar sanction for a almost a month not to meet people for he went out of an assembly meeting saying that the process of the meeting was out of the mission of the church.
At that time bishop Gabriel disclosed in writing to the Patriarch that unless the situation gets improved he would altogether leave the premise, so the sanction had been lifted..
The sources who mentioned that it was violating the bishop's human rights and out of the dogma of the church to forbid the intrace of food form outside and talking of individuals with cases, called for the laity and human rights organizations to put pressure to lift the sanction that was passed in secret on this spiritual father. .
From Tobia October 9, 1997
There was an explosive bomb Attack on two UN vehicles in Eritre.
Two vehicles whose properties were that of Canada's Peace delegations of the United Nations Mission for Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) were attacked by an explosive bomb at Tsorena, Eritrea.
The first explosive bomb occurred on March 12 at 2:10 in the afternoon while the second attack occurred yesterday.
Although there was no human injury in the attack, insignificant damage occurred on the two cars..
The attacks occurred at the time when the cars were investigating whether the vicinal roads were free from explosive bombs.
Major General Patrick, UNMEE's force higher commander, underlined that although by chance something pitiable didn't happen, this attack showed how it's important to get explosive bomb information form both countries. .
In addition, he stated that the information about explosive bombs is not only to keep safe the peace enforcement delegates, but also to ensure the security of the displaced fellow people who would return to their respective countries when the temporary security zone is established.
In order to establish and control the security zone that separates the two countries and to enable the displaced dwellers return roads must be clean from explosives..
In the areas where the mission is found UNMEE, Slovak and Bangladesh groups of experts who made explosives inoperative are doing cleaning task..
In addition, the UNMEE centre for making explosives inoperative is giving training for the people enrolled in this task and relaying the necessary information.
Additional investigation is being underway to identify the cause of the two accidents.
From Addis Zemen March 16, 2001
Editorial
The Value and Importance of National Reconciliation
In our country, discussing ideas calmly, resolving differences through tolerance or agreeing to disagree has not been a common experience.
While it is not possible to say it is from our nature, we are not used to accept defeat willfully due to our cultural backwardness.
Starting from two individuals we give precedence to resolve our difference of opinions through the physical tackle.
This kind of practice could be said a black spot of our thinking that went deeper from individual to political organization.
Consequently we are dragging ourselves along the ground embracing, the culture of guns and poverty.
It's common to have differences of opinions in individuals, communities, countries, political parties.
If the contradiction among these social forces were to be resolved through force, as we've been used to for long, and are inclined to do now, it's not difficult to estimate in what kind of turmoil the world would get in.
That's why we say the way of contradiction should be abandoned in order for us not to get in to such kind of disorderly situation.
That's why we say our political differences should be resolved though the spirit of tolerance and national reconciliation.
And we benefit, not lose, as a result.
Resolving differences through the culture of clashes and guns have hurt us deeply.
Especially the clash that's been among children of one nation consumes not only the country's wealth.
And not only development fruits that came about through time..
But it is also the youth who is the productive force and has a prior role in the construction of community and development of a country that would be devastated.
Due to the absence of peace, the hope of civilians to live would be obscured..
We would move from poverty to the abyss of poverty.
We saw in our eyes this practice and its consequences for the last thirty years.
We went through it.
If we just say the sacrifice that was paid to defend the unity of the country is the price one generation would pay to the country it lives in, the loss of the lives of the children of the country due to political differences is countless..
It was a generation that perished due to the disgusting so-called white and red terror.
This generation was young, and not only productive and full of strength but also that excelled in its understanding,why did this happen.
It used to ask; it was one who was bright and who could widely contribute for the strengthening of democratic culture.
As a result of these white and red terrors, there are now many behind bars who were from these elite and that were believed to be active groups..
If our queries are to continue today and tomorrow, all who have, through guns, destroyed the unity of the country, opened a chapter of racial politics and caused to destroy one another, killed their comrades and opponents in the struggle in the bushes, killed and have people killed in broad day light are to be brought to justice.
The yesterday's destruction cannot give blessing for today..
In fact, as today's leaders told us from the outset, that criminals of red terror are put to justice so that it would teach a lesson that no one's life ever in this country would pass without legal order.
Today, these people have no gut and courage to repeat these phrases.   .
They don't put to justice criminals of Bedeno's, water's, Areka's, Mosque's, Universities, Jesus square's cases and assassinators of Asefa Maru.
When we say let national reconciliation reign in the country, it should be understood that we're not saying that ordinary criminals sight not to be put to justice.
But at least, before additional destruction is followed, let the confrontation of political forces slack off and let there be a chance to discuss; we mean let the door open.
As it's started in our opening news the political air has been tightened with contradictions..
There's a naked contradiction between leaders and followers, among leadership itself, and between the incumbent and opposition parties.
In most places the contradiction is transforming to military clash.
We are heading towards destruction.
For national reconciliation and political tolerance more than anyone else, it is the government in power, the political organization which is the basis of the government and its all members that shoud work day and night..
For this it has a reason.
This government and its supporters should bring about and familiarize peaceful transition power.
If this didn't happen, the first to be hurt would be them.
We think they have seen the trouble the act of being defeated by force could bring about from the previous regime..
As a government, they have the responsibility of keeping the peace of the community not with force but with knack.
The other reason that makes national reconciliation necessary is not only our backwardness and the necessity of our cooperation to defeat poverty.
It's known that it's TPLF which is the prevalent political orbit (central wheel) that claims to have started its struggle holding the complaints of the Tigrean people..
Whether the group has a support of all the Tigrean people is doubtful but due to the narrow cause it has, the superiority of Tigrina speakers was clearly demonstrated for the last six years, and hence, "We-They" kind-of-saying dividing people in to two category, which is a dangerous tendency has been created..
This is a dangerous tendency that could pass on to the next generation.
Therefore, the disease that has been widespread by few leadership should be stopped before long by the cooperative effort of the struggle of Tigrean people, responsible leadership of TPLF, all opposition forces and donor countries. .
The value and importance of national reconciliation would be clearly seen only then.
From Tobia September 25, 1997
The EPRDF Central Council Regular Session Begins Today
The EPRDF Central Council begins its regular session today June 19, 2001, the front's office disclosed.
In a statement the office released it stated that the meeting that starts today will evaluate in depth the journey the front and its member organizations have traveled through the last ten years.
In the council's meeting, central committee members of SEPDF, TPLF and OPDO council representations and central committee members would participate in the meeting, the statement disclosed.
In addition, members represented by cadres from each organization are made to participate in the council's forum as invited guests, it stated.
In the evaluation session the council starts today, the conclusion it reaches at each stage would be official, the council pointed out.
From Addis Zemen June 18, 200.
The standpoint and Resolution of the Third Plenary Session of Board of Sympathizer Groups of Ethiopia, AAOP and Professor Asra.
We who are in different positions of AAPO and sympathizer group of Ethiopia, AAPO and professor Asrat, in a meeting held today on October 21, 2000 in Addis Ababa, Gerar Hotel, after having listened to the report of the executive committee of the board, deeply and widely investigated it had unanimously passed the following decision.
1st With Regards to our Organization, AAPO
1.1 We came to understand from the report that after our leader, His Excellency Professor Asrat Woldeyas died, the central committee didn't call an urgent national assembly and in his place didn't substitute his leader, so it realized that the organization is without a leader.
Therefore, according to the regulation and principles of the party, activities done within the AAPO up to now have been illegal, it realized.
1.2 We can realize from this report that since the executive board meeting second plenary session was held in May 9, 1999 and the effort to make our leader's burial ceremony colorful, and in his place assigning a leader who is capable and efficient, evaluating the pros and cons of the organization, and in order to enable it take measures of amendment, the session realized the effort it made to call the national assembly.
1.3 Moreover, the assembly looked in depth the effort the organization made to strengthen sympathizer groups in foreign relations, in its own organization, public relations departments.
1.4 At last, the assembly fully realized that the report analyzed in depth the situation of out country and our organization, AAPO, and its call for a better struggle.
Hence, /1/ the assembly appreciates the work performance report the executive committee presented and unanimously approves it and decided to have it as a document.
2nd with Regards to General NekaTibeb and Dissenting leadershi.
2.1 Since the assembly realized General NekaTibeb Bekele's leadership since 1995 have been engaged in scattering the organizations strong and sympathizer members, and continuously removing structures.
2.2 Moreover, realizing that dismantling the Moresh musical band that was a strong force behind the organization and which was established in a tiring effort, has made the assembly sorrowful.
2.3 Taking into consideration that he assigned TPLF sympathizers in Addis Ababa Council and even in the central committee, and paving way for the destruction of the organization,
2.4 And realizing that he used the income that was gotten from various sources regardless of the finance rules and regulations, and objected the investigation of it by external auditors .
2.5 Considering that based on the code of the organization, Article 2.12, the question that was asked by all members and bodies, particularly, his negligence to the call of the strengthened national assembly that came about after His Excellency professor Asrat woldeyes' death, protecting against the election of leaders and being an impediment by attempting to put himself on to power.
2.6 Dismantling the support-giving committees which have been a back bone in finance, material, diplomatic and organizational work and giving unparalleled contribution and dismissing the popular leadership and attempting to displace the people in exile writing letters to governments expressing death, and seeing these acts with great sorrow.
1st Unanimously condemning the General's unprincipled leadership, until the national assembly is called and decided, he is ejected from leadership in AAPO.
Therefore so as to make whatever activity he does illegal.
2nd The others who were close collaborative to him in this destructive work especially
1. Admasu Mekete
2. Sahile Seif.
In order to stop their destructive task in the organization it is decided that they should be banned from doing any activity of the part and be brought to justice before the national assembly.
3rd In order to maintain AAPO's legal existence and to reassure its acceptability and prestige among people the sympathizer's executive committee would call all members and supporters, followers for a public meeting and have them decided about the meeting of the assembly.
4th The destructive campaign that has started on Ethiopia by the encouragement and support of the historical enemies of Ethiopia should stop and the incumbent government should make the necessary effort to strengthen the unity of the people, and the assembly realized that it is the EPLF group that's responsible for the extermination of people.
5th As it is indicated in the report, the assembly decides to have the effort of public and foreign relations, continue strengthened.
Ethiopian, AAPO and Professor Asrat's Sympathizer Group.
October 24, 1999
Addis Abab.
Hussien Iydid A waits him Death
His powers has been highly hit
Among the popular war leaders who's primarily called was Hussien Iydid who has now been weakened and found in a stage where he can no more move, the western political analysts expressed.
According to the analysts Hussien Iydid weakened due to the battle he had with his rivalries and division among his clan.
Hussien doesn't have the capability return to its former state, one western diplomat said.
As another western diplomat expressed, Hussien Iyded was brought to such a failure because he committed mistakes after mistakes and had a clash with his neighboring Ethiopia, so he has what so ever capability to control the former strategic areas, but in Somalia a person has to struggle un to his death, otherwise what awaits Hussien Iyded is death, the German Radio reported quoting him.
Iydid who has recently gone to Egypt, Libya and Eritrea but the reception he was given in all the places was cold, "what Hussien needs is to create peace with Ethiopia agreement with his clans," advised Libya's Gadafi, the news disclosed.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
Diplomatic effort Changed to Fear (?)
Mr. Seyoum gave the last warning at the eve of Christmas.
Isayas Afeworki disclosed that his troops won't move from Beademe.
Ethiopian Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Seyoum Mesfin gave a press statement on the eve of Christmas about the prevalent Ethiopian and Eritrean border issues to diplomats residing in Addis Ababa..
The speech he made in the Hilton hotel was more serious than the usual and hinted that from now on his government will use the last option-getting into war.
Mr. Seyoum Mesfin highly criticized especially the international community for soothing and consoling EPLF..
He also pointed out that the cause of this problem was that the international community couldn't call a spade a spade.
And this made EPLF continue in its arrogance, he said.
The limitless patience exhibited by Ethiopian government has been criticized by the people and army..
Especially the army who rose with indignation from every quarter is now feared that its boosted morale may gradually fade away..
The EPLF radio was repeatedly heard in its news last week the morale of the army is dying..
Moreover, the front is at present talking to various top ranking officials the army..
Although this fake interview which was said to take place was for propaganda, in actual fact, it may hurt the army who rose with boosted morale, as many would agree.    .
Many feared that the diplomatic effort that passed its limit may change to fear..
While preserving a country's sovereignty at any place and time is unquestionable, some say that EPRDF's softness was inappropriate and giving time for EPLF to buy time means it would be enable this force to strengthen in work force and ammunition..
This in turn would increase the upcoming sacrifice, they suggested..
In the mean time, Eritrean president Mr. Isayas Afeworki in his Christmas speech to the public made it clear that his troops would never leave Beademe or other occupations..
While exchanging threatening words have become customary in both sides, especially Eritrean President's conceited words still continue pouring.
Anyway, seven months have passed without knowing the exact date the war breaks nor when Ethiopia starts preserving her sovereignty.
Although it's difficult to say exactly where situations lead, the limitless patience exhibited on the part of Ethiopia has become contentious..
From Fiameta January 8, 1999
A Book that Introduces Ethiopian Sacred History was Published for the First Time
A new book that introduces and narrates one by one the Ethiopian historical places and Sacred History was published, it was disclosed.
This book that was published by Ethiopian Orthodox church possesses hundreds of the holy name of males and females.
The book that expressed their birth places and the places of the churches that were built by their names, was prepared by the Wise Likeberhanat Mekorewos whose work place is in the clergy as a Head of preaching the Gospel, it was proved.
The book consists of many extremely difficult things to believe.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
Jennifer and Reporter Encountered Opposition .
The effort that Jennifer Parmele who is known for her Pro-TPLF stand and former journalist of Washington post is making to get support from United Nations Science and culture Organization (UNESCO) for Reporter newspaper got opposition from EPRP;
As EPRDF farmed fake political organizations in the pretext of having multi-parties, Reporter newspaper is a "Trojan horse" of EPRDF who stood among the free press, said EPRP, and in a letter written to UNESCO on October 25, 1998 EPRP stated the Jennifer Parmeli who's pro EPRDF used to write unbalanced news while she was in Ethiopia and biased to wards the ruling party, and now her effort to rally support for a newspaper which in the pretext of the free press, is subsidized by the ruling party, made her stand obvious, criticized EPRP.
In the letter EPRP wrote to UNESCO, the editor-in-chief of Reporter, Amare Aregawi is a member of the ruling party, TPLF, and was a higher official of this government and he was the person who strongly argued that the press law which put many journalists behind bars is precise and without error, and for a newspaper which struggles for aborting the development of free press and execute governments aim EPRP continued that attempting to use Jennifer Parmeli to rally support from UNESCO is one of the methods employed to defraud the world community, and asked UNESCO not to be deceived by such an elusive mission;
It is known that Jennifer Parmeli whom Washington post dismissed is now trying to get residence permit in Ethiopia in the pretext of forming an organization which gives support to the free press by the name "Independent Press Agency" (Independent Press Agency);
In a response she gave to testify about Mr. Amare Aregawi, she said, "he used to report on the radio during the time of patriotic struggle, prepare the people for true struggle, after the victory left the party on his own will, stood alone for true free press, presents information based on truth, criticizes the government without fear," sources from the area disclosed; .
Some readers who evaluated the editor-in-chief of Reporter news paper, Amare Aragaw's former role and the content of the paper would agree with the idea EPRP wrote to UNESCO;
According to these people's disclosure, the newspaper is involved in indirectly declaring untrue the issues related to government that have been exposed by other free press, and the accusation of Tamerat was being continually reported as if it were not political, just as TPLF needed it to be portrayed, only the police is information was reported about the killings of Assefa Maru and three other individuals killed around Mekanisa, he declared untrue the news written about the patriarchs embezzlement, never repots on the burning issues of the country, especially about those journalists who are suffering from the tortures of prison, all these are given as evidences.
More than Ethiopia's issues, he gives coverage on issues related to Eritrea and Sudan and points out before hand what measures government would take, presents that the political mistake committed by EPRDF was not of policy but of implementation, all these made most people doubt whether the newspaper is free;
In a country where there are press who strive day in and day out and suffering from imprisonment and money punishment, the rally that was made to support this organization which didn't have pressure and didn't face any risk at all, has taken many by surprise.    .
From Tobia November 6, 1997
Editoria.
Does the Night fell on the regime
There are more than 20 internationally renown and respected human rights, conscience and press freedom keeping organizations..
These remotely situated parts of the world known Mr. Meles and his leadership comrades for they are institutions that shut when one human being, one journalist, a prisoner of conscience is killed in atrocity.
These organizations wrote several times to his Excellency Prime Minister to improve the human rights and handling of journalists.
They craved his sympathy; more than twenty Human Rights Organizations associations of journalists, even scientific research organization, starting from Ethiopia Human Rights Forum up to AMNESTY International, from Haiti up to El Salvador up to America, craved and beg our leaders so that the rights of citizens of Ethiopian are respected.
This regime seems to aggravate it conditions whenever it received a reminder to respect our rights to be human, freedom to be journalists.
Adds up the atrocity and injustice.
Performs its massacre in public.
It provokes imprisonment.
It considers it duty persecuting citizens.
The organization which closely followed this, eye witnessed and fairly evaluated situation, organization for keeping journalists' Right (        ) categorized Prime Minister Meles as one of the ten enemies of the press.
Although no one is pleased with this name, it is the right measures from reality point of view.
Because starting from him down to all officials there's no healthy outlook to the press; in exposing the widely spread mockery and violation of human rights with tangible evidence in Ethiopia, these human rights organizations are not alone..
The European Council which consists of sixteen members states repeatedly gave advice, request and warning..
Behind the warning the European council wrote to Mr. Meles, these are sixteen countries.
The council was obliged to send strong statement similar to that of Tobia and other free press because it calmly analyzed that the rights of Ethiopians have been violated while they should get legal protection.
Those who listened to only the people in power and used to say "EHRF is a political organization and needs political power", they are sharing the shout it makes for the respect of human rights, today an it's possible to say that, the struggle for right and freedom had moved one step a head..
No nation could be led up to the end by a blow of fist, butt of gun, bullet and bomb.
This kind of authoritarian strategy didn't serve fro long for anyone.
Instead, we know that from cruelty and unfair measure, rebellions are unfair measure, rebellions are created..
This regime came through rebelliousness and knows well about rebelliousness, since it realized what individuals do when they are mistreated, and it shouldn't have needed any reminder and push..
Preparing various fictitious stories to citizens, putting journalists behind bars, opening a propaganda campaign on the free press, however, aggravates the problem and confrontation, but doesn't bring about any gain.
Recently, including the newspaper "Ethiop", few free press journalists were put behind bars by police without having the court's order to capture them..
Side by side to this government and party newspapers opened up late-propaganda on the free press.
The newspaper of EPRDF named "Revolutionary Democracy" (No.220, October 1..7/1998) told us citing names that Ruhama, Tomar, Andinet, Tobia and other which it said are related to the newspapers, are the people affiliated to the Dergue regime..
Since the people have conscience that weighs the personality and work of all these people, there's no need to go a long way to tell them.
Imprisonment or giving names wouldn't solve this problem.
Disseminating Cadres all over the world spread lies, and to confuse propagating numerous lies with the monopolized mass media doesn't bear fruit.
The remedy is not killing and putting behind bars, sending people to exile and confusion through the media but respecting people's rights and freedom.
Since it doesn't accept this, we realize that the right fell up on the regime..
From Tobia October 9, 1997
Ethiopian Democratic Party was Established in Addis Ababa!
It's expected to give statement recently
Under the basic motto, "People's Democratic Order for Ethiopia" with out any difference of race, color, religion and language, where all Ethiopians participate, a political party by the name "Ethiopian Democratic Party" got legality and started activities.
As it was possible to understand from the party's political program, "the incumbent party holding fast its racial politics with its inflexible stand" couldn't soften and instead of seeing the country's downfall sitting in the bush, the party was established, in the hope of using the small opportunity it has and peacefully expressing ideas.
"In order to skim the enemy cloud hanging on our country and to curb the ongoing journey of failure, organizing and leading so that it plays a prominent role" explains EDP and for this it calls for all Ethiopian people to be on his side, in it program."
In relation to the establishment of this party, the Fiameta newspaper asked the founders of this organization and they said, "At a time when all opposition parties which are abroad as well as those in the country, failing to carryout the historical responsibility they were entrusted by the people, and protesting against each other in minor differences, using the same opportunity the incumbent party unfolds and rising to struggle peacefully, from the stand point of EPRDF's malicious behavior is considered as a great courage and though there's no doubt that this presupposes great sacrifice, claiming to win the incumbent party, holding the public this by itself is to be considered as victory..
Those who are abroad and opposition parties by themselves rather than expecting sympathy putting in place preconditions, it would be better to boldly get in to the country, living the life of the public, tasting the good and bad, coordinating and making the public struggle gripping the throat of the incumbent party, giving way to the death of political refugee," that would be better, they disclosed.
On the other hand, the Ethiopian Democratic Party (EDP) would introduce its aim and program to the public and whether it would participate in the next election it's expected to give statements.
Fiameta newspaper would present EDP's program continuously as from the next edition on wards.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
Meeting of Ethio-Eritrean Border and Restitution Commission Held in Hei.
According to the peace agreement signed between Ethiopia and Eritrea meeting of border and restitution commissions held in Heig, Holland's capital on March 25 and 26 2001, Foreign Affairs Ministery announced..
In the statement given to (Ethiopian News Agency) ENA yesterday evening, the Border commission in its meeting exchange ideas and gave reminder on the disciplinary procedures the commission would abide by, the system of resolving oppositions on judges, financial administration, as well as on presentation of applications and time-limit.
This meeting decided that the first meeting of the commission with completed members to be held in May, it disclosed..
Similarly, the Restitution Commission discussed on the disciplinary and administrative issues and passed on reminder, informed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the office of International permanent peace-making court decided to use the members of the commission as secretaries, it also disclosed..
The ministry disclosed that the agreement signed between Ethiopia and Eritrea on December 11, 2001 decreed by-law that the two commissions which look in to issues of border and restitution be formed.
The Border and Restitution commission are formed by assigning 2 members form each countries, Ethiopia and Eritrea, and by the presidents of the commission that are elected by the 4 judges and accordingly commissioners were assigned from both sides and they each close their presidents and the commission is more or less in formation, it was pointed out. .
Since commissioners who serve in either Border or Restitution Commission are assigned by any of them sides, they have the responsibility of being objective and fair, there is a working procedure to oppose if one judge may be thought to have been prejudiced or impartial towards the other, and on the side of Ethiopia there's opposition on the two commissioners Eritrea brought and similar opposition was raised on the side of Eritrea..
However, since the expression of opposition on both sides would disallow the commission to look into administrative and disciplinary issues, the meetings were not conducted for two days.
Even though the commission members faced oppositions and have weakened authority to pall decisions, not only could they give reminders on necessary and appropriate issues, but could make important and constructive idea exchanges, the ministry disclosed.  .
The ministry also disclosed that in the meeting Ethiopian and Eritrean governments' consultants and international lawyers participated.
From Addis Zemen March 30, 2001
Ethiopia is punished by CAF; Today She Plays Against south Africa
It is to be recalled that our country, after twenty-five years, had the opportunity to host a great continental championship, which was considered to be good news and the games were opened with colorful ceremonies and has been continuing for a week more or less splendidly.
Yet, in the 5 games that have been conducted up to Saturday, many trespasses have been observed in Judgments of referees, leadership, provision of information, security and stewardship as well as in principles of sport discipline..
The Cameroonian and Egyptian players who have no respect to the sport spectators in their complete libertine and disgusting acts made one think they had "some support at the back".
It's known that CAF president Isa Hayatu is Cameroonian while Mustefa Kemal, the secretary is Egyptian..
On Wednesday just because the spectators expressed their opposition against Cameroonian players who used excessive force in their playing and showed conceit, the Cameroonian players insulted them in a libertine and disrespectful manner as they headed towards their wearing rooms..
Similarly the Egyptians, just because the referee gave a free kick to Ethiopia, troubled, admonished and spat on her, displaying their indecency publicly..
Above all, CAF general secretary Mustefa Kemal not only by slapping the Nigerian referee expressed his inducement support to the Egyptians, but also in the continuing games he was doing whatever he wishes, which made supporters furious..
As if these were not sufficient, last Saturday the two troublesome and quarrelsome of the championship, in revenge to the spectators' opposition and to disqualify Ethiopia and South Africa form championship they played below capacity out of sport discipline, which saddened the sport family; it made them furious.        .
As the international media and several observers agreed the agreed the disrupted match between Cameroon and Egypt showed their contempt to the spectators who paid their money to enter the stadium as well as the million people at home who were following the games.
The referee of the game had stopped the match 25 minutes after the game started due to the observable below the potential play..
Afterwards, including CAF Vice President, Farah Adon, the referees and observant stopped the game and told them Cameroonian and Egyptian players to amend their playing, they continued their indecent acts "relying on their people in CAF".
The spectators who saw these expressed their opposition in different ways and showed their position by throwing plastics, giving their backs, and asking to stop the match.
In the mean time after they expressed their regret through songs, "why don't you rise, why don't you rise, did you forget this flag is yours, "Hey, you brave, there's no melancholy during time of revolution" and so on, the spectators got in to the soccer field, took out the flag post at corner lines, and chased the players with different things, and kicked them, loosing their patience..
Moreover spectators, who were following the game through televisions at home, came to the stadium and damaged various properties..
Since the game couldn't continue due to this reason, it was made to stop and, on the morrow, including CAF president, Isa Hayatu, CAF authorities had a meeting at Sheraton Addis, CAF's temporary office, and pass on various decisions..
Based on this, it was decided that Ethiopian Football Federation be fined 2000 American dollar while the teams who played below their potentials are to play again at Abebe Bikila Stadium just to see the winner, Ethiopian and South African teams are to play at the same time at 4 o'clock in Addis Ababa Stadium..
In related news, one individual expressed his willingness to pay the 2000 dollar fine.
Accordingly, in order to pass for the next round, Ethiopian or South African teams should necessarily win by more than 2 goals.
In the mean time, yesterday from group one Ghana and Mali finished with 1 – 1 draw, while Angola beat Nigeria 2 – 0, passing for semi-final..
Accordingly, Ghana and Angola made sure they passed for World Youth cup.
It's disclosed that if in today's match Egypt and Cameroon defeat on another and Ethiopian youth team wins by more than 2 goals, it will get a chance of passing for semi final and World Youth Cup.  .
From Addis Zemen March 26, 2001
Kofi Anan Appoint a Deputy special messenger for Ethio-Eritrea case..
Kofi Anan, United Nations Secretary General appointed Jol Odiche of Benin as a deputy special messenger for Ethio-Eritrea case.
The United Nations disclosed the day before yesterday that Ambassador Odiche have been Benin's permanent representative for the United Nations since September, 1999, and in the Security Council he worked as representative for his country.
Previously the ambassador served his country at various capacities.
The report explained that he also worked as president of coordination office for developing countries.
Since Mr. Odiche graduated from a French Orleans University in international law in 1997, he has been working as an associate in Benin's Foreign Service Office..
Odiche has got a master's degree in diplomacy from public administration Institute in Paris.
Anan's deputy special messenger is said to start work after a week..
From Addis Zemen May 27, 200.
The AAPO Europe Coordination Board Released a Statement.
It Asked to step down NekeaTibeb from its Position
In Europe, Belgium at Luven town, after having met for two days from August 20 up to 22, the AAPO, Europe coordination Board released a statement and in it asked the acting president of AAPO, General Nekatibeb Bekele to urgently step down form the responsible position he occupied.
Moreover, it strongly opposed the preparation AAPO is making to participate in the 2000 TPLF election.
Since AAPO, above all, held as an aim Ethiopian ness, sovereignty and Unity every Ethiopian should not be a refugee and a stranger in its own country having been divided by race, language, religion and culture alone, so in opposing this it had gotten support and trust, the statement expressed.
The statement in relation to this said that TPLF/EPRDF which was frightened by AAPO's aim and belief started to repress its struggle and conduct anti-AAPO activities even from the outset.
Starting from putting behind bars and torturing until death, the founder and leader of AAPO, a great asset of Ethiopia, Professor Asrat Woldeyes, accusing him of factitious crime up to closing AAPO's office in every quarter, stealing documents, kidnapping and killing leaders, members and supporters, and putting behind brs the rest is doing great harm, the statement mentioned.
With regards to its working procedure General NekeaTibeb, the first deputy President, changed its direction of struggle, made it possible so that the leadership of TPLF would involve the other way round, the statement described and they tried to change his situation but they couldn't do so, it pointed out.
From now on, in order to lead the organization inline with the designed aim, it had released a nine-point statement of standpoint at the end of the meeting.
The statement of the standpoint is as follows.
1) In order for AAPO to carry out the aim of the struggle and the entrusted responsibility, effort       should be make to substitute loyal and ones who are efficient in leadership permanent       executive members of the central committee through democratic ways;.
2) In order to substitute the leadership with high caliber efficient bodies, the National Assembly       should be called urgently and a meeting that includes seen-off members, members and       supporters should be held in a short time and election should be conducted.
3) The resolutions passed in the seventh meeting held from July 1-4, the North American support       Organizations should be practical;
4) His Excellency General Nekeatibeb Bekele should immediately step down from his       responsibility, before the election taking into account his internal relationship with TPLF and             his determination to be elected for the upcoming election.
The statement in addition asked all members to facilitate organizational and alternative strategies of struggle rather than preparing to participate in the upcoming election and carry out this historical duty by accepting this standpoint the Europe AAPO members coordination board released. .
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
Message of Fiamet.
Be careful to those whose Arrows are Directed towards Fiameta
Since the establishment of this news paper we have paid more or less unnecessary and unwanted sacrifices to reach today..
We saw a lot of individuals in the yesteryear; observed many people.
Even today..
Those idle people who are green with satanic envy and their fellow friends are still laying obstacle on our path.
Overcoming all these obstacles with tolerance and discipline is troubling their conscience.
Moreover, the revealed wild characteristics of them enabled us to see who they are. .
Let our message reach those idle individuals to think like men.
While running here and there to wipe out Fiameta, we fear they might perish themselves..
Our today's message and advice to them is to put back the weak envious arrows they directed towards us..
Otherwise...
From Fiameta October 21, 1998
Message of Fiameta!.
We have not Completed, Rather just started our Race!
A great lesson this generation can pass on to the next is the freedom of press..
Leaving the Freedom of speech and writing that was brought forth through great Sacrifice is certainly unthinkable..
Staying up to the end with this right which was found through the sacrifice of free press journalists is mandatory..
Since the historical responsibility of this generation is to hold fast and sustain press freedom through struggle, imprisonment, and suffering and even through sacrifice, that's why it is now meeting face to face with truth..
Indeed, there are sides who couldn't admit this hard truth and wanted to hurt the free press journalist, they never leave no store unturned to harm them..
The free press journalist, on the other hand, having over come all these obstacles reached today..
Therefore, the wealth of this generation is these journalists and newspapers who are unique children of Ethiopia.
The freedom of writing that this generation cleanses through struggle has to pall on victoriously to the next generation..
And for these we have not completed, rather just started the race..
In order to save journalists form being beaten and thrown by the political storm, it's the responsibility of the generation to do its level best today and only to day by hook or by crook..
Let everyone does his own share..
The ship that aboard free press journalists continues her journey in the midst of cloudburst and blizzard..
Our wish is to see this historic journey completed, and in another age, in another time putting her anchor peacefully on to the land..
We have strong belief that this generation would pall on up to the last victorious chapter, being aware of its historic duty..
From Fiameta April 29, 1998      .
The Belgium Government Writes off Debts
Out of the 20.3 millioin American dollars Ethiopia borrowed from Belgium government, 19.3 million dollars debt has been written off. .
In order to help Ethiopia's effort to reduce proverty, the writing off agreement was signed yesterday in Adds Abab between the Finance Minister, Mr. Sufiyan Ahmed and Belgium's Development and Cooperation Minister, Ede Bawtamans.
95 percent of the debt which was written off would greatly help especially for the sectors like health, education, road and area development which the country focused, it was disclosed.
From Addis Zemen April 12, 2001
The First Private University is to be Established in Ethiopia
Investors and representatives of Universities of United States took the primary step to establish the first private University in Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia on October 3, 1998, pointed out the information American embassy in Ethiopia sent.
The information from the embassy disclosed that the investors and representatives together with invited guests visited the building site of the university which is to be established on the northern part of Addis Ababa.
The invited guests observed the signed treaty that was made between the founder investors and California University (Stanislaws).
The agreement is to cooperatively establish a university for Ethiopia and surrounding countries that followed the general model of California University, and enables to give an American educational methodology.
The new university that is hoped to be opened in 1998 would design its first program to fulfill the demand of the country in business administration, accounting and finance fields, the information uncovered.
Apart from the regular degree program, the university would prepare knowledge-building certificate program for professionals at work..
From AddisZemen October 9, 1997
SPDO Dismissed Five Higher bodies Including Abate Kisho from its Central committee..
The Sidama People Democratic Organization (SPDO) ousted five higher bodies including Abate Kisho for it said they displayed inefficiency of leadership and ethical behavior..
The organization ousted Mr. Abate Kisho and the deputy chairman Mr. Biru Bale inclusive five leadership members as a measure to save the organization form the danger of deterioration, and after having wide evaluation session at Awassa town for 17 days.
These higher leadership members who have been ousted due to their inefficient leadership and ethical behavior would be accountable for all the wrong they committed in accordance to the government rule and regulation, the cadres and the leadership members disclosed in the statement they made official at the end of the evaluation session..
The individuals who were ousted from the central committee were said to abuse their power in selling and giving lands to their nears and dears, explained the statement..
Meddling in works of justice, troubling works and threatening judges, police officials and prosecutors in order to have their relatives work done through pressure, the reporter pointed out..
Besides, corrupting the government budget and properties, per-diem, procurement, bid and through other means establishing share companies in the names of their relatives, establishing coffee pulper industries and building up their own capitals, explained the leadership members and cadres, assigning their nears and dears who have no qualifications to key positions..
Moreover, through their relatives whom they assigned at toll stations, and finance offices in collaboration with merchants embezzled large amount of government money and constructed villas, business centers and just running their own selfish businesses, the leadership members and cadres disclosed in their final statements that was official..
When government salary was embezzled in the name of dead government individuals and fund allotted to Development Associations was deliberately directed to individuals benefit, these ousted leadership members gave their deaf ears out of the rule of law; and when the constitution of the country is violated and misused, doing great anti democratic deeds they were deliberately negligent, it was explained.
The leadership members and cadres agreed to curb corruption and anti democratic working ways and despotism which are impediments for the people's rapid economic development, and with the community's participation to make the recently coming district council election democratic..
Condemning the defected group form TPLF central committee, they disclosed that they would firmly struggle to strengthen SEPDF EPRDF..
From Addis Zemen June 15, 200.
Sudan Disclosed that U.S.A Warned she Would Attack Her Though Missiles
President Umer Al-Beshir, in front of many thousands of people who came out in protest, said that Washington sent a threatening message to Sudan stating that if United States Embassy is attacked anywhere, U.S. will retaliate with missile.
While United States office of the Foreign Secretariat considered it unremarkable, Al-Beshir indicated that the message was sent to him through the heads of ex-Sudanese official.
Although the detail of the message was not mentioned, he surely stated that he would retaliate, the report from Cartoum stated.
We will wait for their second and third attack, but we work ever appeal to the Security Council..
We will use our right to retaliated.
Our retaliation will cause severe pain.
Said Beshir to this people.
When ex U.S Prosecutor general Ramse Klark who was in this public protest made a speech to the people, they were shouting Alah-Keber.
It was reported that Klark apologized the people for the missile attack, demanded compensation for the demolished industry, asked U.S to lift the ban on Sudan and called for America not to support SPLA.
From Fiameta September 25,1998.
Message of Fiameta.
While the Leaders of EPLF Uttered War Boasts, Ours.
It has been months since the Ethiopian border has been violently crossed, lands taken and has been under the control of strange EPLF aggressors.
The people in that area who have been beaten by enemy hands, their humanity and citizenship humiliated, are shouting.
Although several efforts have been made to negotiate and intermediate, the EPLF leader responded negatively to the presented resolutions.
Even if her sun stops shining once we seize the land, we won't leave" told us the authoritarian Isayas even at the outset.
But it's not known what happened to us, it seems that we're looking forward to duck's egg under the lap of a snake, and expecting that they would abide by peace, we have had extreme patience; we're swimming in a limitless ocean.
In their side, very recently alone the president one time, at another time the office of foreign affairs, on the other hand, the Eritrean mass media assured in black and white that they won't take leave from the occupied Ethiopian territory.
They are also telling us they would win if war broke.
They are preaching that they have an organized force.
So, what are ours doing? When is people's questions pet responses?
From Fiameta September 25, 1998.
The Discussion Between Addis Ababa University Students and the Minister of Education was Adjourned without fruitful results.
The discussion held between the minister of Education and the university students in order to seek remedy for the oppositions student started claiming that their rights have not been respected, was adjourned without coming to fruition.
The discussion which was expected to seek remedy as well as answers for the questions university students raised recently claiming that their rights were not respected was adjourned because among the queries was one that states police forces should go out from the campus, and agreement could not be reached with regards to that issue..
In the discussion held at x-mas hall, the students expressed that they wanted the police to go out of the campus with out any condition, while the minister agreed with the question in principle she said that it may take some time to pull out these forces and it would be difficult to give time frame as to when they would go out.
The minister, Mr. Genet Zewdie, explained the necessity of security forces in the campus for the properties as well as students security and she reminded that if police forces are pulled out today, since these are no prepared force that could substitute it, the campus would be without security, hence, until control and training process is carried out, the police force has to stay in the security job..
Mrs. Genet who reminded that the question of continuing the publication of students' council's gazette, respecting the rights of students to gather and discuss, speak have got remedies in Thursday's meeting, the issue with regards to a change of university administration, she said she would study the proposed idea..
Many questions were raised on the part of the students, among which the main one is to make the police force leave the campus as soon as possible.
They earnestly asked that the police force leaders who beat students should be brought to justice and for a change of the university administration.
They insisted up on an urgent response for the questions they asked but it this doesn't happen they promised not to start classes and continue their opposition, up on which the representative of students was obliged to send the minister off.
In the speech the representatives made to the students just before this meeting they told that among the students who were beaten by the police forces two of them are still under treatment in the hospital while the rest returned home after the treatment..
The 46 students who were under police arrest were released that day in accordance with the discussion with the minister..
In the mean time, the ministry of Education announced that the Addis Ababa University students who stopped regular classes since lest week, have been decided to continue their regular classes as of today April 17, 2001..
In a statement the office of the Ministry sent to ENA yesterday evening, students who do not want to continue their classes would be considered leaving on their own starting from April 18, 2001, noon, and without affecting the rights of others should leave the university campus, fulfilling the formalities of withdrawal of the university..
Even if the students do not fulfill the formalities of the university, as long as they are not present in their classes it would be considered as if they left on their own will, the statement reminded..
Those students who left in this way would not be given any kind of readmission, the ministry also disclosed.
Any kind of activity that would hinder the teaching learning process should not be carried out and in order to avoid difficulties and acts perpetrated on students who are interested in learning, legal measures would be taken, the ministry warned.
The ministry, reminding that the Addis Ababa University has stopped classes since last Tuesday April 10, 2001, expressed that it has given responses to questions raised by students by difference levels of the ministry of education..
The attempt the university authorities made to talk to the students on April 10, 2001 became fruitless due to the students' disobedience to do so.
Based on the students' request, to talk to the minister of education, discussion was held on April 11, 2001 on the questions raised by the students, and statements were given by the university administration by the police with regards to the measures taken by the police that day.
Based on the agreement reached with the representative of students, the minister of education discussed the details with students on April 12, 2001, it was explained..
Addis Zemen April 17, 2001
Jiji and Aster Awoke Squabbled over the Son of General Mengistu Neway
The recently becoming popular Jiji and the legendary singer aster Awoke squabbled over the son of General Mengistu Neway, a report that reached US from America disclosed.
According to the report after Aster Awoke returned from Addis Ababa presenting a concert, she had a dispute with her lover, son of General Mengistu Neway, it reminded.
While Jiji and Aster were performing their songs one after the other in the same concert Jiji got a great applause and admiration in the part Aster was supposed to show, which made aster Furious.
In a European concert that was led by the General's son Neway Mengistu Neway who was her lover and Aster Awoke, Jiji was a hired singer.
For this accidental program detachment, the other person whom Aster considered accountable was the General's son, Neway Mengistu, so after they finished the concert, Aster furiously told Jiji that from then on they wouldn't work together, and commanded her to get out of the dressing room, when Neway Mengistu intervened between them to calm down the situation, but since he couldn't said he would also go out with Jiji, debt the dressing room and went out with Jiji.
When Aster observed this completely unexpected situation started to study their relationship, she found out that they had an affair apart from purely business relations.
It was then Naway and Aster's love affair came to an end.
It was after this that Jiji being with Neway Mengistu started making an effort to release her new album.
In her new album, the song under the title Abo shemane, the person whom she sings to as he's mine he's mine is for Neway, the idea individuals who know them both closely in America reported to our newspaper.
Jiji's album was sold in America in cassettes and CD while in Addis Ababa she had no agent so the cassette was widely illegally sold with copies of her photo attached to it, the report reached us disclosed.
Jiji's album in cassette as well as CD was released by Neway Mengistu's support one month before Aster released hers.
In this competition, Jiji couldn't get legal agent in Addis, our sources from America disclosed.  .
From Fiameta June 30, 1999
Why has the Conspiracy Strengthened on Kibur Gena
Mr. Kebur Gena, who was elected with a high number of votes in the 20th plenary session of the General assembly of Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce, held on February 28, 1998 resigned on July 8, after having undergone 6 consecutive evaluating sessions, it was disclosed.
They situation made the business community and the members of the chamber very sorrowful..
Mr. Aschalew Haile who was the new elect deputy president of the Chamber accused him by saying Mr. Kebur Gena, committed authoritarian leadership and has no leadership efficiency..
The new deputy president was not only elected democratically by the business community but also had put great pressure on the coup de tat of the leadership, internal sources indicated..
According to these sources, "The rules and regulations of the chamber or other related rules states that when the president resigns the deputy takes his position; but this didn't happen, they said.      .
These internal sources stated that Mr. Kibur Gena was elected with the presedent of General Assembly and members of the chamber, and so is when he leaves or resigns, but this didn't happen..
The members of the chamber elected Kebur Gena as their president and not Aschalew Haile, they said..
Nothing was said as to why the deputy of Mr. Kebur Gena, Mr. Tekla Biru, who was elected by the business community, substituted him..
While Mr. Kebur Gena was in America recently, he expressed about the prevalent condition our country is in to foreign business community, but he said this war can't prevent us from investing, inviting foreign investors, it's to be recalled..
He has done a lot of work for the chamber of commerce since his election..
He had supported the business community to use the necessary e-mail and internet services..
It's to be recalled that Mr. Kibur Gena completed his education in America and he used to work in ECA. .
After wards he produced his own software's and has been doing business activities..
Leave alone to indulge in corruption, Mr. Kebur Gena has been opposing those who are deeply involved in it..
The plenary session of the General Assembly is held every two years, the election for the next and 21st presidential and Board members of Directors is expected to be held in the coming February 1999..
The new elects who contributed for the deposition of Kebur Gena from his post would be leading the chamber of commerce for the coming six months..
After 6 months, the elections for the General Assembly of chamber of commerce would be held, let us stay alive till them.     .
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
The Curtain of the Embarrassing scene is Uncovered!
Prisoners who were about to testify against Dr. Taye on December 11, 1998 returned, receiving an appointment for January 21 as Judges who were to see Dr. Taye, Mr. Gebretsadik Hailemariam and Mr. Kebede Desta's case didn't appear at the tribunal..
On January 21, 1998 Dr. Taye and the rest came from correction House at 9:00.
The judges appeared before the court session at 10:20..
That day the individual, who appeared to testify, Major Moges Assefa told the court the severe beating and whipping he underwent.
Major Moges Assefa while giving his words to the court, told the unexplainable suffering he was undergoing for they claimed he knew that Dr. Taye Woldesemayat, Mr. Gebretasadik Haile Mariam and Mr. Kebede Desta run illegal political organization that plot to forcefully oust the government..
That his suffering was immense, and that he used to be a member of ex-army and completed his rehab program and has been working in a farmland, and civilians kidnapped him without any reason and was thrown to a dark room an as a result of harsh beating his tooth was pulled out..
Then this wiper tied him with a rope, turned him upside down and beat him, underwent the suffering of electric shock; they told him to testify against Dr. Taye and if he does so, they told him that he would be free, this he didn't wide if form the court..
In addition, he told that when he was first caught a citizen wrist watch which was bought for 440 Birr and two cans of onion best seed which was bought for 220 Birr and cash which was in his pocket was taken from him..
All these brigandage and robbery was conducted so as to forcefully make him act in the drama they perpetrated and oblige him to present false information to the Ethiopian people, and they told him if he does so, they will release him freely..
If you express that Dr. Taye and the other are illegal leaders of AAPO political organization in front of a television camera and teach the public, in which case I didn't want to mislead the Ethiopian people so I was not willing..
In addition, he told that he met the young boy Yoseph Biresaw who testified on the radio and television in the prison, and Yoseph had severely been beaten and told him that he was given a script to study against Dr. Taye and the rest, which is going to be acted on the TV. .
At last, he asked the court to show the serious bodily harm, but the court said "it doesn't have any use to show this now..
But next time he was given an appointment for March 5 to show and his broken tooth, too; his broken arm and whippin.
Until this report is presented, Major Moges' family had no idea where the individual is and in what kind of situation he's found..
From Fiameta January 28, 1998
The 3rd Plenary Session of Sympathizer Groups of Ethiopia, AAPO and Professor Asrat was Conducted.
Leader of the right flank, Nekatibeb's leadership was also annulled.
Sympathizer groups of Ethiopia, AAPO and Professor Asrat met on October 21, 2001 in Addis Ababa at Girar Hotel and after having listened to and investigated the report of the executive committee of the board, have passed a resolution, the statement pointed out..
The statement pointed out that after AAPO's leader His Excellency Professor Asrat Woildeyes died, the central committee didn't call an urgent national assembly to assign someone in his place, so whatever tasks that have been done since then are illegal for that the organization was with out a leader.
Moreover, when it was asked to call national assembly that would enable to elect an efficient and able leader and evaluate the organization's weak and strong sides, and take measures of amendment, Nekatibeb defended and became an impediment by staying long enough in power, was mentioned in the report.
Moreover it condemned the right flank leader Nekatibeb's act of dismantling the Moresh Musical band and assigning even in the central committee of Addis Ababa council proponents of TPLF, paving the way for the destruction of he organization..
In addition since he used to organization's income which was gotten from various sources regardless of the finance rules and regulation, and objected the investigation of it by external auditors; dismissed the support giving committees that are contributing a lot.
Besides, the sympathizer groups of Ethiopia, AAPO and Professor Asrat passed a five point stand point and resolution at the end of the meeting, the first of which was unanimously condemning leader of the right flank's non-disciplined leadership and until the national assembly is called up on and decide, his leadership in AAPO was lifted.
Secondly,1)Mr. Admasu Mekete 2)Mr. Sahle Seifu whom the assembly considered close collaborators of him dismissed them from any activity of the party in order to stop their destructive working procedure and decided to bring them to justice before the assembly.
3In order to maintain and ensure the legal existence of AAPO and its acceptability and honor among the people, the executive committee of sympathizers would call up on a general meeting of members, supporters, followers and pass a resolution about the issues discussed in the assembly.
Look at the full text of the stand pointed and resolution of the Assembly of sympathizers groups of Ethiopia, AAPO and Professor Asrat passed. .
From Fiameta October 27, 1999
There's no Arm that Bends for EPLF!
In any yardstick, the invasion committed which results from EPLF's conceit and contempt is not to be supported..
EPLF, whose basic characteristics are arrogance and conceit, has long ago not only an imbalanced but narrow out look on Ethiopians..
While it is not possible to avoid these contempt that has been impregnated for long in the conscience with dialogue and negotiation, it has become timely to talk to them with the language they understand.
A measure that is taken for the sake of Ethiopian dignity would enable one to receive appreciation in the eyes of history and generation.
Therefore, there's no arm that bends for EPLF..
This was what we used to say, and the word we repeat today..
"Preparedness is for a patriot, Victory is God's"
From Fiameta June 3, 1998      .
The Inflation on Prices of Medicine Embittered Peopl.
The individuals who opened and sell medicines in private drug stores (pharmacy) in Oromia and Southern people Administrative Regions at Shone, Durame, Alaba, Ade, Shashemene, Arsi Negele and Ziway towns, embittered people by inflating the price of medicines as they wished starting from anty headache pills up ot syrups, the reporter who sent us this from the places pointed out.
The Tobia reports who are in the region spoke to the individuals who queued at the doors of the pharmacies reported that it was government clinics, health centers and hospitals that facilitated for this pillage.
After patients were diagnosed, they were told, "we don't have this medicine, buy from outside," so they were obliged to buy expensively.
Our reporter asked some of the owners of private pharmacies about the issue and they explained that apart from the tax they pay, they are asked to pay additional money while going to their respective sub-regions at Tikur Wuha toll station in the name of "Ethiopian Transitional government" work and city Development ministry, Sidama Awasa Miscellaneous Tax, there are people who collect tax for the items we bought with legal receipt from Awasa Medicine Distributing Organization, so in order to compensate that the added price on medicines, they explained to him. .
From Tobia October 2, 1997
Editoria.
Disrespect and Mockery in Judicatur.
In the words of what people of law tell us, in the countries where thrones of democracy reigns and countries where democracy took a royal seat, judicature is precious.
If the citizen is done wrong, if its rights is taken out of the law and order he would go to the order of judicature.
Indeed, all judgments can not necessarily be mentioned as fair.
Because fairness means right judicature while judgment is a decision to be taken based on presented evidence.
Therefore, the given judgment could be affected by officials of the railing party or a covered evidence presented by a flatterer lawyer..
The judiciary court that is established in any dictatorial regime can not be said to be free from political influence.
The familiarization and multitudinous of decisions that smell government and which are taken to be instrumental to the political aim make people not to put faith fully in the supremacy of law..
One can see the outlook of people on the judiciary system at present.
As Mr. Meles witnessed earlier, in this country most legislative bodies who said they took care of justice sell justice..
The ex-minister of justice (In actual fact the minister of justice) said this age cannot be the golden age of justice.
Indeed, it's, as Mr. Meles liked to prove to us a time where "justice is suppressed and mocked at."
Mentioning very few points as reasons alone may give the answer.
First, people of law who had skill, capability and experience had gone out.
Second, those who liked friendship with the government, who judge in accord with the weather condition, dominated the scene of selling justice..
Third it's difficult to say there is any work done with conscience and in respect to the law..
Justice by itself makes you erroneous.
It's possible to widely see the details in this way.
In our belief, the very first reason is since the regime doesn't have quality and clarity, thinking of justice by itself makes you erroneous..
As everything has become shaky from its basement!
From what we read on papers that the government led parties publish, with regards to major bodies that are clad red to sell justice, there are confusion and disagreement.
One official has filled its throne, with full of relatives and families, according to the news we found from other publication..
If this is really true, this by itself is an act of mocking at justice.
Therefore, it's undisputable that there is a lot of damage in the area of justice.
While what Mr. Meles said was all right, it is to be underscored that the judgments displayed by these court sessions and judges lacked Justice..
Especially those political oppositions group leaders who are said to be prisoners of conscience could be seen as victims of these people's judgments.
People of law say "Delayed justice is injustice".
People are suffering behind bars for the last six years without being changed, and even if changes are put against them, the court proceedings are delayed for one reason or another.
The cases of individuals suspected of the red terror who came from the Amhara region and the sources of Christianity, are going to be seen in after six years in 1998.
These people, if found not guilty after their cases are seen in the court, could be sent out by saying to them "you are free to go".
While for one region school of different levels, health institutions, roads, factories etc. are planned and established for the past six years, for the unfortunate (shall we say for the one who didn't struggle?) Prisons have been formed here and there.
They have become full of prisoners..
Although the number of prisoners is unknown, it could be generally estimated in thousands.
All these are proofs for the remoteness of justice, demolition of equality are seen day after day.
While the working procedure of judiciary system in this country is becoming pensive and controversial, a question has been raised by TPLF/EPRDF to Canada, United States, some African countries and Europe.
The question was to be handed over those individuals, who used to work with the previous dergue regime and now living as political refugees, getting citizenship and in working terms in these countries..
What justice have the suspected individuals who are imprisoned got.
How many of them have got a chance to defend their cases in the court?
Hence, these countries need to seriously ask the lack of justice, suppression of individual rights, delayed justice, etc, when taking in to consideration the question they were asked.
On the other hand legally appropriate institutions such as EHRC, Lawyers' Association, Journalists' Association and other legally appropriate groups and opposition forces should intensify their struggles so that an order of justice rules over and for fair judicature.
The people should no more be convenient for a government that comes with disrespect and mockery in justice and judicature..
From Tobia September 4, 1997
Democratic Order Through our Struggl.
In a democratic government structure it is not without any reason that government work departments such as legislative body or lawmaker, court of law and interpreter of the law are formed. .
The purpose of making one control the other and maintaining the balance in government working procedure and leadership is to curb the strength and pressure of especially legislator who holds in his hands the finance and military force which can be out of control and dominate the public.
The experienced democratic countries use this government method of working procedure as a mechanism of controlling and maintaining balance.
In our age, this tripartite government working procedure, the "fourth force" which is the free press added, would make government and officials to be governed by the laws previously drawn upon by the legislative body, so that there won't be government tasks that are done in obscurity and behind the curtain, for the free press follows and makes it public; if government officials commit any transgression out of the drawn up legislation and the authority they have, there's order in place that could bring them to justice..
When we look at the situation in our county although for the consumption of propaganda when we look at the situation in our country, although for the consumption of propaganda there's a council elected by the people, a government which held power through public election, free judicature, free economy, free press, in actual practice the situation we see is a force which came to power through gun force, and carrying on its shoulder the ideology of revolutionary democracy and people who came from the same source..
In the name of free economy, the party's economic institutions are strengthened.
In the name of free press, the publications of the ruling party are disseminated, even with the support of government structures..
In the name of free election EPRDF controls the political forum all by itself..
This group controls council's legislative body..
Including the Prime Minister, cadres and members of the legislative body that have key and decisive role in government bureaucracy who are of the owner of the gun, in the council as "representatives of people" decide and have them decided through the legislative body..
This legislative body trains and recruits judges and proposes them for promotion and then sits in the council and approves their promotion.
So, is it possible to say the tripartite government bodies (the legislative body, interpreter of the law and court of law) are structured and the situation has been conducive for the development of democracy.
In a government regime, the order of judicature is structured and is said to be working independent free form influence and pressure, so that citizens in the relations they may have with one another and the government wouldn't receive unfair treatment, which is out of the legislation, and so that if this happens, they could go to the judicature and ask for justice..
In our situation, to take root such procedure, the government and official discharge their responsibilities based on the legislation and rules that had already passed on, and if they astray from this, to be accountable by the legislation, can be said there is no interest in this kind of working procedure..
And this didn't happen without a reason.
The ones who control the leadership of government used to claim that they were progressive leftist politicians, until international situations change they officially claim to be "followers of Albanian Communism", and when international situation changes, they wisely claim to be guided by "free economy" and entered the camp of the modernists..
Their ideology is still "free economy" which is soaked by leftist outlook.
In our belier, it is not possible to get democrats from Albanian Communists.
Indeed, that's why today the inclination of suppressing national reconciliation and following the way of confrontation is seen..
Let's mention the outlook of these people concerning human rights and law from one document of revolutionary democracy.
Making the constitution of the country form the outset assuring the majority of the people's rights.
Based on this, the different legislative decree that would pass on would become assuring the rights of the majority of the people, and should become impediment to acts of enemies.
The institutions that keep and assure the constitution and legislations would be structured in such a way as to keep people's rights..
When the ruling class attempted to curb the rights of the majority of the people, it's possible to punish and subdue each of their impeding actions.   .
When they violate the constitution and the legislation in the form of rebellion attempted to suppress the rights of the wide population, it is possible to incite the majority of the people and destroy them.
Based on the revolutionary democrats' (MLLT communists) elucidation, a law stands and serves not for all citizens but for "wide population or majority of the people". .
A law is controller of "the enemy of the wide population"
That's why to day oppositions are suffering behind bars, given names as committing different crimes.
It's based on this polity that the ones who have had different dreams about our country other than EPRDF's, especially TPLF's, are becoming targets of propaganda by being given various names.
As we repeatedly said free judicature is a forum that would enable them based on the legislation to request to return their rights when it's violated.
Today, a worker is sacked from his job in administrative decision; his rights are violated.
The case of a worker that should get a verdict in two months' time due to meetings of court of sessions would be postponed for years.
The district officials cold seal anyone's home.
They could throw away things from the house.
There's no speedy working to oppose the working procedure and seek justice from the judiciary order.
These days it's common saying "It's better to be accused than to accuse to seek justice," for people lose faith in the judiciary system.
The courts that were believed to be places of keeping rights have become locations where people suffer..
When salt becomes flavorless what would you use to sweet on sauce?
The situation seems that the legislative body prepares a way to violate civilian's rights as it wishes, take what ever illegal measures without accountability.
No other name could be given to the act of suffocating the curt of sessions where there's no shortage of legal professionals, other than mockery on the rights of people.
The only remedy to it is struggling to be subdued to the people's needs..
Let's bring democratic people's order through our struggle..
From Tobia October 2, 1997
In Order to Control the Malaria Epidemic that Widely Attacks People Establishing an Independent Office is crucial
Malaria Epidemic is now deep-rooted plague that takes a way many people's lives all over Ethiopia.
Although malaria has long started spreading not only in the lowlands but also in the highlands, including Addis Ababa, driving people out of jobs, no successful measures have been taken so far to control a deadly epidemic such as malaria..
It was age since malaria plague was known to be deadly and that's way an independent malaria eradication office was formed with its own professionals and budgets, and that's why malaria was never out of control during that time.
This was because controlling mechanisms such as spraying medicine in all potentially tsetse fly infestation areas..
Nonetheless, after some years the office was demolished and made to operate within the ministry of health, so no independent body could take responsibility to control malaria, and as a result, malaria epidemic has become threatening..
What has to be seen in relation to this is the fact that the medicine given to protect malaria is no more healing for it adapted to it, so it is questionable whether it's going to be eradicated with the newly arriving medicines..
Hence, before this plague goes out of control, we recommend that government give due attention to control and eradicate this unparalleled epidemic through establishing an independent office.      .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
The Preparation Completed to Fix the Statue that Returns from Rome
The preparation that has been underway to fix the statue that returns from Rome are completed, Tigray culture and Tourism and Information bureau disclosed.
Mr. Mesele Zeleke, the bureau Culture Department Head said that the when statue that was taken to Rome during the Italian aggression is returned, a well has been dug to put it next to the present standing obelisk.
Mentioning the information he has so far, the head of the bureau pointed to that in order to insure the strength of the base of the well which was dug French experts made a study and the earth has now been paved and it's possible to plant the obelisk when it comes.
The Emperor Yohannes International Airport which was established in Axum town and was started giving service recently where the obelisk comes by plane through civil Aviation, has been studied by experts as to whether the run way road could withstand and proved to be so, Mr. Mesele pointed out.
From Addis Zemen June 18, 2001 .
The International Refugee Organizations Disclosed that Ethiopians were Beaten During Their Stay in Lebanon
The recently returned 30 Ethiopians who went to Lebanon in search of jobs were beaten and were suffering during their stay their.
The French News Service quoting the organization reported the day before yesterday that 36 females who came to Addis Ababa from Lebanon underwent a first degree examination and it was proved that they were suffering from beating during their stay there.
According to the spokes person Mr. Jin Philip Chewziy, the returnees were beaten by Lebanon citizens and some of them had even bone fracture as well as one female was exposed to mental lunacy as result to injurious assault she befell her..
The females were from 20 to 30 years of age and except three of them all went from cities.
According to the organization's disclosure, at the moment there are approximately from 12 to 14 thousand Ethiopians in Lebanon as house maids.
The refugee organization said that it is working in collaboration with women's affairs Bureau so as to make the women not go out illegally from their country and to create awareness of the problem as well as help the returnees..
Only between 1997 up to 1999 alone 7 female deaths out of those who went out to different Arab countries were reported in Newspapers, and the organization also reminded that Ethiopian Television showed the picture of a female burned with acids and this is only the tip of the iceberg and in order to know more about the problem, continental study is necessary, it pointed out.
Similarly Kenyan and Eritrean Females are suffering, too, the messenger of the organization in Addis Ababa, Mera Seze, presented a written report, it disclosed. .
From Addis Zemen March 2, 2000.
EPRDF Disclosed that It's Prepared to Discuss with Ethiopian Democratic Forces Coalition about Election Issues
EPRDF accepted the question Ethiopian Democratic Forces Coalition presented to EPRDF regarding the upcoming election issues, and expressed its preparedness to discuss it's disclosed..
Abiyotawi Democracy" newspaper quoting office of EPRDF council reported yesterday that EPRDF is, on its part, completing expected preparations to work together with all political parties which are participating in the election process and work all political parties which are participating in the election process and work collaboratively in all tasks that strengthen the democratization of the election.
Based on he EPRDF council's decision, the Ethiopian Democratic Forces Coalition informed that it presented election ideas to Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, the organization's secretary general, in mid-may.
EPRDF expressed its readiness to discuss up on the ideas to the current chairman of the coalition, the newspaper reported.
In a related development, the EPRDF council in its recently conducted regular session disclosed that in order to make the third Nation-Wide election to be democratic, the front started activities that enabled it discharge its responsibilities.
The activity going on to ensure the eligibility of the election on the one hand, include facilitation of situations in which the people would register up to giving votes and make wide and active participation, while on the other hand, it includes to bring about a democratic election process working together with groups that participate in the election, the newspaper elaborated.
The council decided that EPRDF should make the necessary cooperation to bring about democratic election process, it disclosed.
Based on this, the newspaper mentioned that EPRDF started its activities to make all the people of the country play active and crucial role in all election activities from the beginning up to the end, the newspaper reported.
From Addis Zemen August 26, 2004
Mohammud Ahmed Returned disappointed from Canada and America
The renown artist Mohammud Ahmed who went to Canada and America on the occasion of New Year returned disappointed, it was disclosed..
Artist Mohammud Ahmed has been losing its fame from time to time for it was told that he gave support to EPRDF, was present in TPLF anniversary and after that, used by the TPLF/EPRDF to disseminate their propaganda in public Medias.
Formerly when he went to Europe, he encountered oppositions..
Before he went to Canada flyers were disseminated in Toronto.
These flyers reached Immigration and other authorities.
The title of the statement in the flying papers goes "A Betrayer wouldn't stand and sing in front of Nationalist Ethiopians.".
Moreover, he statement that disseminated in Canada – Toronto says "the once renown an applauded artist Mohammud Ahmed, has committed harm on the people's prestige belittled his custom and culture and collaborated with EPRDF and displeased his fellow people, and a betrayer, now collaborating with the EPFDF's ambassador in Toronto and enemies, of Ethiopia is going to prepare an entertainment evening, so all nationalist Ethiopians are called not to attend this betrayer's entertainment party, so that it becomes a fiasco.
on the other hand, Mohammud Ahmed renouncing this claim disseminated another flyer entitled "my fellow people who live in Canada."
In his message, Mohammud detailed stating "As every person has its own gift, I also have one skill given by God's grace, developed by efforts and enriched by the support of Ethiopian people, and unless to defame that, I, mohammud Ahmed is an artist who have neither education in politics, nor the skill, nor the interest and am neither supporter nor otherwise of any political party what so ever..
In response to this, "at one time we all know that you were a respected artist..
However, our complaints and grudges ...you publicly belittled our people's prestige custom and culture, and since you, collaborating with TPLF/EPRDF, saddened put to shame people... we're against you and those TPLF/EPRDF employees and betrayers whom you called friends, and your preparation to throw a concert, "and summarized, "ask Ethiopian people an apology in public". .
The concert of Mohamnmud Ahmed on the eve of Christmas concluded in Toronto with such a fiasco.   .
On the other hand, the concert that was to be conducted in northern America has faced similar kind to opposition, but this one was different in the sense that the oppositions went to the pertinent authority and file a charge against Mohammud claiming that he didn't pay the necessary tax to the American government during his previous concerts he conducted there, so his journey to the united states was hampered, the report reached us form north America disclosed. .
From Fiameta February 4, 1998
The Federal police Commission Disclosed that there was no damage on Human live
The Federal Police Crime Prevention Department, in the statement it released with regards to the clash between police and Addis Ababa University, reminded that these had been a little misunderstanding between Addis Ababa University students and the administration and the cause for this was the administration's negligence not to respond at the proper time and, on the other hand, the administrative issues in general are not treated in a proper manner, it said..
Although Police was aware of the requests to be put forwarded by the students before a week and reminded the administration to resolve, the university administration didn't respond as soon as it was aware of the problem..
Those who fear that the clash between Addis Ababa University Sidist kilo campus students and the police may aggravate and officials who coordinated the surrounding police force placed two police members in to the University premise, the statement disclosed.
When the Federal Police Crime prevention Department realized that the decision to send police members to the university premise was wrong and tried to remedy it, however, students took illegal measures and in order to resolve the situation, it took prevention measures, it disclosed.
In the measures taken, certain students had light injuries of beating and few students who were going about out of the normal procedure were for the time being were taken under arrest, and then released after wards when the situation calmed down. .
The statement proved that unlike some news organizations who exaggerated, these hasn't been any damage on lives of students, and also reminded students to put forward any question through legal procedures and expect responses, and for this they head to struggle, and underscored that participating in any other illegal measures wouldn't be supported.
And finally, it reminded that as seen occasionally, the activities that go on outside their premise, out of the normal legal procedures, doesn't have acceptability.
From Addis Zemen April 14, 2001
"The Clash Between Ethiopia and Eritrea is Said to Hamper Sudanese Peace Talks"
Sudanese Foreign Minister said that the clash between Ethiopia and Eritrea is going to impede the peace talks of Sudan and the rebel groups, which is expected to convene in Addis Ababa next August, reuter reported.
These Clashes have no use for the stability of the two countries as well as the regions," and the minister, further continued, "The only thing it may bring about is increasing the number of refugees," Ray-Al-Am reported.
Sudan has been the home for more than half a million refugees of Ethiopia and Eritrea who have been victims of the previous clashes, the report said.
Ethiopia and Eritrea are members of IGHAD who initiated the dialogue to stop the clashes between Sudan and the rebel group, who were fighting for 15 years.
Approximately 1.3 million people were killed since the new clash began in 1983.
The Christian-dominated but also pagan-inclusive southern people liberation army, SPLA, wants to be alienated form the Arab northerners and have an autonomous administration.
In May, during the peaceful talk in Kenya, the right for self-determination with the intervention of international inspection was granted to the region.
Although the two sides would convene a second-round dialogue in August in Ethiopia, the foreign minister doubts whether IGHAD could do this peace talk mainly due to the border clashes between the two sides.
It is regrettable that IGHAD couldn't resolve the conflict that surfaced between the tow member states," said foreign minister Ismael"While Kenyan foreign Minister, Bonaya Guwedana, pays official visit to Sudan on Saturday and "there will be a discussion on Ethiopia and Eritrean clashes, its impact on the stability and security of the region, and the peaceful dialogue between Sudan and rebel groups, which was expected to take place in Addis Ababa," told reuters..
Some Sudanese Officials would rather like the next round peaceful dialogue take in Nairobi or Kampala than Addis Ababa, reuters reported..
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
Bole Airport Widening Project work could be Delayed by Rain
The General Manger of sub-project work for Bole International Airport Widening work, Sunap Chang, in the statement he gave, stated that due to the possible heavy rain that could come in the future, the completion of the work could be delayed by certain months..
One of the works from the entire package, the runway toad building, was given last March 1997 to South Korean Kengnam construction..
The General Manager Chang pointed out that up to now his company has completed 40% of the construction and his plan is to complete all the work and hand it over next November 1999..
The entire construction work is expected to cost 200 million Birr.
According to some experts, the black cotton soil of the area has made the digging work difficult and created additional time delay..
The Addis Ababa International Airport building project general manager Mr. Hailu G/Mariam on his part disclosed that the project is to be done in three building packages and the debt money came from Africa Development Bank, Kuwait, OPAQUE, NORDIG development Bank and Bundia Arab Bank of dept..
Mr.Hailu pointed out that the first work package which is 3800 meters long run way was given to Kengnam organization, the second work-terminal building project to Saudi Arabian Mohammed Abdumonig Alkarafi and his sons, the third work-Navigation complimenting work has not yet been given. .
From Fiameta January 8, 1999
The Discontinued Addis Ababa-Gohatsion Transport service was made to commerce its service
The army that came from Liberia completing its duty of peace-keeping, the 107 major members who closed the road that takes to Gohatsion from Addis Ababa yesterday while asking the money government gave to be handed over to them, has now let the road commence its service due to the agreement they reached, the ministry of Defense disclosed.
In the statement it sent, the ministry of defense disclosed that the money that was given as a reward to the members of the army who efficiently completed their duties of government peace-keeping in various places, has been given timely and in a manner that would build their financial capacity.
The office of the ministry used to give the money that was given as a reward to the soldiers by hand who came at the completion to their duties, but since it observed that the money was expended in a short time, without being used productively, the government believes that with an agreement made with the soldiers themselves, the money could be put in a bank account of each soldiers and the owner can use the money wherever he wanted to.   .
In the mean time, those major members whose quests got proper response, blocking ways on the road of Gohatsion yesterday didn't have what so ever no connection with political issues; since they realized that such kind of engagement was found improper, they discussed and agreed with their immediate bosses and returned to their regular jobs.
The ministry of Informationit would like to disclose using this opportunity that it continues its usual procedure of handing over the money as reward to the owners as they wanted it, and in accordance to the discussion and agreement reached, the discontinued transport service, continues as usual.
From Addis Zemen July 4, 2005
The Assassinator of Kinfe, Major Tsehaye's where about is obscure.
The Assassinator of Kinfe Gebre Medhin, the ex-security head, Major Tsehaye Woldeselassie who was under arrest since last May 2001 and his not being brought to justice is dangerous, committee of Ethiopian political prisoners Unity disclosed.
In the written statement the committee sent to ZePress, it disclosed that not filing charges as yet on Major Tsehaye woldeselassie is violating the law.
The statement which claimed that the prisoner's fate was held confidentially would lead to different suspicions, and the EPRDF-controlled Radio Fana's pretext that the major couldn't appear to justice for he was injured, was to be condemned, it said.
Although the death of Kinfe Gebremedhin, the head of Security was the result of the division of TPLF, it's been mystified, and even the Prime Minister, Meles Zenawi, too, should be asked, most accused, it said.
While the issue was this, attemptitint to cover up the charge would be violating the accused individual's rights, said the report, and the kind of working procedure seen with regards to this case showed once again that violation of the law is a common task for EPRDF, it said. .
After Major Tsehaye committed the death crime not only has he been officially accused over nine months now, but also his whereabouts has been obscured..
Tsehaye who was born in western Tigray at a place called Adiawola in the special place Adeyabe Mender, and the late Kinfe joined the struggle in 1976 at a time EPRP, EDU ElF and Dergue were attacking TPLF; during that time the late Kinfe was lieutenant leader in the 22nd infantry force while Tsehaye was captain leader, but after victory there was no work opportunity where Knife and the late Tsehaye work together, their history explained.
From ZePress February 6, 2002.
In Oromia Towns Education would be given in Amharic
This year in the different towns of Oromia region there has been pre preparation so as to give education in Amharic in the baby's mother tongue and has now been practical, the news it reached us pointed out.
The different nation-nationalities found in Nazareth, Shashement, Nekemt, were made to learn in Amharic due to the failure of the education in the last five years as revealed by parents and their children of each city and teachers of each school, and because government permits; similar activities have started in Oromia towns where various nationalities live together, it was disclosed..
More than 90% of children who were not Oromifa speakers an who were deprived of the international and national right that allows children to learn in their mother tongue, the repeated request their parents put forward to officials of Oromia region were neglected an for the last five years, teachers' knowledge, students' time and people's money were unfairly spent, the complaint reached to very critical stage, it said.
Due to this, the regional officials passed an order to make pre-preparation for students to learn in the language the want, but before that to investigate whether the question was raised from the people, whether the complaint was presented by representatives of parents and whether the complainers were really students' parents.
But some groups related the parents' complaint that they made legally in their rights to do so with crime and conspiracy and claimed as if it was "the measure taken in hatred of Oromifa" and considered as there were no complaint from the people; in the pretext of being sympathizers they were disseminating the reflection of their own selfish narrow feeling and interest, it was disclosed by the report it reached us..
The complainers, however, said "our request was presented without violating the rights of Oromo people, without touching its spiritual and moral feelings and with decency, so we are rather proud, not embarrassed about it."
While the people have the right to complain to government representatives individually, in groups, through representatives, demonstrations and public meeting saying "we're done wrong or our rights have been violated", at a time the complainers were presenting their case and even after response was a given to them, these individuals were disseminating rumors underground to the public, "the Amhara riflemen through AAPO, Amharas whose benefits have lost put forward the Tigrean and Eritrean riflemen as forerunners rose to suppress the Oromo people again," they said.
Moreover, they even say "strangers" blaming and calling names arrogantly, it was pointed out.
But the complaint these people put forward includes the Oromo, Gurage, Tigrean, Kenbata, welayta, etc. and in general it includes the different nationalities that live in the towns..
These groups haven't stopped their efforts to thwart the decision passed to start teaching in Amharic since 1998 especially in Nazareth, the information our reporter sent us form the place explained..
Although in a teachers' meeting held in the zonal education bureau on August 6, 1997 an idea that said "students were made to choose the Amharic language due to the influence of teachers and anti-oromifa propaganda.
It is the child, not the parents who must choose in which language to learn," an idea with lame reason giving it a political touch was presented but the teachers didn't accept the idea, it was disclosed.           .
Previously teachers Eastern Shoa Zone conducted a week's meeting and decided to use whatever means not to make Amharic language the language of learning, internal sources disclosed to our reporter.
If we permit today to teach in Amharic it means that our political power has been snatched away and, therefore, this should never happen," was the decision that passed and party cadres were assigned to work together with officials of the education bureau, it was pointed out..
The cadres even approached some parents whom they thought have been popular and asked them, "Why do you want to teach your son in Amharic while you are Oromo".
For this question, the parents, "Although we are Oromos, our children haven't gained any result for the last five years through learning in Oromifa, so we want them to learn in the official language and communicative language of the people, Amharic," was the precise response they gave..
In general, in the decision they made again, the people approved its standpoint, but the form filled by parents and students could be intrigued, so the people should follow attentively, these information sources disclosed to our reporter..
In the mean time, Mr. Mitslale Dengel Muluneh who mainly contributed for the permission of learning in Amharic in Nazareth town and who was coordinating parents' committee was arrested..
The cause of his arrest as it was told by the authority who took the action was it was it was the case of a sport teacher who was found dead while he was working in a public school, although the people of the area said that in the activity conducted in the town to learn in Amharic, he represented the committee of parents of the town and persistently followed up with the zonal administrative officials, and it was due to this, most people said..
The Amharic language that was permitted to be given in the present year, in some schools (for example, Dejene Sime Primary and junior secondary school) parents were told when they went to have their children registered, that "priority is given to children taking Oromifa language.
We don't know when Amharic starts" they misled and engage parents in bureaucratic muddle..
The issue of giving education in the regional language has been problematic for long in Harar, Jijiga, Nazareth, Debrezeit, Ambo, Jimma, Nekemte and other areas where multinationalities are living together.    .
Due to this in some regions some parents have been sending their children paying expensive school fees to private schools that give their lessons in Amharic.
Even the area officials send their children to areas where education is given in Amharic and to the so-called "best" schools.
The children of the poor who have no choice, however, learn in Oromifa, if they can, but if not, would hold the fate of being unemployed..
It's to be recalled that in the last five years, many teachers from various parts of the Ethiopian regions were sacked from work just because they struggled to keep the freedom of education, and in the pretext that they don't know the language of the region, and that they oppose the educational policy. .
From Tobia October 2, 1997
We had a different stand from Meles on Sovereignty" ANDO
ANDO members who stood beside Mr. Meles at a time when the central committee had created a faction said that with regards to sovereignty they had a different stand than that of Meles Zenawi and similar belief with the faction group like Mr. Tewlde and others.
Mr. Tewolde W/mariam and others who were ousted from TPLF central Committee, for an article they wrote on Reporter magazine under the title "The Hide and Seek Drama of Meles and Polit Bureau of ANDO", ANDO members gave responses in the same magazine, reporter, that the difference was so loud and clear and explained the different stand that was in the process.
This difference has even become much obvious after the ‘Technical Arrangement' document that was presented as a peaceful remedy that could resolve the Ethio-Eritrean conflict.
The document more or less divided the leadership into three sides; the first side has held an idea that was propounded by Meles.
The second side was the standpoint led by Tewolde Woldemariam; the third side was to be termed as the stand of ANDO," and continued the explanation of the ANDO, and elucidate the standpoint of the three sides.
The standpoint propounded by Meles strongly believed that our sovereignty should be respected and for this it says that since it has our sovereignty respected, let us take the document as it is and peacefully have them returned our land; and in relation to this let's resolve the problem peacefully and struggle the anti-democracy and corruption that reigns with in us; after all, the fate of our country is decided upon by our internal things so we should give special focus," ANDO reminded Mr. Meles' stand by coloring it and described Tewolde's and other side's standpoint as follows.  .
the second stand was held by Tewolde and siye; this side propounded that the document doesn't have our sovereignty respected, so we don't accept it, it said; the proponents of this stand were also of the opinion that we should talk about EPLF's aggression and should never talk about EPRDF's weakness, which they gave great emphasis," and continued that when Mr. Siye Abrha expressed that they have profited from the war, the group was defending by shouting "Hurray" sort of war chant, they said; and thirdly and finally explaining the standpoint of ANDO it said.
The third was the stand propounded by the leadership of ANDP; ANDP had a different stand with regards to whether the document would be able to make our sovereignty respected.
It also told a stand saying that the document does not make our sovereignty respected.
In this regard, it had similar stand with Tewolde and the rest.
However, with regards to the question of anti-democrac and corruption it had basically different stand from that of Tewolde and the rest," it said.
ANDO which explained in detail the stands that were apparent in the discussion, and its own sand which propounded that the document doesn't make our sovereignty respected, have surprised all who read the article, for the testimony it gave to Meles Zenawi who argued saying let's accept this document.
As the leader of warriors," Tewolde Wolde Mariam, the faction leader is saying on Meles' side he has never had a stand on any forum that held the idea let's give in our sovereignty and then negotiate," that was how ANDO gave testimony to Mr. Meles' document.
If the document doesn't make our sovereignty respected as ANDO themselves believed, insisting on signing document that doesn't make our sovereignty respected, isn't it putting in to a negotiating table?
Many are asking this question.
The ANDO article that played swing here is indicative of the fact that the people do not think freely, even now, the observers underscored.
Continuing their article, the ANDO strengthened the testimony they gave to Mr. Meles as follows. .
As long as we know, although Meles raised a difference of standpoint that insisted on accepting the document and defeated, he had triend a better activity to mobilize the majority on his side and make the document practical...He made his level best to make it due majority vote unlike Tewolde and Siye who said boldly, "We shouldn't accept the document; Based on the document, we stand not for peaceful remedy, but for the continuation of war." And they continued, "If you deny that, here is the evidence..
By the way, we would like to let you know before hand that we provide this evidence not to build up the physique of Meles; we ANDO do not have the culture of spying, and you know well that we don't like to waggle our fails after the boss; we and Meles himself believe that it is not useful for us to walk by this direction," expressing that the last ten years they stayed serving TPLF, as if the people do not know this they gave a different an improper picture for themselves and detailed Mr. Meles' contribution..
Before all for the victory of the war, the plans of military science wisdom and military doctrines that were necessary had to be designed by Meles; if he hadn't prepared this, no one of the faction members could have done it so.
This we and you all know well.
Had he not prepared it, we would have been in difficulty to design the strategy we have been using to come out victoriously form the war.
This was because this issue needed certain research.
You were not in the study.
According to the malicious gossip, siye spent his time for theft rather than research, and even though he is used to stealing, he wore field jacket and wander and make a speech, so "couldn't get time" and did it.
Tewelde Wolde Mariam doesn't have any other thing except Newsweek.
The ANDO article which highly built Mr. Meles' personality, detailed that Mr. Meles had much greater role than anyone during the war..
The article that assured in other world, that there was no one from ANDO that could design the military strategy if Mr. Meles didn't prepare the study, gave its testimony that if Siye form TPLF had time he could have prepared it; this study paper which Mr. Meles was said to have prepared were actually prepared by one of the two Generals who were ousted from their power, Mr. Tewolde disclosed in their article which was published in the Reporter, it was to be recalled.
At the time Ethio-Eritrea aggression broke out and while others were doing their best to defend the aggression, ANDO didn't mention about the fact that he was preparing his thesis for his graduation.
During the war the team that was led by Mr. Tewolde Wolde Mariam believed that the war should continue up to Asmara; and with this ANDO's article detailed that they had an interest in establishing a pseudo-government and return; it condemned this stand of Tewolde and his group and showed its complete sympathy to Eritrea..
The faction with regards to the aim of the war brought new meaning of establishing a pseudo-government apart from respecting our sovereignty; the issue of changing the Eritrea's government is the responsibility of the Eritrean people; if the people don't want to do so, it can never be done, if an external force tries to change a government at a time when the people don't want to change the government, it led to slaughtering of people.
The idea of the faction, however, went much more than maintaining our sovereignty, it went as far as changing forcefully the Eritrean government," explaining that there was an interest, on the side of Tewolde and others, to remove the Eritrean government, and condemned it..
With its military force superiority should the Ethiopian Defense army push and control Asmara and other Eritrean territories, remove the Eritrean regime and put another force in its place, most believe that it could have been a guarantee for not wagig another aggression.
Had this been practical, most believe that there would have been a possibility of using the Asab port as an owner or in some other way.
Observers criticize that the suggestions put forward by ANDO in this way to defame Tewolde and others was indicative of their sympathy towards Eritrea rather than Ethiopia.    .
ANDO in this article rebuked their former leader, Tamrat Layne..
In an article entitled "Mr. Tewolde Yanyeh welcome", ANDO made it official that when issues of the country are raised it should be left for the TPLF, while other member organizations are made to focus on regional issues.
From Ethiop January 30, 200.
Unless Ethiopia and Eritrea Stop Fighting They would Not be Granted Debt.
Both should Fight Against Poverty
In an international conference held in Zambia, Lusaka recently, the Head of the International Monetary Fund African Desk reminded that Ethiopian and Eritrea wouldn't be given new money debts unless they urgently stop the war that lasted for over 16 months.
The International Monetary Fund Official, Mr. Madebo in his statement pointed out that the two countries should fight against poverty, and to launch a campaign on poverty would change the destitute living conditions of their people, he suggested.
In the war Ethiopia and Eritrea began in April, 1990 due to a border conflict, the lives of more than ten thousand soldiers have passed away, it was pointed out..
On the other hand, the peace effort that was attempted by the Africa Union didn't bear fruit, it was pointed out.        .
Regarding the reminder that unless Ethiopia stops the war the International Monetary Fund wouldn't give her debt, a team of higher Ethiopian delegates would go to the United States next week, it was pointed out.
Observers tell that it was United States that is putting pressure so that Ethiopia wouldn't get debt unless she stops the fight.
However, the Ethiopian officials who travel to Washington would facilitate ways to get the grant, and outlined the discussion points, the report also mentioned. .
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
One Thousand Workers were given the Sack from Dire Daw.
The Dire Dawa Textile Factory known for its being veteran and huge in the name of structural adjustment, more than one thousand workers were dismissed from their job as from August 9, 1997 together with not less than 5 thousand families of them, were exposed to great difficulties..
Based on the list presented by the factory's structure-study committee, 840 workers were made to be pensioners, those who served for more than 20 years and their age reached 45, while 260 regular workers who believed that the situation would be much worse resigned and based on the application they submitted to leave their jobs, were paid their service compensation and made to leave..
Our reporter who went to the area and asked as to why the company needed structural adjustment and the aim of reducing working force came up with various suggestions..
Some said, since the factory has long years since it inception, the production instruments have become old and the products which come out at present couldn't compete with the free market and the government has stopped the amends that it used to give the company is operating on loss.
Therefore since maintaining the 5 thousand workers would intensify the problem, the reduction was needed, said some of them.
Others suggested, since the factory is famous and its profitability is not wanted to enable the recently built Almeda Textile Factory in Adowa become successful in the free market, and hence, it's a measure taken to weaken it." They said.
The evidence they give for this is that technical experts who were in key posts and supervisors are said to be recruited to be taken there with high salary.
The reduction of employees wouldn't stop there but stage by stage other 1400 individuals would be reduced so as to make the factory profitable or else it was decided to be sold for investors with only 2000 workers, internal sources who knew the matter closely told.
Even if the reduction seems to be appropriate in line with the system of free market economy, without making the workers psychologically ready, where a husband and wife being dismissed together and the nearly 5 thousand families who are supported by these people being without any means of subsistence, and may also withdraw from next year schooling, filled the people of Dire dawa with dejection..
The Dire Dawa textile factory among all other textile factories in the country, which was known especially for its production of khaki and calico (cotton cloth), has started to transform from profit to loss since the last two years when it was made to receive cotton which was below the standard of quality and the products started to be unwanted in the market..
Although the workers' association insisted on taking measures against the individuals who made the purchase them, it was only meant for a one-time media consumption and didn't do any good, most of the victims of the problem spoke with regret..
From Tobia August 21, 1997
Haile G/Silassie Wins 10 thousand Meters Race for Third Time
Haile G/Silassie wins for the third time in the ten thousand meters' race held in Athens city.
According to Reuters report form Athens the 24-years Haile G/Selassie finished the fierce competition in 27 minutes 24.58 second.
Haile slipped out when it remained 600 meters to the finishing line and had a marvelous finish followed by the 1995 bronze medal winner, Paul Tergat of Kenya, and the former ten thousand meters record owner salah Hisu of Morocco.
Paul Tergat of Kenya stood 2nd in 27 minutes 25.62 second while salah Hisu of Morocco finished 3rd in 27 minutes 28.67 second.
It's to be recalled that last year in Atlanta Olympic in this race three of them finished one other just like this one.
Before the recorder holder Haile dashed off from the midst, he followed leg to leg the athlete who was leading the race and suddenly slipped out marvelously in a way the Kenyan athletes couldn't reach him, proving to be the best athlete of the world, routers disclosed in its report.   .
It's to be real led that the Ethiopian great athlete Haile G/Selassie couldn't participate in the five thousand races for the track in Atlanta was dry and his feet was injured while he won ten thousand race there.
Due to this Haile requested that the track field in Athens to be smooth with water..
However, his question was disregarded, routers also reported..
From Addis Zemen Friday, August 8, 1997
I know what kind of Verdict it would Pass on me, Mr. Bitew Bela.
The third accused Mr. Nigussie Hailu was allowed by the Federal High court first criminal bench to go and bring, being escorted, documents from the ministry of Justice but disclosed that he couldn't find any.
Among the individuals the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption commission prosecutor changed in corruption case, the third accused Mr. Nigussie Hailu spoke to the court yesterday that as the ministry of justice doesn't have any evidence on me except the case of Tamrat Layne, I have brought a-15-page counter oppositions, he said.
It was to be recalled that the rep of crime investigation coordination said to the court on January 15/2002 that the evidences of Mr. Nigussie is not with us but at the Ministry of Justice, and Mr. Nigussie also made the curt realize this.
Including Mr. Nigussie's counter opposition of yesterday it was disclosed that all the accused presented their defensive evidence to the court.
However, the court said it's mandatory to give appointment for February 13/2002 in order to be able to see all the written evidences and give decisions.
In the mean time, after the appointment date was given, the second accused Mr. Bitew Belay said, let me present an idea and expressed his appeal.
I didn't expect to come and go only with appointment for eight months, and I ask if the judgment process become shortened and be given the right verdict, he said.
Indeed I know what kind of verdict it would pass on me, said Mr. Bitew, but I would accept the verdict anyway.
According to him, he would like to know the verdict passed on him and would like to think of his future life and work in a peaceful frame of mind.
Although Mr. Bitew said that he'd accept whatever verdict passed on him, he also stated that he's guiltless to the court.
The first criminal bench of the Federal High Court after having listened to his suggestions gave him a response saying that although you claimed to know the verdict before it passed, we still don't know it now.
What decides this is the judiciary process and the analysis of evidences presented, the court disclosed.
On the other hand, when the 54 government officials, inclusive of Ethiopian Commercial Bank president, Mr. Tilahun Abay, and business people were accused on January 8/2002, the 16th accused Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye, who did not appear then, appeared on this court session yesterday.
The 16the accused was charged with other 25 accused individuals of illegally allowing 190 million 218 thousand 700 Birr to be taken on money laundering from Ethiopian commercial bank of Ethiopia, Anwar Mosque Branch..
The accused stated that he went out of his job from Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, retiring in 1993 and, therefore, he wasn't in his position when the alleged debts were given.
From this angle the accusation doesn't make him accountable and, therefore, asked the court his bail right and continue to dispute his case.
The prosecutor however, said since his case was a corruption one, he asked the court not to give him the right to be released on bail.
The court viewing the case ordered that it won't give the right to be released on bail for the 16th accused Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye, and he was sent to prison..
From the Press, January 30, 2002.
The Regime That Campaigned on the Legislation and Judicatur.
In Federal Courts there are 72 thousand substantive files for 20 Judges -- shortage of Judges has been aggravating
In a country where a popular law school which has produced professionals for over 30 years and where the new "Civil Service College which is the training institution for members of the regime are said to have trained law professionals, the shortage of judge from time to time in federal courts aggravates the situation for people with cases in the court who seek justice, are in great problem, it was disclosed.
While the judges whom their appointment was approved by the Council of Reps were only 26, six of them left their work due to death case, on their own, and as a result of a not-so-conductive-working environment, and on sickness, it was disclosed.
In a statement the Federal Supreme Court gave in the second week of August in connection with last year's recess closure of the curt, (Addis Zemen, Tuesday, August 14, 1997) made official that 38,146 criminal, 40,189 civil, 3,116 work dispute files were transferred to 1998.
These altogether made the figure more than 72 thousand files.
This figure doesn't include new cases whose files are in the process of being opened and cases whose files are with registrars and judges but not given appointment..
In this case one judge should see 3,600 files this year.
If judges are said to be full and work 200 days in a year, one Court of Session should see not less than 54 files.
And if the word "seeing" may include listening to word evidence, investigating and giving decisions, it would be extremely difficult for the working judges to run judicature qualitatively and in haste, professionals in the field are saying. .
The problem that reigned in the courts which resulted in elongation of unsettled cases an injustice is also reflected upon more than 500 lawyers who take up their cases in the Federal court, so there are many who call up on Ethiopian lawyers association to make heard its voice focusing on the issue.
They mention as proofs that the judiciary system is in a difficult situation and in order to show that it is plodding along, files which have been postponed year after year are many; that including cases which need urgent responses are being postponed; for example, case related to employer-employee which need to be resolved in 60 days is postponed for years; that judges of each court session mostly spend their time in the new year giving appointments.
The regime doesn't have interest in strengthening the judiciary system; instead it opens a campaign against the legislation and judiciary system,and continued, these groups saying, "The fact that it sacked old-timer law professionals from the judicature and in their place assigning those 12 graders, and even those who are below this grade, by giving them short-term courses, for the positions that need a long-year training and maturity even in regular education; so if there had been willingness to strengthen the judiciary system, even recently before the council of Reps was closed, judges could be appointed and could have made preparation for this year," they said.
The nation's judiciary system is in a "bush like" the law of the jungle?    .
Way that they wanted to operate in this way and are now controlling everything, adding that the civil servants are sacked in great numbers; at a time when illegal decisions are being taken on the business community by the legislative body, and where the judiciary system is deliberately weakened so that sides who have been done wrong administratively would not be able to go the court in search of justice and judicature and strengthen decisions of politicians, they expressed.  .
They pointed out that this is done so that ways could be established where especially citizens could be put behind bars without legislation and judiciary order, and couldn't go to the court and get urgent decision; it is a campaign they deliberately carry out to cripple the judiciary system.   .
These revolutionary democrats, who preach free judiciary system on a propaganda level, see legislation and judicature not as a tool of respecting human rights, but as a protector of their power and authority from the opposition forces; this is how observers are telling;
While the interest of politicians is this, there are who claim to be law professionals, sitting on the chair of the judiciary system, who had the legislation and judiciary system killed; they would never escape from being accountable by history and the generation, many are pointing..
It's to be recalled that whether it was from the problem around the judiciary system or not, Mr. Mahteme Solomon, the ministry of justice who resigned use to say "the golden age of Justice.
From Tobia October 2, 1997
The Atrocious case of Colonel Mengistu has Caused Trouble to the Free Pres.
The Journalist was released in 24 hours
Going to Nairobi, then to Zimbabwe it is known that he has made his living in Harare now.
It is to be recalled that two Eritreans made an assassination attempt on Colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam on November 5, 1996 around his residence..
Among the free press, who reported this news, Mr. Zegeye Haile appeared to the Federal Higher court 2nd criminal court of session and pronounced two years sentence and then thousand Birr fine to be paid in four years..
The owner of Genanaw newspaper and publishing Mr. Zegeye Haile, had presented an evidence to the court and the latter proved it right similar to the news that is reported in the newspaper, but stated that the accused should have gone further to prove it; and hence, the sentence would be executed..
The two Eritreans accused of the assassination attempt on Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam on November 5, 1997 around his residential area, after having been sentenced to 5 and 7 year imprisonments appealed to the court and recently were released freely.  .
On the other hand, the free press journalist who reported about the Eritreans was subjected to a sentence of imprisonment.
The case of the journalist who, after appearing to the court on July 4, and was told to appear for the court's decision on July 8 from his arrest, was a surprise to many for he was sentenced to two years imprisonment and ten thousand Birr fine to be paid in 4 years' time.
The efforts made to have the journalists released since that day, including the distributing manager of the news paper and Maebel, Ethiop, Atkurot and Fiameta newspapers made their share to pay the ten thousand Birr and in 24 hours he was able to be released..
The cooperative spirit displayed by the free press members is commendable and educative, as many would agree.
In the mean time, Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam is to change his former residence, Ganhill Villa to a more secure and a better modern villa, the Independent Newspaper which is published in the country reported..
The place which is now to be taken by colonel Mengistu was formerly intended to be residence for African leaders in Zimbabwe when they went there for summit meeting, it was disclosed.
Colonel Mengistu's was allowed to live in a residence intended for Ethiopian leader. .
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
CUD and EPRDF are agitating through Mobile Message.
Among the political parties who are making fierce competition, Ethiopian peoples Democratic Front and coalition for Unity and Democracy are making their election agitation through mobile messages, too, some Addis Ababa residents told.
As the residents told yesterday, EPRDF and CUD are sending their messages through mobile messages, asking those received to disseminate it to others.
EPRDF's message says "I definitely know that you love Ethiopia.
Without doubting that the coming years hold a bright future, vote for EPRDF."
Those individuals who received the message are asked by EPRDF to pass the message on to ten other supporters of the party.
Coalition for Unity and Democracy, on its part said, "Truth he come explicitly; voting to the sign of victory on the road to freedom, move with CUD," expressing its election agitation.
In its message that said vote to CUD, we believe that you love Ethiopia, so the receiver of the message should pass it on to at least to five country-loving Ethiopians.
In both sides, the mobile messages that are dove in a civilized way are found to be better than those rebukes which are heard on the television, individuals who received the message pointed out.
From Addis Zemen April 15, 200.
The Curtain of the War is Opened!
The EPLF troops who were seen off with profuse chanting and dancing were taken captives at Algena, hanging their guns like a still rod!
The Ethiopian and Eritrean clash that suddenly erupted on May 12 was astray form diplomatic efforts to an open war.
It was to be recalled the new attack that was made by EPLF soldiers on May 30 at 4 O'clock in the morning on two Ethiopian districts, Dalgeda and Algena, were held under control of the EPLF forces, attacking the surrounding militia and peaceful people.
EPLF forces were encountered by resistance in all areas it had put under control, killing individuals, arresting them in houses and even burning them..
Not limited by this, EPLF forces attacked the buildings the surrounding people built, looted its cattles, and making them carry machine guns, committing inhuman acts, sources related to the issue reported.  .
On the other hand, in a news transmitted on the day before yesterday on the voice of America radio, from the two districts EPLF had put under control, algena and Dalgeda, it has now left some of the areas as a result of the retaliating attack on it..
The VOA reporters, who were reporting from Alitena, said the Ethiopian army held under control anti-aero plane missile, machine gun and took captives lots of army officials. .
These EPLF soldiers, who were seen off with profuse chanting and drumbeating, couldn't defend the retaliation measures taker on the side of Ethiopia, the news sources disclosed. .
It was known that after the army who were in Jijiga town came to Adigrat after three day and night journey, the moral of Ethiopian army and the people were highly boosted..
In the mean time, in order to substitute the army that had come form Jijiga, many army members were making their journey to east by train..
On the other hand about fifteen thousand former soldiers of TPLF who now work on farmlands in Gondar, at Dansha district (Awrora) urgently responding to the call went to Tigray..
In general, the defense which used to be done by militia and police have now been strengthened and charged by mechanized army, the news that reached us from the place pointed out.
On the side of Eritrean people's liberation front, former Dergue ground force military officials were participants, "the Indian Ocean News Letter" stated on May 28/98 editions..
According to the report, among those ex-Ethiopian military officials who led the mechanized EPLKF army during the invasion of Beadme and Sheraro areas, the ex-leader of 6th mechanized squad 26th unit, lieutenant colonel Tadesse Senbeta and the ex-military security official of the 6th  mechanized squad, major Nesibu W/Gerima, spearheaded the front.    .
On the side of Eritrea, the campaign around the border is still underway, some reports pointed out..
Related to this it was reported that the dwellers in Asab and Asmara are in great difficulties..
As a result of this, expensive living conditions many Eritreans are emigrating to Ethiopia, and by now 100 Ethiopian Birr is exchanged for 125 nakfa, the report explained.       .
The Eritrean president Isayas Afeworki answering to the questions asked by voice of America, said ... we have been hearing a concocted story that Eritrean economy is dependent on Ethiopian economy..
The trade relation we had with Ethiopia was said to reach a highest stage merely on Teff cereal..
We used to buy up to 50 million Birr Teff cereal..
But now it stopped.
Just because Teff cereal has stopped being imported or because Teff is not eaten, it doesn't mean that Eritrean economy meet with crisis, he concluded..
In the mean time, many trucks that carry Teff and other cereals were obliged not to cross Eritrean border, and in the same way, trucks which carry salt have been banned up to recently from getting in to Ethiopia..
The other contentious issue was that not only were more than 65000 ton food aid, different cars, medicines an packed food were ordered to remain at Asab port, but also owners who went to Asab to collect their properties were seized and are under arrest, it's disclosed..
Asked about these conditions, the Eritrean president replied that they ordered to stop Ethiopian Airline Service..
They closed it.
The activities around the port were ordered to be withdrawn and closed.
Cars were ordered neither to get out or in..
Since the situation in Asab and Mitsewa were said to be dangerous and they sent a message that movement should be stopped..
The ships which were carrying Ethiopia's cargoes were ordered to come via Djibouti and so they went there.
The port was said to be closed..
It is closed..
The fact we know is this ... I couldn't make out why this was decided..
If that is done to run dry the economic benefit of Eritrea, we might think ... until situations charge or till another curtain is uncovered, he responded.
Well, the other curtain of war is uncovered.
Both sides sent their troops to the place and started the war..
The Ethiopian army, who was on alert, is aggressively moving forward..
The feared war has started bringing about blood sheds.
While peace and negotiation is expected from both sides, or from third party, situations seemed to be out of control..
It won't be difficult to think about the loss of life and properties this war whose ending is unknown. .
When's the confrontation, which has now counted twenty-two days, going to stop? It would remain a question that wouldn't be answered for long..
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
An Aged Skeleton is Found
(ENA): At the Polio Anthropology Heritage Center in Konso the group that is conducting the study disclosed that it got a human race skull that lived before 1.4 million years, the discovery of which appeared in scientific publication, organization for Heritage Protection uncovered..
According to the statement the organization made to ENA yesterday, the study conducted at Konso Polio Anthropology Heritage Center on the skull of the ancient human race which was found in 1993, known by its scientific name ‘Australopitiks Bozy' has been completed and it would appear to day for public reading on scientific study magazine..
The studies that were conducted before years indicated that the two different human races by their scientific names, ‘Homo Eraktis and Australopitiks Bozay' used to live together, the organizaton disclosed..
In addition, various animal races that used to live in those days were found in great number and stone tools the ancient man used to utilize were also found in great number, out of which the age-old heritage known by the name ‘Ashuliyan' was found it was disclosed.
The organization for studies and protection of Heritage indicated that the skull of the human race discovered in the study was not found in the heritage centers of north of Konso, Hadar, Central Awash and Melka Kunture, the ancient human race was expected to have lived from 1 to 2 million years and then become extinct on earth..
The konso Heritage studies is believed to give answers to questions related to the ancient human race and unanswered questions, and questions pertinent to the general biological cultural growth and change of human races who lived between 1 and 2 million years, the organization disclosed..
The Konso Heritage Center has been said to resemble the Tanzanian ‘Alduvay' and the Kenyan ‘Turkana lake' Heritage Centers..
The Heritage Center has a great significance not only in showing the development of ancient races given of heir to human races, biological development and change, creation of the ancient material culture and development, but also the fact that it has become heirloom of Ethiopian and world history is great, the organization disclosed..
The Konso Heritage Center was found in September, 1994 by a group led by a research named Dr. Berhane Asfaw in a search campaign while the skull of the ancient human race which appeared in scientific publication was found by a Mr. Awoke Amozaye who was a member of a study group at the ministry of culture in southern Nation and Nationality Region, the organization revealed..
For the last five years the Organization for studies and Protection of Heritages disclosed that a group has been conducting a research led by the archaeologist Dr. Yonas Beyene and Paleontologist instructor at the Japan Tokyo University, Dr. Gen Suo, the organization disclosed.
From Addis Zemen October 2, 1997
The OLF Suspects Were Freely Released After 7 years Behind Bars.
In a pretext of being a member and proponent of OLF out of the Oromo nationals that were being behind bars between five and seven years without any charges, 550 of them were freely released, reliable news sources form Oromia region, explained.
Among the 970 Oromo nationals who were taken from their areas of home by OPDO cadres and core members and were put to jail from five to seven years in eastern Hararage zone without being brought to justice and charged, in the pretext of being a member and proponents of Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), 550 of them were released freely for they were proved to be innocent from any of the climes they were suspected of OLF membership and being supporter, giving in innocent individual's nor killing and terrorizing, our reliable news source disclosed.
These 550 Oromo nationalities who were behind for 7 years without being brought to justice, in violation of the country's constitution consisted of farmers, business persons, civil servants, intellectuals and privately working individuals, the report pointed out.
Due to this illegal long-time arrest, about seven years, their families and marriages have been torn apart and the properties they've possessed through long years of marriage were divided among regional officials and some OPDO cadres, the news mentioned, and even from the outset they were arrested because the area officials wanted to confiscate their wealth, properties and houses and their wives, and due to an influence of skill and outlook, the report also explained.
The political officials and cadres of OPDO who cooperatively operate in eastern Harerghe Zone with Harari National League (HNL) which accused the Oromo nationalities and innocent civilians in a pretext of cooperating with terror groups, OLF armed troops, by giving in people for killing and had put them behind bars for up to 7 years' time without being charged, the news said, and had the suspects were found to be guilty with evidence, they could have been sentenced form life imprisonment ot death penalty, it pointed out.
The 550 individuals out of the 670 prisoners released be cause the Federal prosecutor General filed 375 charges since the last two months an the eastern Oromia main court of law mobile court of session investigated the files and found no evidence of witness to the charges the Federal prosecutor brought, the reliable sources of Oromia region explained.
The prisoners whom the mobile Court of Session decided upon to be released were freed due to the removal of the area OPDO cadres from their positions and the rest 120 Oromo nationalities' case would soon get a resolve, our sources disclosed.
Due to the removal of OPDO's higher officials from their positions and following the statement released by OPDO stating that it had undergone reform, the president of Oromia administrative government, Mr. Juneydi Sado recently gave a statement expressing that in the region individuals are found behind bars for a long time without being charged, and that the situation would be investigated upon and would be given justice, and in the future this situation would not be repeated.
From Goh January 12, 2002 .
In Ethiopia the Hope of Democracy is overshadowe.
Netherlands Minister of Foreign cooperation and Development
The democratic regime that was expected to flourish in Ethiopia after May 1991, was never brought to light and the hope of reviving it is overshadowed, one higher official of the Netherlands government disclosed in Amsterdam; Mr. Yan Teronk, who expressed this concluding remark that showed a great change of standpoint on the part of Holland government, is minister of Holland's Foreign Cooperation and Development.
In his official speech at Fu-Sositiat Hall in Amsterdam town on October 8, 1998, the TPLF/EPRDF government from the outset didn't have all-embracing feeling and hasn't participated most of the political organizations, and so the democratic process that was expected to happen, has been aborted now; consecutive discussion programs have been carried out round "Hints on an overall Issues about Africa".
Mr. Yan Teronk was invited as the main speaker on one topical issue among other programs.
The topic he chose for his October 8, 1998 speech was entitled "Conflict should be avoided;"
In the speech he made on this topic, after he detailed the critical problems that are predominant in Ethiopia, the outlook that Holland had two years ago up to some time on wards was positive but then as from the outset, the TPLF /EPRDF/ administration hasn't make inclusive and since it has become, in the process, pushy and exclusive of other political organizations, the formation of democratic order that was highly looked forward to, has been hindered, he underscored.
At the time it was common to popularize TPLF/EPRDF in Holland, the Ethiopians living in Holland who were highly concerned and felt uneasy about the issue ‘said' "For us Meles and Mengistu are the same! Don't make us choose form two dictators!" and repeatedly were made to go out to the street for demonstration, to express their bitter protest..
This protest which was part of the democratic struggle of Ethiopian people have bear fruit today as pointed out by Mr. Yan Teronk's speech, many observers suggested; During the occasion of Mr. Yan Teronk's speech other than invited citizens, a number of Ethiopian living in Holland and citizens of other African countries were present.    .
Many questions and criticisms were raised based on his speech.
In a situation where previously by the powerful soviet Union, in the name of socialism, and today the powerful Western Countries in the name of democracy, bring to power dictator leaders on Ethiopia, and in a situation where they make the country a land of extermination for three decades, could conflict be resolved from Ethiopia and horn of Africa.
For this question which was raided from one participant Mr. Yan Terok gave a response;
In his answer, after the end of the cold war, that is, after the fall of Dergue regime and Soviet union, there was a great hope that in Ethiopia a democracy which is backed by the west would flourish, but this hope was aborted, he underscored repeatedly.
In addition, he said Africans should not raise the past history of colonization and the actors of the history and put the blame on them, rather they should use the positive changes that came about after the cold war and, organize the basis for facilitating public order and building up development, he reminded..
He also explained about the critical issue of refugees case that has become discouraging to Ethiopians living in Holland.
He strongly reminded that the refugee whose case was given a negative decision on the law court after his/her applicaton for right of refugee has been viewed up to the end, is obliged to leave Holland.
It is to be recalled that last August the Holland government signed an agreement with TPLF/EPRDF government to return from 700-900 Ethiopian citizens whom it identified as illegal refugees..
Based on this agreement, Ethiopian citizens whom the court passed judgment as having no sufficient reason to live in Holland would be given money to establish themselves and return to their country..
However, no Ethiopian citizen has applied to willingly use this opportunity and return to Ethiopia, it was told.
As Ethiopians Immigrate not in search of money but in search of peace and life security, there's a predominant feeling among Ethiopians that there may be no one who would be attracted by money and return home.
In fact, while the number of Ethiopian refugees are like a drop in the ocean when compared to the number of refugee population in Holland, the question why have they been focused among the first ones to return, has been raised among them.
On the other hand, while other African countries are not willing to sign the treaty that was designed to return refugees, the fact that the TPLF/EPRDF government is the only government to sigh the treaty by itself may point out that there might be a plot or an intrigue which was made between the two governments behind the refugees, a hypothesis has been raised. .
From Tobia October 16, 1997
President Negasso Giddada Bade Farewell to the ambassador of Mozambiq.
President Negasso Giddada yesterday bade farewell to the Mozambique ambassador in Ethiopia, Alexande Zendamelan, who have completed his work time..
In a ceremony carried out in the national palace, President Negasso praised the role played by the ambassador to strengthen the relationship of the two countries during his stay here for five years, a spokesperson from the ministry of Foreign Affairs disclosed.
Although her economy was affected due to the flood she had had before, the president expressed his hope that he would speed up her development, and he pointed out. .
At this time, president Negasso expressed his brotherly greetings to president Chasan of Mozambique, it was disclosed.
On his part, Ambassador Zandamela explained that during his stay in Ethiopia he opens good time and considered Ethiopia as a second home.
From Addis Zemen June 27, 2001
This Year's Autumn Rain Exceeds Those Registered in 52 Years
This year's amount of autumn rain exceeds those registered in 52 years, National Meteorology Service Organization disclosed.
Mr. Diriba Korcha the organization's weather Forecast and precautionary Warning group leader in a statement he gave to the reporter of the newspaper, expressed that in Addis Ababa, Kombolcha, sirinka, Kofele, Sokru and Enewari, from 96.3 up to 48.8 mili meter rain was registered.
The expert reminded that last rainy season such kind of rain poured for only one or two days, but the rain that poured for 2 hours last Friday exceeded those that poured in 52 years' time.
The rain that poured for one hour in Enewari area, North Shoa damaged the crops on threshing floor, disclosed Mr. Diriba and pointed out that the farmers should collect their grains in communal Labor, but in order to threshed it has to wait until the autumn season passes, he reminded.
Especially, the part of the community that lives around flash fold should take the necessary precaution and protect themselves from a danger of flood, and when it rains it could be dangerous to take shelter in an open field and under a tree for it brings about lightning, he disclosed.
From Addis Zemen March 15, 200.
The Gun that was used to accompany the patriarch while he went to Kulibe was seized on the way
The Clashin-Kov gun that was make to accompany the patriarch who went to attend the annual church service at Kulibe St. Gabriel church on July 27, 1999, by the clergy was seized on its way, it was disclosed. .
According to our reporter's disclosure the patriarch's nephew, Mr. Yared Kebedew, Mr. Berhane who'd head of the security, and several security guards of the clergy, as well as various workers of the church who were heading towards the church, accompanied by many vehicles, were about to reach kulibe when suddenly the area government security guns made a search and the gun was seized.
Including the patriarch and his deputy archbishops went by airplane on the 25th of July, 1999 from Addis Ababa to Dire Dawa, while the patriarch's close relatives who went early by car to warmly receive him on the 23rd of July 1999.
Those Friend of the family who spent the night on the 23rd of July at Awash, were aught with the gun unexpectedly on July 24, our reporters disclosure quoting eye witnesses explained.
The patriarch's entourage who were sent to Kulibe were not only all armed with pistols but also a Klashin Kov gun is seized in their car explaining to the area security force that "it was held for the purpose of the patriarch's security" the report disclosed.
Kulibi has its own security guns; and if necessary there is the area security force.
Why was it necessary for you to bring guns?
It was a question asked by the area people to the patriarch's entourage and armed members who were caught with pistols and the Klashin - Kov..
However, after so many ups and downs, the people were made to be released, out reporters disclosure explained.
The other news which we received from the clergy was that a lot of money was paid for the patriarch's entourage who hold the guns as per diem expense while no per diem was given to the scholar of the office of clergy who went to Kulibe.
As a result, there was a great discontent from the side of the scholar, it explained.
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
They Become without Country, without Government.
Ethiopian were evicted from Somalia, their properties appropriated – they couldn't get anyone that take their case stand for their rights..
According to the agreement reached between Ethiopia government and Somaliland Republic, from 900-1000 Ethiopians who used to do menial jobs at Hargesa, Berbera, Borema, buro and other forms were forcefully evicted at night through Togo Wechale Ethiopian border, their money and properties appropriated by policemen, kidnapped and beaten, the victims disclosed..
Since Ziyad Bare government was ousted in 1981, many Ethiopians who used to live for many years in the different towns of North Somalia, a country that declared as Somali land Republic, doing menial jobs such as dam work, Toilet digging and as servants in private residences, suddenly and without giving them chance to collect the properties they earned though their un preferred jobs, were evicted from the country through threatening gun-shots of Hagesa policemen, they told our office that the situation had left them feeling very dejected..
As if the maltreatment of Hargessa policemen were not sufficient, the EPRDF soldiers who received them at Togowechale left them in the bush for six days without any help, later took them at Jijiga revolutionary square which was unexpected from a troop that claimed to defend the country from attacks, and it also showed that the prevailing government doesn't care a bit about its citizens, the victims explained..
The people of Jijiga provided them with water and food supplies to its fellow-people who were hungry and suffered a lot but the government wanted to come out smelling like a rose by distributing clothes and daily rations attempting to keep them stable..
These sources indicated that the displaced people who were evicted, money they hardly earned doing menial jobs being appropriated and being beaten put forward their mistreatments to Somalia national regional administration which is found in Jijiga..
The displaced people explained there the Regional Administration wrote regretting letter sating that the agreement of the two countries underscored to hand over Ethiopians bringing them to the border and not appropriate their money and evict them by beating; since then the looting and forceful measures and eviction have temporarily stopped.
The cause for the displaced people, as widely heard in the area, was the request EPRDF government put forward based on the information reached it for the government to curb the flow of Ethiopians who engaged themselves in menial jobs in Hargessa, Berbera, Borema, buro and other Somaliland towns and were said to have flown into Oman through Bosaso port, where training center of the opposition forces are claimed to operate..
The Ethiopian government wanted to evict primarily Ethiopian ex-soldiers, some of whom with high and military ranks who were registered by United Nations Humanitarian commission for Refugees (UNHCR) and line these, but since couldn't evict those people, we were obliged to became the victims of the problem, said the information.
Although the number did not excel that of the present year, as many Ethiopians were forced to evict from Northern Somalia, these victims reminded that three years back, too 90 people were evicted from that country in late at might their money and properties appropriated, they spoke with regret.    .
At the time when Somalia have become without government after the downfall of Ziyad Bare regime, and when Somalia has been in great trouble and anarchy reigned, Ethiopian people opened their arms warmly received somalians and up to now many hundred thousand refugees are considers as fellow - brother and sisters, the displaced mentioned, and the Ethiopian government having kept their rights even of those who don't get have permits, it has saddened them to see a government who claimed to lead the country to be negligent when such kind of injustice and humiliation were done to Ethiopians.
While somalians who are registered as refugees, especially those who live at Hartishek, Harshin, Kamaboker and east Gashamo, have opened stores and built big ware houses and without any question import cars crossing borders, trading as far as Addis Ababa, and takeout passports to go to some other countries, the Ethiopians who were engaged in menial works not in big businesses, were considered criminal and forcefully evicted, in any criterion is in humans, full of racism, the displaced underscored..
One Ethiopian who was in Hargessa at the time asked "While the somalians in Ethiopia more freely with their rights protected, where do you evict Ethiopian appropriating their money and properties, who have been working in your country in menial jobs for along time?
In response to this, "Ethiopia is a country where anyone is allowed to live.
But Somalia is only for Somalias, we don't allow other to live in it" they responded with obstinacy, the victim who listened to this conversation expressed.
In order for the Somaliland police to take forceful measure, especially the ALETHAD group members played great role, these sources also disclosed.
It's known that Hargesa, which secede from Somali, which is a country with out government and call herself Somaliland Republic has not yet recognized would wide..
From Tobia August 7, 1997
The Spy got married in Ethiopian Embassy.
Was it because the Ambassador's wife is Eritrean?" Mr. Tadesse Gebre Egziabhere who was born and grew up in Eritrea, was told by many, as one of those engaged in spying career, threw a lavish wedding on September 1, 1999 in the premise of  Ethiopian Embassy in Bon, it is disclosed.
The report that reached us explained that Mr. Tadesse was sent to Germany for education and he remained there, when meeting was held in Germany about issue of Ethiopian Unity, he was known for insulting and shouting in the hall, especially when EPLF and TPLF were mentioned..
What was most astounding about this individual was the fact that he had a wedding extravaganza in the premise of the residence of the Ethiopian ambassador, it was said.
These sources added that the individuals did this in order to show their contempt on other Ethiopians as some said..
While the Embassy represents the people, the Ambassador's residence is considered as a palace..
However, from which policy does this kind of irresponsible act of throwing a party emanates? Say some people on telephone form the place..
The other contentious issue was the Ethiopian Ambassador Mr. Berhanu Tinsay's wife is Eritrean..
Opinions were given that this lavish wedding party was thrown because the wife of the Ethiopian Ambassador is Eritrean..
Tadesse Gebre Egziabeher secretary at Ethiopian Embassy in Bon who came from Eritrean made the wedding extravaganza colorful, observers commented..
Internal sources told us that the General Secretary, Mr. Tsehaye Wolde Gabriel contributed a lot being EPLE member when he was an immigrant in Germany..
It was regrettable that while the Embassy invited Ethiopian immigrants twice to discuss about the prevalent situations in Eritrea and Ethiopia, the meeting was not held in the Embassy compound..
The reason given for deciding not to hold the meeting within the Embassy premise was to make oppositions not appear in the embassy, it was disclosed..
Due to this reason, they rented a hall outside the embassy and in the meeting held there, it was agreed to raise fund for the displaced Ethiopians and the meeting was adjourned..
To rent a hall outside the embassy 28 thousand Birr was expended..
So, why do the diplomats who refused to discuss issues about Ethiopia in the premise of the Embassy allowed the premise for an individual who's claimed to be a spy for Eritrea? What did the Eritrean spied in this wedding? Who did he recruit? We'll leave the response to government bodies..
From Fiameta September 6, 1998
In Adowa Town more than 37 million Birr Development Projects are Underwa.
In Tigray central zone, in Adowa town different development projects that cost more than 37 million Birr are underway, the municipality of the town disclosed.
General Manager of the municipality Mr. Habtu Mebrahtu recently disclosed that the development activities that are being carried out in the town are made possible due to the contribution of the residents, investors and the municipality.
Among the development activities that are being conducted in the town, a five-kilometer gravel road, a 15-kilometer cleaning of interior roads, a five-kilometer asphalt repair, amendment of two flood protection tubes for two intermediate bridges, and a three-kilometer road-repair work are found.
Moreover, the residents and investors, allocated more than 33.4 million Birr capital to take part in hotel, children's school, supermarkets, plastic factory and different small-scale industries, received more than 18 thousand square meters, and started construction works, the general manager disclosed.
When the development projects are completed more than 10 thousand residents would be beneficiary, and it would create job opportunities for more than 300 people, the general manager explained.
From Addis Zemen, March 24, 2005
Eritrea is Going to Train the Young with Special Army Commando
The Eritrean government is prepared to send and train thousands of youngsters to Israel..
To this end, youngsters who gave services and returned are being gathered form everywhere..
During their stay in Israel the youngsters would learn skills that enable them attack in ground force, air force and navy..
The requirement asked was one whose age is not beyond 25, not married and healthy, it indicates..
According to the news report, the call is reaching these recruits, but most of them didn't accept the call, escaped and are found immigrating to Ethiopia.
In the mean time, Eritrean defense minister ordered those who took school leaving examinations last year and didn't get enough results, those who graduated form University in degrees and diplomas, and those graduated form technical schools in diploma to get in to Sawa and take the 7th round soldiers training. .
Political analysts who follow Eritrea's situation from various directions believed that the wide military preparation may be dangerous not only to Sudan and Yemen but also to Ethiopia, the report it reached us pointed out.        .
From Tobia September 18, 1997
EPRDF's Newspapers Are Decided to be Published Twice in a Week.
Journalists are seen off to the War Front.
It's known that EPRDF's papers are decided to come out twice as February 7, 1999 with the order of higher bodies.
Among the papers of EPRDF which are published by Fana Democracy this directive would apply for Efoyta, Abiyotawi Democracy, mahitot and other similar papers.
Before it was decided to publish these papers twice a week several controversies wer4e raised.
While many raised and argued a question of capacity, EPRDF authorities mentioned other tabloids that hit the stand twice a week and asked in what way are you weaker? This raised their eyebrows.
While each newspaper which is the new media of EPRDF has now a days from ten to thirty personnel's the private press (tabloids) who work with less number of personnel's, do a better job, according to many who gave their testimonies..
In related news, the afforested newspaper moved to the war front to report about the war.  .
On the other hand, the BBC and AFP journalists who returned home doubting the break of the war, arrived in Addis last week, it was stated.
Some of the journalists have now moved to the nearby towns from where the war is to be conducted..
There are some who said that this was a clear indication that the war surely would break..
In the meantime, it's stated that the present Eritrean government opposition force, ELF, started a news radio broadcast.
The broadcast is aimed at opposing (shaebian) EPLF government; wipe it out upon establishing a new government..
The radio is broadcasted through 9230 Kilo hertz and 31 Meters short wave, sources related to us, reported..
ELF is widely supported by EPRDF and its broadcast is clearly heard In Eritrea, it was stated.   .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
Thirty tons of Ammunition that was on its way to Eritrea was Seize.
Bulgaria Seized ammunitions that weigh 30 tons in a Ukraine air plane that was on its way to Eritrea form cheque Republic, a private television in Bulgaria disclosed.
BBC quoting the report broadcasted the day before yesterday by the television pointed out that Bulgaria seized the ammunition that would cost quarter million dollars in a Ukraine gov't air plane, attempting to violate the UN sanction..
The Bulgarian government disclosed that it is looking in to the case to release the Ukraine air plane..
BBC didn't say in its evening report as to what measure would be taken on the ammunition next..
From Addis Zemen May 1, 2001.
"Computer Technology Helps for a Country's Development"
Mr. Fikre is what he's called.
He was born in 1952 in Gondar town around Azezo area.
He learned his elementary education in Gondar town.
Since he went to Asmara when he was 15, he got the opportunity to learn at Leul Mekonnen Secondary School.
As soon as he completed grade eleven he was employed to serve as an Air Force officer.
Because he got good results in school leaving certificate examination while he was in the air force, he joined Addis Ababa University.
A little after having earned diploma in Accounting he went to the former Republic of Czechoslovakia and got now master's degree in Management Information systems and ‘computer science', and now he's the manager of Alpa Lumber Corporation. .
Ato Fikre who's currently doing research on Computer Science Font technology has become our guest today. .
Addis Zemen: What kinds of work were you doing after you have earned your Master's degree?
Ato Fikre: As soon as I completed my education, I returned to my home country to help my fellow people.
Then I have taught a computer course entitled system 'Analysis and Design' in Addis Ababa University for eleven months..
At the time I was teaching in air force, too.
Nevertheless, since situations were not convenient and the time was not reliable and since my wife and children were in the capital of Italy, Rome, I asked to bring my family so permission was granted..
As soon as I went there I was employed as a programmer and computer expert at food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
After serving for four years I went to Canada.
Addis Zemen: why did you choose to learn Computer science.
And how far had this field got recognition in our county.
Mr. Fikere: When I returned to Ethiopia after studying computer science I came to realize that nothing was known about the field..
Well, this was in 1983.
During the time there were few who had computers.
Since computer was not known, it was not widespread.
It was during this time that I returned to Ethiopia from Czechoslovakia (now called Czech Republic).
I was interested to study the subject for I knew about the various disciplines of University.
When I though of the field I first studied in diploma, Accounting, it worried me how it would be useful to me and where it would take me..
When I joined university computer science had just started.
I thought about it.
So, I took one flyer about computer science and started to understand what the field is all about.
I had mathematical and a technical skill, what could be difficult was logic and integration.
Hence, I decided to study, this field in and become ready in the belief of having a good future.
I presumed that thing called computer may become the powerful thing of the future's world, and I found out later that my assumption was true and its result was amazing..
Of all the things I am surprised of is the fact that different professions vary in accordance to the country's culture, economy and development..
For instance, if an electric engineer would go to Canada and work he would face difficulties.
He may not get a job because he's expected to have the capability in line with their standard and discipline..
In order to fulfill that he need to learn and pass various examinations.
It's only after he adjusted himself to the prevailing level that he could perform his job.
The field of medicine is similar.
But the one that has acceptability in all fields is computer technology.
It doesn't have difference in any country.
Of course, some standards are being designed now.
However, the field of computer makes one busy.
It needs caution, it needs thinking.
It needs to take many things in to consideration.
Because the job is fire some, many people don't want to take it as a profession.
Addis Zemen: computer is known for having great contribution to work facilitation and reducing tiredness..
And you're saying it's tiresome, would you explain it to me.
Mr. Fiker: our work is to make the computer work.
To me that computer fulfills its purpose for the user. .
Our task is to enable the computer think and serve.
In order to accomplish this, there are certain programs to be worked out.
What's a program?
In order to answer this question, we have to see it broadly.
Computer has its own directions.
Each direction tells the computer what to do.
These instructions put together are called program.
That is, by entering the computer it could decide the communication between people.
Therefore, our task is to primarily think and design.
Addis Zemen: After you went to Canada from Rome in what profession were you in?
Mr. Fikre: I knew my profession would enable me get reliable job in Canada..
But it would be difficult to get job immediately due to my job efficiency..
Although I put forward as many applications, the responses I got were not satisfactory.
After that, I reduced my job efficiency and applied to one company for a ‘junior programmer' position.
I got a job as a result of this.
At the company where I got the job, we were two programmers and a boss.
At the first month, I had the capability to perform the tasks of the two..
I was registering result, too.
In the second month our boss resigned and left.
In the third month after he went, the company's higher bosses asked me to take his position.
I immediately became controller of programmer.
I think I got this opportunity because working software programs is tough.
The job may be tough for some but easy for others.
As a matter of chance, it was easy for me.
The programs I do have become precise and good.
For some, it would be tiresome to find difficulties in the program.
Addis Zemen: what's a computer?
What about Software.
Mr. Fikre: computer is a broad subject.
If we want to put it briefly we can put it in three categories.
The first is called personal computer and this are computers that could work alone.
They call the second one as super computer and Mini computer.
These are meant for middle-level companies.
Such kinds of computers can serve up to two thousand users.
Their tasks also vary.
For example, they could perform engineering works or else could perform production yields.
The third is called main frame computer.
This serves for big and heavy industries.
It has the capacity to collect a lot of data.
In Ethiopia, I mostly saw personal computers.
Mini computers are few.
Software's have also levels.
The first one is what is called operating system (Agafari), it is known that computers is done by electronic instruments (devices).
It's he software that moves those (instruments).
When the Agafari is pressed it means the computer is ready to take as well as give command.
This means that a communicative language has started.
The other is called "application" software.
This is software that could perform special task for the user.
There is word processor software that enables words to express easily.
This has a limited function of only processing words.
Hence, there is an instruction in the process that tells how to create files and how to write.
How to print, magnify, enlarge and create lines, it has become easy to perform each application software..
Addis Zemen: what's the study you make previously on computer.
Mr. Fikre: It was reporting to decision-making bodies by identifying the problems computer can create in our company by the year 2000.
Based on this, I started my research.
Since I knew the software's of each company, I tried to show in details in my study what effects it could have. .
Based on the research, I put forward three kinds of remedies.
The first was what would happen to the company if we don't take any measure.
It would give answer to this question.
According to the study, nothing would happen.
But we have to employ many workers.
This pointed out that we have to get permission from our company to have about half a million dollar.
The problem the year 2000 could bring about was not as such mal functioning but mixing issues related to dates.   .
Or else it gives mixed up responses to questions related to dates.
For instance, a person retires at the age of 65 according to Canadian law.
When he exactly reaches 65 he'll be sent a cheque at home..
The computer that does this would affect the person if it has problem of dates.
The man might have been born in 1960.
The computer would write him a cheque in 1997.
The next year it would give him a cheque in line with the figures..
In 1999 the man would get his retiring cheque for he becomes 69 years.
Since these computers which are expected to create problems, have no four digits, they would be forced to deduct form 0 by 2000.
Therefore, the man who was born in 1930 wouldn't get a cheque by 2000 for the computer would deduct his age 30, and makes it below zero.
Due to this it means that at one time Canadian Retirement strategy would be disrupted.
To amend this, it would help to enable the computer read four digits..
This problem was not considered by software producers twenty years before.
But software's produced after nine years were made not to face this problem.
Actually, there are cases where it's being done as an option.
It asks whether to do in two or four digits.
Thus, the first remedy that is, it wouldn't bring about any difficulty if we didn't make anything, so let's employ certain workers.
The second was finding the issues that are related to dates and amending them.
Then if this is the case, we need to employ five programmers.
If they work for two years consecutively they would solve the problem..
However, we have to expend 800 thousand dollars for them.
The third idea was changing the old computers with new ones.
For the long-term plan, this would be the convenient way.
And for this we have to expend 1.2 million Birr.
I presented these solutions for decision-makings.
They liked the last idea and when I came here they were changing the old computer with new ones.
Addis Zemen: could computer problem arise in our country?
Mr. Fikre: what was heard in Ethiopia was a little bit exaggerated.
There are very few computers like the ones in Ethiopia.
There are not many works that the year 2000 computer problem is related with.
Personal computer users would never face problems..
Perhaps small computers which were made of the old software's and if the number is two-digit, it will have problems.
But since the problem was identified eight years ago, it was resolved..
Since computers stated to get in to Ethiopia after the problem was resolved, There won't be any problem.
Even if the problem exists, it shouldn't be seen as a big difficulty.
Addis Zemen: what initiated you to do the Amharic software called the Geez font?
Mr. Fekre: The position wouldn't give me any other opportunity other than the one I have now, Manager of Management Information System..
The company which I administer operates six hundred million dollars per year..
And I thought it would kill my profession if I am inclined towards management work.
Therefore, I believed I was expected to do the technical and managerial work integrative.
And completing this task would ask for a little sacrifice.
And for sacrifice working eight hours a day is not sufficient.
At least it needs 14 hours of work a day.
So, I wanted to sacrifice a little and decided to do so.
When I thought about this, "why do not I attempt to create something helpful to my fellow people?'
I asked my self.
I started doing research in subject area about producing Amharic software – it made it easier for me to produce one.
It took me eight months to complete the work.
Addis Zemen: why did you give it a name Geez font?
Mr. Fikre: To my mind, Geez seems to me the father of Amharic.
Hence, it took a position that in order that Amharic software develops, it has to start somewhere.
I want Geez to be the basis for development..
Due to this I used the name Geez.
I used ‘font' because the entire technology I used are of font.
I believe that in order to develop the Amharic letter in line with computer, in most ways, it's the font technology that we should use.
Addis Zemen: how convenient are the Amharic letters to computers?.
Mr. Fikre: we professionals know the language of computers.
We are not linguists.
The question that may create problem for us is that which letters and languages should we accept?
These kinds of problems should be resolved by linguists.
Efforts are being made to create computerized standardization where all can use.
On the other hand, if linguists gather and standardize letters if would be easier for our works.
Unfortunately, we can create standards of letters.
We don't have the skills and professional efficiency.  .
Addis Zemen: how do you see our country's computer usage strategy?
Mr. Fikre: the problem we have in Ethiopia is the inability to use computer power appropriately.
If we buy computer to use it for writing purposes, it can be compared as buying and using truck for the purpose of buying a monthly expense.
This means we never use the power it has fully for services?
If we want it for writing purposes, it would be better to buy typewriter.
Perhaps if it gives writing service for eight years, it may be good..
However, as I see it, the majority of the people didn't get the service the computer could give.  .
Indeed, computer service varies according to the area.
If it is a small organization, you may study and examine about project provided you connect it to the internet.    .
You can put in place, software that can strong them your accounting.
Because the use of the computer means doing works efficiently which are repetitive.
It would avid repetitive tasks.
It helps to work efficiently.
If there is problem in accounts, and if handling money shows wastage, working procedure is chaotic, the computer could help it.
Because computer has a lot of numerical strategies.
As a result, organizations could avoid damages and bring about speedy developments.
Addis Zemen: It's said that computer aggravates unemployment; how far is this true?
Mr. Fikre: This is not a correct concept.
Computer service should go in balance with a country's prosperity.
If computer working strategy were to dismiss people from work, the computers in each organization would be able to dismiss many workers.
At the moment, the number of unemployed number in America is below 4.8.
It needs to be broadly aware of about the use of a computer.
The first us of it is to be productive, and increase production immensely, as well as avoiding redundant works.
This would enable growth at the level of a company.
It would prosper a country's economy.
When economy booms, the unemployed gets the work one wants.
Perhaps at one place, one person might be sacked.
On the other hand, at another place there'll be vacant places for five people.
When computer technology is expanded its impact on the economy of a country is immense.
Addis Zemen: what did you feel when you return to Ethiopia after twenty years.
Mr. Fikre: In the previous regime, every thing used to incline to politics.
Economic development was not seen.
I was obliged to leave the country then for there was no good condition.
But now economic development is underway.
This is one encouraging change.
Big institutions are being built everywhere.
This is an indication of economic development..
The company I work for is involved in construction field.
Addis Zemen: In which development field would you like to involve in the future?  .
Mr. Fikre: I saw many computer companies.
This has great contribution for introducing the technology.
I am thinking of coming to Ethiopia to invest money and do my level best.
I will share my skill and profession for my fellow people.
I have a plan to perform my share in the economic construction.
Together with other I am willing to create situations that would enable the country to develop.
I'm studying some situations to do this.
After ensuring suitable situations I will return in a year's time.
But now I came on vacation.
Yet, I'm doing certain things that are important and go back.
When the computer standard association was recently established, I contributed my share.
Addis Zemen: Do you have anything that should be given focus vis-à-vis social life in our county.
Mr. Fikre: First of all, focus should be given on being punctual, doing big or little tasks efficiently without erring and respecting work whatever kind it might be.
Canadians developed it as a common thing, and since it is crucial for development, it seems to me that it would be better if it is given focus here, too..
From Addis Zemen October 11, 1998
"In order to stop the emigration of wise men, the clergy requires caution."
The fact that the news of a reformation movement which was on a level of malicious gossip for many years, now being officially declared by the clergy is to be admired, it was disclosed that the clergy should take caution for under the camouflage of "reformation" wise men of Orthodox church could emigrate..
Last week in different tabloids, especially in the one named "Hamer", took up reformation monks who were condemned and among them there were insiders like "Aba Gerima Tesfaye" and those sides pointed out that Aba Gerima Tesfaye is the one who highly condemns reformers, respected, and in his teachings highly popular scholar among the Christian laity..
Due to this reason, Satan out of jealousy, acted upon him as is commonly known and considered him an enemy, otherwise we never doubt that he's not are former, they said..
These sides mentioned other spiteful news..
The enemy rumor went against the experienced preacher, Aba Wolde Tensae Ayalneh, whom the clergy as well as the Christian laity know very well, and referred him as a "reformer"..
But this Holy Father is at the moment teaching the good news in different states in American and has been a great support to many fellow Christians abroad..
His popularity has become world wide; his gospel teachings abroad have been recorded in cassettes and sent to Ethiopia, has been used by many Christians..
He's still in the service of the gospel, but the church and the laity missed him..
Our clergy should deeply look in to these godly people whom the church brought up with her discipline not to be victims of the enemy, he pleaded..
These several people of the Orthodox Christians' faith who assuredly described Aba Gerima's lives and his firmness in his faith and love said that there are people who have double-face like a bat, and who approach these people in different directions to that people who excel them in education and skills do not come out of the church to fulfill their nightmares, with the help of their supporters, contemptuously hoping they would be heard, in the pretext of helping the church, they wanted to hurt her, hence, the wise men of the church are expected to differentiate the truth from the take, sifting the straw out of the wheat..
In relation to this, before reformation came to light like now, even in 1992 and 1993 when nobody seems to know its existence, those who called Aba Wolde Tensae "reformer" won't keep their mouth closed when they get such a coincidence, and therefore, it is to be reckoned that our church not only have enemies form afar but from within, insiders. .
All of us are trying our best to enable orthodox faith to continue as it was, and while explaining about what he knows about aba Gerima, he said Aba Gerima Tesfaye was sent from northern Wollo clergy and learned for four years in saint Paul high school and after completion due to his knowledge and eloquence different churches in Addis Ababa wanted him to be assigned at their place, but the one who sent him for education, Northern wollo Clergy his Beatitude Arch Bishop kevlos pleaded to the Holy synod he wanted him back and therefore was not assigned in Addis, this we know..
But there were many churches that needed him, he said..
He certainly told that he doesn't have the characteristics of heretic.     .
Taking in to account what was said by commentators, we also asked about Aba Gerima those who worked in the clergy..
The response we were given was he's not to be suspected of "reformist"..
They wanted to remain anonymous..
Although we attempted to find and speak aba Gerima vis-à-vis the comments forwarded, we couldn't find them, couldn't trace his permanent address, we reported only the comments of church laity..
From Fiameta April 29, 1998
The police Training England Gives Brought About a Protest
As soon as the Prime Mister Tony Blair's labor Party held power it said, "we don't strengthen dictatorship by the money which was earned from the fax-paying people of Britain, without democracy, there's no aid," but now declining from this statement, decided to give police training to those countries which hit torture and kill opposition politicians, religious people and human right activists, which provoked fury among many British citizens, and many refugees from different countries living in England, "The Sunday Times" disclosed.
In its November 9/1997 edition, countries like Kenya, Indonesia, and China which torture and kill their own police force training and aid, has now continued for a policy change has been made on the part of the government, which made many furious, the news paper mentioned and without making sure that the mentioned countries have improved their records of keeping human rights, they asked the government not to implement the decision, it explained.
On the other hand, the news paper which is regarded as proponent of the leftist and which is published daily in London "the Guardian", in its November 6/1997 edition disclosed that the lifting of the sanction to give police training and aid to Ethiopia has brought about protest among Ethiopians.
Just because the EPRDF government has accepted the appointment of Ambassador Gordon Geofferey witherelen which it has delayed for five months, the labor government which had propounded "without democracy there's no aid" has suddenly shifted its decision and the sanction to train police and give aid, that was laid for sometime has been lifted and decided to give the training and aid, which showed that the sanction from the outset was not real and it was not made considering the people, the Ethiopian disclosed.
The members of the community opposing this decision are now preparing to conduct a campaign against those, individuals and at a community level who distorted the news and for the journal is who wrote unbalanced news in the newspaper, both by writing through his address and a copy of this to the newspaper.
The members mentioned that it made them very sorrowful to rule out the promise he gave to the people not to give such aid that was collected from the tax-payer public to governments like Ethiopia, and they explained that they condemned the act and said they would disclose indifferent ways this to human rights activists organizations, and the international community.
It was to be recalled that the international human rights organization AMNESTY International made a call to the entire world that starting from the recent killing of Assefa Maru, the killings, tribulation, and illegal arrest enacted by EPRDF government on the peaceful citizens of the country and the free press journalists should urgently be taken measures against it.
From Tobia November 20, 1997
Mayor Arkebe Equabay awarded Being the year's Best African Mayo.
Mayor Arkebe Equabay was called the year's best African mayor and awarded by Broadcasting Network of Africa, the ministry of Foreign Affairs disclosed.
The ministry quoting the EFDR embassy at Pretoria disclosed yesterday that Mayor Arkebe was awarded on March 30, 2005 in Johannesburg by a South African organization called Broadcasting Network Africa, at an annual award ceremony at the Santen Convention Center.
It was Mrs. Mebrat Beyene charge d' affairs at EFDR embassy in Pretoria who received the Mayor's award being present in the award ceremony; there were diplomats, reps of awarded organizations and invited guests during the award ceremony.
The awarding organizations pointed out that it gives an award every year for different sectors of African organizations which have registered high results.
As it was mentioned in the award ceremony, Mayor Arkebe Equabay was awarded for ruling over governance, fighting HIV/AIDS, improving tax collection, solving the problem of housing and the city's cleanliness.
From Addis Zemen, April 6, 2005
Two People's Representatives were Banishe.
In Addis Ababa, district 15 private candidates and representatives, Mr. Zenebe Alemayehu and Dessie town representative, Mr. Yusuf Ahmed, were banished from their country last week, they disclosed in the "Reporter" newspaper, September 11 edition and in the September 10th edition of "Ethio-Time" newspaper.
The Reporter in that day edition, "... Mr. Zenebe Alemayehu was one of the few reps in the council, where the majority seat was occupied by EPRDF, and has been voicing a strong opposition," it said.
The newspaper reported in relation to this, as a result of the opposing ideas he raised in the council, the injustice acted upon him, his families and supporters greatly worried him.
Ethio-time on its part, expressed Mr. Zenebe Alemayehu who won privately from district 15, and Mr. Yusuf Ahmed, from Dessie representing Mr. Kifle Wodajo's party and who won a seat in the council, are both said to " be extremely sick and tired of mockery and worried of the haste" in the council, so they went to America legally, it disclosed.
In the 55th plenary session of the council of representatives and during Prime Minister Meles, together with his cabinet ministers, gave explanation and elucidation about the 1998 budget plan and preparation, among the questions Mr. Zenebe raised were the absence of audit report, the enormity of Defense budget and the subsidy given to regions and "the obviousness of the incompatibility of regional developments", these questions and suggestions brought about offensive remarks such as "Bitter enemies of Tigrean people" and, this in turn, uncovered the difference, the newspaper reported.
From Tobia September 11, 1997
Student's case in being cooperatively seen by MPs' permanent Committee
The complaints the Addis Ababa University students presented to the parliament is looked in to by social and legislative issues permanent committee cooperatively.
In the meeting the two committees held yesterday, they discussed on the application and questions the students put forward, deciding to discuss with organizations that have direct relations to the issue..
Mr. Harka Haroye the secretary of parliament's social Affairs permanent committee, expressed in a telephone massage to the reporter of the news paper, that the organizations the two permanent committees would discuss ministry of Education, and Federal Police commission..
This as it is the Addis Ababa University reminded that in order to restart urgently class that were disrupted, a temporary committee by formed that consists of teacher and students, ENA reported..
The university in the reminder it gave in different faculties stated that in order to resolve students questions through the necessary discussion with the senate, students should send one member from each department, within the coming ten days, through the coordination of department heads..
Moreover, teachers committee would be formed in each faculty's academic commission that help the senate, particularly to point out ways to make-up classes, the university reminded..
In addition, the earlier committee that represents the senate and discussed remedial ideas with the student representatives, and follow-up their implementation, is asked to start urgently its work..
In the mean time, students, teachers and committees that this issue refers to are reminded to contribute their part in the effort to start classes urgently.   .
From Addis Zemen May 3, 200.
Is Mengistu Hailemariam's Going to South Africa a News Worth Disseminating broadly.
The Minister of Securit.
Opposing the news coverage time given by the news media that the ex-leader of Ethiopia, Colonel Mengistu Hailemariam's going to South Africa last week for higher medical aid, Sydney sekrimay, Zimbabwe's national Security minister said "should one person's going to south Africa for medication worth disseminating widely?.
He disclosed to Zimbabwe's Independent News.
The Independent News uncovered that Mengistu Hialemariam asked for entrance visa when he was to leave, but the South African authorities expressed that he has been given a diplomatic passport and so they expressed to him that he doesn't need visa, and he went, it explained.
On the other hand, the South African Authorities didn't give visa to Mengistu Hailemairam because they didn't want to get in to contradiction with the Ethiopian government and to avoid international protest, the report of the newspaper pointed out.
Internal sources expressed that the Zimbabwe government not only previously informed the South African officials the travel of Mengistu but also reminded that he return safely with out any problem after he completes his medication.
Since it was not possible to know the problem Mengistu has by Zimbabwe doctors, he went to South Africa an it's unknown how long he would stay there, and this is decided by the change he gets there as a result of his medication, the newspaper concluded.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
A Press Statement is to Be Released about Emperor Haile Selassie!
Emperor Haile selassie Memorial Organization is going to release Press statement for national and international journalists on February 9, 1999.
Led by Bitweded Zewdie Gebre Hiwot this Emperor Haile Silassie I memorial organization was registered to the Minister of Justice, office of Registration of Associations on February 12, 1999, and was granted permission to operate.
The government announced that the emperor's corpse which was kept temporarily in Taeka Negest St.Mary monastery is now going to be moved to the Trinity cathedral and funeral rite would be conducted.
As to when this is to be conducted, nothing is known as yet.
It is expected to be official Monday in the press statement the Management committee releases..
It is to be recalled that the late Emperor Haile Selassie's corps was found buried by the toilet of ex-president colonel Mengistu Haile Mariam; its funeral ceremony is going to be conducted with honor and reverence after 25 years, the related news it reached us stated.  .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
The Council disclosed that it would Participate in two Great Parliamentary Sessions that would take Place in Africa
The people's Representative council would participate in two great parliamentary sessions that would be conducted in Africa recently, the Council's Foreign Defense and Security Issues Standing Committee disclosed.
As the council disclosed yesterday, it would take part recently in the Third All African Parliamentary Assembly and in the Ninth ACAPA European Union Parliaments coalition Assembly that is to be held in Mali.
The All African Parliamentary Assembly would be discussing on the continent's policies, budget and issues that are given focus by African Union.
The All African Parliament is doing its share of consultancy on continental matters and in five years' time it would build up its capacity to become the legislative body, information and public relations Department of the council disclosed.
The assembly that would take place in Mali by the coalition of African, Caribbean and Pacific countries' Parliaments and European Union Parliament would have consultative meeting based on the cotton's agreement, on ways of ruling over and strengthening good governance and democratic order and on ways of subsidizing budgetary support, in the form of regular budget by the European Union. .
The ACAPA countries' parliaments would conduct separate meetings and would establish a consultative body that keeps their mutual benefits, it was reported.
The Ethiopian delegation which constitutes five members team that participates in All African Parliamentary Session is led by the House Speaker Dawit Yohannes, it was pointed out.
From Addis Zemen March 24, 200.
The Security Council Expressed its Concern for Eritrea have Engaged Numerous Force in the Security Zone
The United Nations Security council expressed its concern about the numerous militia and police fore Eritrea engaged in the temporary security zone.
In a report the United Nations Security Council Secretary General presented to the council about Ethio-Eritrea's case on June 20, 2001, the council looked in to it and released a statement the day before yesterday calling Eritrea to sign with the UN regarding the force she is engaging in the region.
In the statement it reminds that Eritrea should, especially, respect unconditionally the free movement of the peace-keeping force in the region.  .
The statement that care out in the name of the president of the council, asked both sides to agree on the border demarcation of the peace region..
It also called upon them that they work to develop mutual trust between them.
Moreover the council asked the president of the council to talk the ambassadors of both countries, the statement disclosed.
The council also called fro the international community to continue strengthening the humanitarian aid they give to the war displaced victims, the statement pointed out.
From Addis Zemen June 27, 2001 .
Explosives were Thrown in Harar Town
Two explosives which blasted in 40 minutes gap at 8 o'clock in the evening on November 2, 1998 at Babile Mineral Water Factory, in Harar town have incurred serious damage on the stone wall of the factory around the water outlet, our eastern Ethiopia reporter disclosed.
The attack which targeted the motor of the factory would have destroyed the factory as a whole, but these were no human casualties, the report mentioned.
At the moment the groups who have incurred the damage have not been known, and they were not captured, but there was a wide rumor that is being heard referring them as "hardliner insurgents who are assumed to have gotten in to the town", the reporter disclosed.
In the man time, there was a serious gun fire exchange in the night by the side of where the factory is situated to Erer direction, our reporter disclosed quoting the area residents, but they couldn't say the gun fire exchange between who and who.
From Tobia November 6, 1997
"Tigrean National, the Segment of Alula" is Expanding in Tigray
Since the division among the central committee of TPLF, not only does this has led to creting divisions but also grown to organizing, the news we received from Makale Tomar reporter pointed out.
The activity that was carried out underground opposing the wing that's led by Mr. Meles Zenawi, operates under the motto "Tigrean national, the segment of Alula" and spreads its web in different parts of the region, the report expressed.
This opposition movement is being expressed through absenteeism on meetings called by the government, not participating in development activities, and exempting oneself from election, disclosed in related news.
Since this public opposition is taking root and in order to control the areas, close and loyal individuals to the ruling party (the opposition youngsters call them Yets Megn) have started to be appointed, the report pointed out, and as an evidence, he mentioned that all administrators in Temben are from Adowa.
In a related news, Mr. Sebhat Nega's sister who was appointed chairman of Makele Zone, Tigray Region president's wife, Mrs. Kidusan Nega, has dismissed the chairpersons of districts of Mekale town who were previously elected by the people, and in their places, assigned people from the sub-districts; and this should that the administration is worried about people and it was an act of assigning leadership positions to those who are loyal to Mr. Meles, the sources disclosed.  .
On the other hand, the gourp clash amongst Makele Youth since recently, has become beyond the control of government security forces, and the youngsters haven't stopped fighting fixing dates and places, the report uncovered.
The Makale Town Administration which seemed to have lost control over the situation and couldn't take measures beyond organizing speedy security guards, have become a concern, it was said..
The report finally mentioned that the money that is used to be paid up to now in the name of "Tigrean Families of martyrs" to building their financial capacity has stopped being paid to the "Families of Martyrs" and, hence, they are found in desperate living conditions, condemning the regime, it was said.
From Tomar January 22, 200.
Ethiopia was the 32nd country to approve the agreement for the establishment of African Union, UN disclosed
Ethiopia was the 32nd country to approve the agreement that was presented for the establishment of African Union, (UN) disclosed..
The organization in a statement he sent to ENA yesterday it disclosed it heard through Dr. Tekeda Alemu that the council of people's representative in its 21t regular session approved the agreement for the establishment of the union, and following this, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi signed on the document..
Leaders and governments of African countries in the special meeting they attend form march 2-3, 2001 in Libya they declared the establishment of African Union, UN disclosed.
The Union would be operational when two – third or 36 African countries approved, UN disclosed.
Addis Zemen March 12, 2001
Mr. Maeregu Bezabeh was Released on Bail
Mr. Maeregu Bezabeh, who was accused of genocide and editor-in-chief of Addis Zemen newspaper during the dergue regime, in a Federal High Court's decision passed yesterday, was to follow his ease being released on bail..
The Sixty criminal bench of the court decided that the accused be released on bail summoning a five hundred Birr guarantor or paying the money after the special prosecutor General investigated the charge and evidence it produced and the legal article doesn't prohibit bail right for the charge he was accused for.  .
Since the 35 witnesses the special prosecutor brought didn't testify that the accused participated in the said crime and the produced written evidence didn't coincide with the article of the law the court passed the decision, charging the article of the law..
The lawyer of the accused appealed that his client follow his case being released on bail since the changed article of the law doesn't prohibit bail right and got positive response so the curt session allowed bail right for the accused..
The lawyer explained that the accused is pensioner and responsible of a family, so it ordered to summon a 500 Birr guarantor or pay 500 Birr, himself and be released from arrest..
From Addis Zemen June 8, 2001
Impress Bitrik's Birthday will be celebrated tomorrow in Addis Ababa..
Empress Bitrik's birthday which is celebrated colorfully in Netherlands would also be, celebrated colorfully in Addis Ababa at Netherlands embassy tomorrow, it was disclosed to our newspaper.
The birthday of the Empress which is now celebrated as a national day has been conventionally commemorated since 1891..
In the birthday party to be thrown tomorrow in the premise of the embassy, higher officials of the Ethiopian government and ministers, international and diplomatic members, religious fathers, renown business people and invited guests would be present.
As a reporter from Fiameta would be in the party, we would present in the future if anything special occurs.
From Fiameta April 29, 199.
Araph Moi Disclosed that He Would Sack Corrupted Officials.
In order to urgently stop the act of embezzling government's money, and taking bribe, one special Investigating team was assigned and Araph Moi gave instructions that the Kenyan government would take measures against officials pre-pointed by this team, it was reported.
Since Corruption and condition of bribery in Kenya have not only widely spread out but it has started growing up, government was obliged to oust officials who are involved in this dangerous nation-wide issue..
The cause for Opening up the door for corruption is believed to be the formation of many ministry offices, and, hence, it was pointed out that reduction measures would be taken.
In a seminar opened at a Saferi Club for Workers of Accounting and financial management, the Cabinet Minister Professor Angari reminded that officials who are involved in corruption would be dismissed from their job.
He warned for the 60 member participants.
Professor Angari, in his speech added that those working in finance and are far from accountability and clarity would be dismissed.
In a warning he gave in line with this, he said.
Either working with professionals properly or leave the job and go away, that's the only choice we have.
From Fiameta September 15, 1999.
The Fire Accident Resulted in Damage on Human and property estimated at 2.7 Million Birr.
The fuel career truck turned upside down in Addis Ababa, district 21 and 20 and resulted in fire accident on humans and animals.
An estimation of 2.7 million Birr property was destroye.
Yesterday at 7:30 at a place commonly called "Beg Tera, on the way to kera a fire stated and one person died while 7 individuals had small and severe injury.
The fuel career truck which was the cause for the start of the fire; two home cars and 11 houses and shops, spare parts stores, cows and sheep and dogs were burned.
Among the victims whom we talked at the place, Mr. Bahiru Jemal has lost an estimated 80 thousand Birr property, Mr. Berhanu Yirga 40 thousand Birr property Mrs. Kassech Hurisa 10 thousand Birr properties were lost, they expressed.
The individuals expressed that the fuel that spills from the fuel career truck has aggravated the fire accident, and told that he couldn't come to the rescue of his properties and money except the clothes he wor.
If Fire brigade didn't reach on time and put off the fire, the surrounding houses could have been devastated.
Lieutenant Tewdros Masresha Head of Fire protection and predication Operation Department explained to the newspaper reporter that in order to put the fire under control a four hour protective effort was conducted.
From Addis Zemen May 6, 2001.
The Peace Effort Itself is an Impediment  to Stop the Wa.
Reportag.
In his New Year message, the Ethiopian President Dr. Negasso Gidada pointed out that the peace effort which has been looked forward for so long to bring about lasting solution has now turned gloomy as a result of the inclusion of technicalities by third party interventionist in the peace effort.
According to president Negasso's speech, because some third party forces consider the aggressor and the aggressed on equal footing, the sought-for peace had been marred.
If this is not going to be achieved, Ethiopia would safeguard its territory through Nile this year, and called upon the army to be ready for this while the people should be standing by for the usual support.
On the other hand, political observers who follow-up Ethio Eritrean conflict pointed out that the peace effort wouldn't succeed, and in fact, there seems to be a tendency of continuing the war.
This is manly because America is merely attempting to press and protect her own advantage.
Other than giving Essayas' administration favorable time to buy, the several attempts of the peace efforts haven't done any good; although it has passed a year since Ethiopian and Eritrean war broke, except a one-time-hard-effort that succeeded in wiping out Eritrean forces from Bademe front and surroundings.
Most Ethiopians are speaking with regret that the time wasted on peace efforts harmed Ethiopia by giving favorable time for EPLF force to mobilize and prepare themselves.
Since the war broke, not only has standard of living been skyrocketed, but also new jobs could not be opened.
Thus elongation of the war has created a lot of damage. If she can't restore the land that was taken from her, Ethiopia should, once and for all, make great preparation to keep her territorial integrity so that she could look forward to development, according to the opinion poll.
The International pressure that enforces Ethiopia is not to be seen lightly.
While the major perpetrator is United States of America, the plan is meant, in two-ways, to put Ethiopia in trouble.
The plan is to rule out exemption from writing off debts and, secondly, from any kind of aid that was offered from IMF and World Bank in the future, if Ethiopia doesn't accept the cease-fire without any condition.
With Ethiopian land being occupied by Eritreans, and with Eritrean forces leaving the occupied Ethiopian land without any binding agreement, it would be unlawful to oblige Ethiopia to sign the cease-fire agreement, and, hence, Ethiopia didn't accept it.
It could't accept it.
However, before taking forceful measures to retake the land occupied by force, it would be a timely act to take international diplomatic campaign with organization of African Unity as well United Nations, in order to avert their Eritrean-biased decision.   .
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
Dead People were Secretly Burie.
The report that reached us stated that some farmers in the southern peoples' Regional Administration were exposed to severe misery.
The brutality and suppression inflicted by the regional, zonal and district officials have been aggravated from time to time..
The other sad scene is that there are people who are arrested and killed, the exclusive report that came from Fiameta reads as follows:
Taxation has increased three and four fold, price for fertilizers has skyrocketed; those farmers who put forward these complaints to Keficho Shekicho Zone council have been looked for and some were put behind bars in Bonga city prison while others in Masha city prison without any court order.
Moreover, close to 700 children, youngsters, adults and the old in sidama Zone, Hagere Selam District, special name cheticha were taken very far from their homes and put behind bars in Aleta Wendo District Police Station, Awasa District Police Station, Belate National Military Service Training premise, and in some other location where relative couldn't trace their whereabouts and provide food and supplies..
Among the arrested fellow members in Awasa City Police Station, around 7 people were dead due to hunger and illness and so were taken to an unknown location in the night and their corpses were buried..
Among those who were behind bars in Belate National Military Service Training Center, approximately 15 people were suddenly killed as a result of a blast of previously-unexploded-bomb in the premise while the victims were "out-housing" in the field.
Half of them were killed as a result of mosquito bite and hunger.
Among these 700 farmers, there were children whose ages were only 12.
There are also elderly priests and sheiks whose ages were close to 90..
The officials who were responsible for putting these poor farmers behind bars, and doing the injustices are as follows:
1.Mr. Abate Kisho - President of Regional Administration.
2.Mr. Wakeyu Demesa - Ex-Deputy Chairman of Sidama Zone Council and Presently                                       Administrator of Shebedino Zone.
3.Mr. Samuel Sheba - Ex-Police Commissioner of Sidama Zone and Presently Deputy                                    Chairman of Sidama Zone Council, while the above three are the                                 ones who play principal role in this atrocities,
4.Lientenant Mesele - (Chief Commander of Shebedino District Police station).
5.Mr. Getahun - (Administrator of Hegere Selam District).
6.Asfaw Amache - (A soldier) Sidama Zone Police Kidnap Squad.
Moreover in the five coffee-producers districts in Sidama Zone (Bersa, Dara, Aleta, Wendo, Dalena and Shabedino), around 462 farmers were put behind bars without any charges and court order.
These farmers were taken to Aleta Wendo District Adult Training Center found in chewat Kebele, parents and relatives found these farmers confined in a single room exposed to suffocation, and some of them were dilled as a result of it..
The perpetrators of this drama, who played significant roles in putting these farmers behind bars, are the following:
1.Mr. Abate Kisho - President of the Regional Administration.
2.Mr. Samuel Sheba - Ex-Police Commissioner of Sidama Zone and Presently Deputy                                    Chairman of Sidama Zone.
3.Mr. Bekele Budola - Chairman of the Sidama Zone Development Association and Central                               committee of Sidama Organization, and Wondo Company General                                 Manager..
The cause of the arrest is expected to be 1million Birr debt form Development Bank, the bank that lent the money for fourteen work and service Cooperatives for the work related to washed coffee..
The money was embezzled by officials from the top Regional office down to the district level, including the Associations' Officials, but the poor farmers didn't have anything to do with this.
These 462 farmers became just because they divulged the officials secret.
From Fiameta March 11, 1998
Mekane Yesus Church is to Appoint Female Priests                 .
Just like other work responsibilities, the suggestion that females should get priesthood and work as priests or pastors has started to yet acceptance in world church council, Priest Yadesa Duba Disclosed.
Priest Yadesa Duba, President of Ethiopian Evangelical church, Mekane Yesus, member of the world church council and All African church Deputy President disclosed this in an interview he gave to Fiameta..
When our Lord Jesus Christ came to this world, the bible speaks of how he approached women and children, teaching using different parables, and how among those who, up to the end, followed Jesus in His cross and at his grave yard were women, and so women have special prestige in the church, Priest Yadeta explained. .
With regards to women's priesthood, although it raised a lot of controversies in the world church council, most of the churches gave priesthood to their females, and there are African churches, too, which accept this and made it practical, and the Ethiopian Evangelical church Mekane Yesus is discussing on the issues, the president of the church disclosed. .
Does it have appropriateness to accept such a practice of female priesthood which was not known in Apostle's Law?
In response to the question the newspaper put forward to him, priest Yadesa responded, "since the previous laws were decreed by men, they don't have acceptability and who gave rights to judge that men and clean while females are unclean?
The world church Council works with those sides who hold on the practice of sodomy, and how do you see this, is it to be applauded from the ethics of Christianity?
In response to this question he said, the world church council approves of them like any other on laity that they could go to church, but they should not give any service in the church, out of this the church strongly opposes the act, he disclosed.
On the claim that the Ethiopian Evangelical church Mekane Yesus wrote against the history of the Ethiopian Orthodox monophysitism church, he responded, "The book is not intended to provoke hatred but it was written based on the history of Mekane Yesus church and it should be realized that it doesn't refer to the present Orthodox church," he said.
Priest Yadesa who responded to the questions raised by the reporter with regards to the growing number of religious organizations, theft of the laity and pertinent issues, stated that the growing number of religious organizations in the country at present could create problems and government should make legal control on issuance of certificate for registering religious organizations.
Regarding the condition of theft of laity from Orthodox Church, he said that the action is not proper and those churches who involved in such activity should be refrained, he disclosed.             .
We would like to disclose that the interview priest Yadesa Duba, Ethiopian Evangelical Church, Mekane Yesus president and member of world church Council, gave to Fiameta newspaper would be published accordingly in the future..
From Fiameta June 30, 1999
Message of Fiameta
The Designating Feature of Democratic Government is its openness
A democratic government which is chosen by the people and which stands to serve the people has its aim to make all the works it does vis-à-vis political social and economic issues and the resolutions it pass clear to the people.
With authoritarian governments this culture is missing..
Whether the people knows or not, without consulting and informing the people, issues of a country and the people would be operational merely on leaders' will..
Due to this, most of the work couldn't give solutions to the people's burning questions and puts the country into a worst trouble.
However, in a democratic government order, not only is there any thing done out of the people's interest and will, but also both positive and negative issues that happened in the country would be announced to the people on time..
Since suppressing things that happened or undermining and misinforming are considered betraying people's trust, the democratic order oblige to put straight all phenomena without misdirection.
Government in consultation with the people would seek remedy for the bad situations on the ground.
Out of this, there's no mechanism where people cannot take participation in the matters that concerns them and to willingly accept whatever is decided by the leadership..
Unfortunately, the way things are done in Africa is to nominally accept democracy but not respecting human rights, which is the first chapter of democracy..
Although it's common to hear that the people elected their leaders democratically, the democratically elected leadership bodies soon prove, to be non-democrats with their deeds..
The leadership group in everything he does is not open into the people who elected it..
As soon as the African leadership bodies hold power, they pare theirs and their dears' future lives with the people's money, and so put the people into the abysmal poverty, turning his lives into hell.    .
When causes of the country's problems are pin-pointed to the people in the free press, the governments have an experienced culture of taking server measures on journalists..
Nevertheless, sooner the crime these journalists have been accused of would be uncovered and every time it's observed exposing each government.     .
In most respects the situation In Ethiopia is better than several African countries..
However, among the many missing things, the main one is that government doesn't show openness.
The situations happening in many national issues are concealed from the public or misinforming the public through government medias or even sooner the real situation would be exposed in detail by foreign medias and the people would hear it..
This operating mechanism that becomes common from time to time and which lacks openness makes the people to lose trust on the government..
Just before Eritrean government and EPLF leadership invaded Ethiopia, it was a recent memory to observe the former commanding Ethiopia more than Ethiopians do..
After the border conflict surfaced it was disclosed that the EPLF government was conducting spying information and fund-raising activities through its underground anti-Ethiopian organization.  .
Yet people believe that it would be difficult to say that government was unaware of it when the organization has been operating for a long time.
Moreover, at the time EPLF invaded Ethiopia, Ethiopian oppositions inside and outside the country stood together with the government to defend the invading enemy, asking to work together on the future issues of Ethiopia when the response given to these forces was heard that they are not Ethiopians, but enemies that should not be concerned with issues pertaining to their country, whether our government is democratic has become questionable..
The quest does not stop here but while it is said that we are following the democratic path, and when people hear the refusal of government officials to accept the negotiation, they are troubled to make out as to what kind of path we're following.    .
Since the recent clash in the Southern People Region between Gedio and Guditu nationalities and the resulting severe causalities and displacement was not officially disclosed, it has become the other issue that lacks openness..
The statement that was given after sometime was imbalanced, detached from the main issue an aimed at accusing the free press, which simply showed that it was not open.   .
What we tried to show above is to pin point that there shouldn't be hide and seek game between government and people, government should tell the truth to the people, and it would build trust in the people only when he strengthens this culture.
So if government wants to prove the path it is following is really a democratic order we say that it has to be open in the first place..
From Fiameta Sunday Edition September 6, 1998
The Appointment of the General Manager Aroused Controversy!
Due to M.G Aba Hailemariam's appointment last week as a General manager of Addis Ababa City Parish, Aba Paulos had a difference of opinion with his families, which aroused a great controversy..
The former Arada Ghiourgis church Administrator M.G Aba Hailemariam  who had been given this position by the patriarch to substitute Aba Gebremichael Beyene, who left the position due to the new bishop-elect and who by now have been victim of car accident; in order to fulfill Aba Paulos' interest, although he accepted the offer through a lot of go betweens, the Patriarch's nephew Mr. Yared and his supporters attempted to avert this decision of the Patriarch, the news that reached us from around the clergy pointed out.
According to the news, even though the patriarch had fought hard against his nephew, special secretary (Mr. Yared), and appointed his new friend M/G Aba Hailemariam, there are three different, contradictory things that lay before him.
These are to lick Aba Paulo's boots, or to obey Mr. Yared's will, or else, like the ex-manager, to be indifferent to all.
To live according to the will of all is not possible.
For one slave cannot be bought by two masters..
Mr. Yared, who recognized this before hard, tried his best to avert the appointment, though not succeeded.
To think of working in agreement with the new general manager M/G Aba Hailemariam, Mr. Yared Kebedew and the secretary of the city parish Yohannes Wale would seem very difficult in the eyes of most of the parish workers, and this worry them..
According to the workers of the parish, although Aba Haile Mariam has been claimed to be the right hand of the patriarch, he has never been seen embezzling money, no one thinks of him like that..
Unlike other officials, he nerves feels like neither receiving nor giving gifts..
And if he couldn't embezzle wigh the rest of his new colleagues, he wouldn't embezzle with the rest of his new colleagues, he wouldn't remain in his power for so long, they said..
Meanwhile, starting from members of the synod, many others including so many church leaders who wanted to remain anonymous applauded Aba Mariam's position not to accept his candidacy as bishop-elect.
Aba Paulos who doesn't want the new general manager to be far away from him although searched him and then offered him the authority, it would be unthinkable to assume working with his nephew Mr. Yared and Mr. Yohannes wale..
Unless of course M/G Aba Hailemariam, charged his position and become like the former manager, said the observers..
From Fiameta April 29, 1998
Five Individuals who Incited civil war and Terror in Gambella were Sentenced to Hard Labor
The Federal Higher Court Mobile tribunal has passed on a sentence from 1 up to 14 years of hard labor on five individuals who incited civil war and terror in Gambella region.
In a mobile session of court that was held the day before yesterday in Gambella, the sentence was passed on against Umod Ubong, Ukik Abula, Ubon Awale, Kebede Ukelo and Amed Utow for it was proved by the prosecutor's evidence that these individuals incited chaos and civil war clashes.
In Gambella, on those five individuals who incited terror and civil war, it was decided a hard labor sentence, in particular, the accused Ubon Awale, Umod Ubong and Ukok Abula planning to wipe away all the 28 Nuwer nationality and south Sudan refugees who were the same in culture and religion and were going to Fungnido from Gambella by car in July 2002, at 10 o'clock in the morning, when they reached Alware inspection station, they separated them from other passengers and made them out of the car, and arrested them, the mobile session of court assured from the prosecutor's evidence.
After they arrested these individuals, took them to abush that is found in11 kilometres' distance from the station, beat them with bullets and cut them with degger, killing them, the mobile session of curt proved by people's and written evidences.
Especially, among the accused, Ubon Awasa should have protected the individuals from such dangers, for he is a policeman, was found committing the crime, intensifying the penalty and, hence, as from the date of his red-handed seizure he is sentenced to 14 years hard labor, Mr. Ochan explained.
From Addis Zemen April 2, 2005
The UN High Commission Commissioner for Refugees came to Addis Ababa
The United Nations High commission Commissioner for Refugees Mr. Rud Lubers came to Addis Ababa yesterday for a four-day visit.
In his stay, the Commissioner is expected to met and discuses with Ethiopian High Officials Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim an international donor organizations about security and support refugees in the region.
It's disclosed that Mr. Rud during his stay here, he would visit refugee camps..
On the other hand, in a press statement it dispatched yesterday, the United Nations High commission Commissioner disclosed that in eight station in eastern Ethiopia, there are 121,000 Somalians, and in five stations in western Ethiopian 72, 000 sudanese, around Sheraro area 3,276 Eritreans and 450 refugees with different nationalities in the cities are taken care by the organization's bureau in Ethiopia and the government of Ethiopia. .
The number of refugees in Ethiopia ten years before were 1,000,000 are since then the number reduced greatly and reached 198,000, the organization pointed out, and added saying that about 1 million Ethiopians returned home in the last ten years..
From Addis Zemen April 10, 2001.
The Minister of Justice was Released for 15 days on his request of Obstructio.
The order the Federal First Instance Court third Civil code court session gave to arrest the minister, Mr. Weredeweld, was held based on the request of obstruction the accused presented and was given a release for 15 days, the president of the court disclosed..
The president Mr. Kesalegn Berhe yesterday disclosed to ENA that the he obstructed the order the court passed to arrest Mr. Weredewold Wolde based on the civil code.
The president Mr. Desalegn pointed out that the minister told him that the First Instance court the third civil code court session's order was not proper and until he appeals to a higher court he asked him to obstruct the order and based on the request it was granted.
The president informed that the order to release the accused for 15 days was passed until his case is seen by a higher court and an optional order was passed.
If the order passed by the First Instance Court 3rd Civil Code Court session to arrest Mr. Werede Wolde for a month is found right after it is presented to the higher court through a appeal and being studied, the arrest would be enforced, but if it repeals all the orders and documents the court passed accusing the minister of being guilty would be repealed, the president disclosed..
The Federal First Instance court 3rd civil code court session passed on the order on the accused to stay arrested for a month for he didn't respect the court's order and was not available in the court session, Mr. Desalegn said.
From Addis Zemen June 1, 2001.
Ethiopian coffee is Producing Goal.
Last Sunday when the league's 10the week game was conducted, 13 goals were cast in to the net.
Out of these 10 of them were registered in the three games played at Addis Ababa Stadium.
Ethio-Coffee took precedence by scoring four goals on Adama Kenema.
In three games carried out of Addis Ababa only one goal was registered in each game.
This is an indication of the games' similarity.
In the three games conducted at Addis Ababa Stadium, Banks and EELPA's game ended in a draw while Ethiopia Coffee, returning from recess, scored four goals consecutively proving their superiority over their opponent team.
The result of Ethiopian Premier League 10the week, EELPA against Guna ended 1-1 draw, Bands Vs Awasa 2-2 draw, Ethio-coffee against Adama 4-0, Saint George Vs Trans 1-0, Medhin Insurance Vs Wenji sugar 1-0, Nyala Vs Muger 1-0, Meder Babur Vs Arba Minch Textile 1-0 completed the 10th week games. .
The next 11th week games would continue based on the time table, today at 4 o'clock in Addis Ababa Medhin Insurance Vs Muger, at 6 o' clock Saint George Vs Awasa Kenema, in Arbaminch, Arbaminch Textile Vs Adama Kenema, in Makele, Trans Ethiopia would play against Nyala.  .
The game continues tomorrow in Addis Ababa, Ethio-Coffee Vs Guna, EELPA Vs Banks, where as at wonji, Wonji sugar would take on Babur.
From Ethio Sport January 9, 2002
The European Parliament Passed a Decision on Ethiopian's matter
The European parliament recently disclosed in the decision it passed strictly condemned the illegal killing, horror, imprisonment and kidnapping carried out by Ethiopian government and military, violating what is stated in the constitution as well as in the amended fourth Lome Convention of which she accepted;
Although the parliament appreciated the ongoing democratic process and structural change, it expressed its worries on the measures taken following this, the pressure and persecution on established and organized professional and public associations, Ethiopian Free Press journalists, Ethiopian Teachers' Association and Ethiopian Workers' confederation leadership members, most of whom were obliged to go in to exile.
Moreover, the parliament mentioned that the killing of Mr. Assefa Maru who was executive committee member of Ethiopia Teachers' Association and EHRC was very horrifying and has passed a 7-point decision with regards human rights condition of Ethiopia.
The decision were,
1. "Strictly condemns Mr. Assefa Maur's killing,
2. Strictly condemns all violations of human rights carried out by government and defense force,
3. Calls for immediate half for acts committed by the country's higher officials on Ethiopian citizens violating their basic human rights illegally kidnapping people relating it to political affairs, persecution, arrest and rape.
4. Asks the Ethiopian higher officials to accept the rights to freely express one's ideas fully, and respect citizen's rights to organize in associations and freely express their ideas;
5. Reminds the Ethiopian government to urgently release all political prisoners who were arrested as prisoners of conscience and for the judiciary body then to give free and fair judgment, taking measures of amendment.
6. Asks the European council, commission and member countries to closely follow the treatment of human rights condition in Ethiopia and report if any kind of improvement is seen.
7. The president of the parliament gave this decision to the council, commission, and Ethiopian government, United Nations Secretary and United Nations Human Rights Higher Commission so as to make them aware of the condition and be able to execute the policy" it stated.
It's to be recalled that European Parliament took similar decision on Ethiopia on July 18, 1996 pertaining to Ethiopian human rights violation and asking for constraint of the time and again persecution carried out on citizens.
From Tobia September 25, 1997
Air Force is Ready to Defend the sovereignty of its Country and Constitution, the Commander -in-chief Disclsed
Ethiopian Air Force is going to carry out efficiently its duty of defending the sovereignty of the country and the constitution the commander-in-chief of the Air Force disclosed.
The commander in chief, Major General Alemshet Degefe, in a rank-promotion ceremony held at the Harar Field, at the head quarter commemorating May 28 holiday, disclosed that the air force would carry out efficiently its duties of defending the sovereignty of the country and the constitution, renewing its public mission.
The commander pointed out that the peaceful and democratic political process that is being strengthened in the country is the result of patriotic sacrifices of many truthful children, and from this point of view this year's May 28 victory holiday will have special meaning.
The election that was conducted for the 3rd time was conducted by the people using their democratic rights, and the army standing round the constitution is ready to carry out whatever is needed of it to assure the decision of the people and the ongoing democratic culture, the commander-in-chief reminded.
In order to make all membersof the airforce stable and calm lives and contiue respecting the nation-nationality and sovereignty of the country in a secured way, the commander-in-chief reminded that they should carry out their mission efficiently..
Among the commanders that were given the ranks from lieutenant to Captain, Major Yadeta Amente and Captain Ali Tegene gave suggestions that in order to defend the sovereignty of the country and to execute the constitution that people ratified with out any impediment, they would do their best and rose with determination with other members of the army.  .
Besides the ranks they got a promotion would be a moral-booster for them to defend the sovereignty of the country and constitution, and efficiently carry out the public mission that they have already started with loyalty and patriotism, they disclosed.
The ranks were given by Major General Alemshet Degfe; the air force higher officials were present during the ceremony.
During the ceremony prayer has been done for May 28 patriots.
From Addis Zemen June 3, 2005
Message of Fiamet.
You brought it, You Took it!
About two years ago there was one controversy.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) put Eritrean and Ethiopian Economic Delegates on a round table and started a discussion.
The basic idea of the discussion was to propose that they use the similar kind t economic policy, and if this is not possible, stop using the same currency and produce their own each of them.
At the time Eritrea used to follow macro-economic policy, while Ethiopia, micro-economic policy..
Both sides didn't want to change their economic policies; or didn't agree to change.
So, they were obliged to take the other option of IMF.
This second option was for both countries to stop using Ethiopian Birr ... they agreed to produce their own currency.
Based on this, they produced and distributed their own currency, in accordance with IMF's order.
After this money was printed, it brought about another problem.
In Eritrea, great economic doom was to come.
Tension reigned in the border of Tigray and Eritrea..
In the new Ethiopian currency, a map that included Bademe was seen.
The economic problem of Eritrea was transformed to war..
In a few months after the publication of the currency, because of IMF and Bademe, war broke out.
And now IMF gave warning for both countries..
Unless they stop the war it warned that it won't give any kind of aid.
One of the instigators of the war was IMF.
Today, it gave an order that says "stop the war".
Since these countries are economically colonized in the eve of 21st century, they are going to accept the order..
As to us, what if we call IMF, mockingly the modern colonizer ... "you brought it, you took it ...".
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
Police was Ordered to Present the Reason for the Decision to Release Siye Abrha on Bail was not Operationa.
Police was asked to present the reason as to why Mr. Siye Abrha who was under arrest being suspected of corruption crime couldn't be released on bail by the decision of the federal First Instance Court, the court session yesterday gave an optional appointment.
The Court Fund it appropriate to pass on an order after listening to the appeals presented to it from both by the court's decision that people who were suspected of corruption do not have bail rights and Siye Abrha's case which was before this proclamation put in place on June 9, 2001, and the appeal presented from the lawyers of the suspect which stated that it should be given strict command to the police to release the suspect.
Based on this, the court ordered the police to bring any of obstruction order given to it by any side who has legal judiciary authority on June 20, 2001 that stated the reason for not implementing the order of the court.
The court stated that the decision of the court to release the suspect on bail before the proclamation no. 239/93 that decreed by low came out operational, and without sending the order of obstruction to the court from the body of legal judiciary authority, hence, not implementing the order of the court so far, is undermining the order of the court, it stated.  .
The Federal High Court First Instance first criminal Bench court session receiving the submitted question of appeal from Investigation coordination Department on June 12, 2001, and the Mr. Siya Abraha's order of release on bail was order to be temporarily obstructed, the Federal Police Investigation Coordination department.
From Addis Zemen June 16, 200.
Are Children of the Poor not going to learn from now on?
Costly School fees have been contentious..
It's planned to have them paid up to 8 thousand Birr in a year.
The decision to have students paid in addition to the social and political problems the Addis Ababa University students have, and facilitation have been underway so as to make those capable pay and those who can't would pay borrowing from the bank.
In the meeting conducted towards the end of last academic year at Business and Economic Faculty Hall, it was told that the issue of payment has been one of the very contentious ones that has stayed for long and even passed on to the new year, University students who are close to students' congress told our newspaper..
Out of the reasons given by those who explained were "Based on the free economic policy the government won't interfere in any other sectors except defense and Administration: and in order to go forward independently the university has to design its income sources; and in other European and African countries education is on payment basis; and that it opens an opportunity for those who can pay but couldn't learn, and to elevate the quality of education."
The students who brought this to our office disclosed that the payment would be varied according to the type of the course, and for medicine law and engineering, approximately up to 8000 (eight thousand) Birr may be needed for payment, and also explained that various questions were raised on the side of the students;
Since one out of the different taxes government collects form the public is expended for education, the reason that "In order that the university will have its own income" is not appropriate, told the students.
Comparing Ethiopia to Europe and their African countries and trying to do all things in accordance to Europe and America is not appropriate, for Ethiopia whose development is the least among the countries who are less developed, and whose people's living condition is low and whose people are suffering from hunger, and the students expressed that who are not free until they pay their debts, and it restricts the ability to further the education of the future intellectuals, expressed their opposition against payment.  .
This issue of costly higher education fee "out of the general public I stood for the 85% farmers".
A government that claims to follow a rural focused policy" and in a country where education has not yet widened planning such kind of policy would rob the educational opportunity of the majority of the farmers and the poor children of most people, it has been widely discussed.
With regards to the payment decided by the government, the congress who was said to be elected by students, is preparing to call a meeting and discuss with the general students community in the coming year 1998, the majority of students in order to express their opposition through open demonstration the students asked the congress to facilitate this, but the administration of the university is thinking of suppressing this activity, these students who reported the news disclosed..
Especially, the sidist Kilo campus has been the source of students' protest continually for the past and present governments and if pubic demonstration is conducted against the payment, the university administration is terrifying and threatening that the government is going to charge it, once and for all, to a research center, and the coordinators an supporters of the protest would be selected and only those who aren't would be assigned in the different regional institutions and learn, the students also mentioned..
These students who disclosed to our press department said that suppression and injustice, in the university has become increasing that those who are entrusted with authority are conducting atrocious embezzlement..
The embezzlement is conducted under the cover of food supply and they insisted that investigation should be conducted with those university authorities who are involved in this corruption..
The embezzlement has been going on in purchasing beet cheaply from debrezeit town from oxen that are slaughtered mainly for the purpose of research in veterinary science, rather than from the Abbattoir House but fraud it with regular purchase register; in purchasing expired and spoiled bread flour in cheep price but presenting a forged receipt for expensive price, in reducing some amount of fuel out of the fuel carriage, which is bought with lots of money for the purpose of the university vehicles, and selling it for an exchange of goods, not from those who win bids but form those individuals, whom the university purchaser and dean prefer..
The butter which has been bought with costly price was spoiled and proved to be inedible and was exposed, while the fuel that was reduced by these people from the fuel carriage was caught red handed just before it was about to go out of the campus, the informers pointed out..
While the individual who was arrested due to embezzlement was released in two months time an assigned in another work post is surprising, individuals who were suspected of embezzlement were relieved, and it was recently given press statement on the radio as if the theft was carried out by other individuals.
Based on the informers who gave general comment regarding the situations in the university campuses, it was possible to understand that for the suppression of students' grievance, in addition to the "policemen" which were seem wriggled about, students of one specific region were armed and are making strict follow up and control..
These "students" who were assigned in the university, not with their results, but with their contribution, have special "alliance" and operate in the campus during the vacation, it was disclosed..
When they need to discuss and in form monthly meetings and place, they put on paper on the notice boards entitled "Melketa" (which literally means observation) to make a call, and every year similar call is made to new students who come form regions, and orientation is given, according to the informants, teachers whose origin is from this region gather these students during their leisure time and given them addition lesson of economics and mathematics, they added.   .
These "students" and armed individuals who were made to form "alliance" are the ones who expose students following their activities, and while identity cards were given for members of students' congress so as "to move around without any difficulty" and do their jobs, these "students" were also given identity cards, it was understood from the informers..
Among the questions raised by the students, solution should be sought for students who came back after with drawing for a year due to sickness, for they are devoid of having food and accommodation services, and this working procedure created a lot of problem for students who are poor and that come form remote areas; the working procedure that make students disqualify without seeing their problems and reasons, for a year just because the time for registration has passed by a few hours or one day should be avoided, the payments students pay for appealing to investigate when wrong results are given to them should be left out; assigning students who have enough results without their interest and inclinations should stop; the university's administrative and academic working procedure should have clarity and stop talking about receiving this and that number of students each year just to draw donors of education, while half of the students are made to sleep on the cement floor and grass-mat, sending out half of them in the middle of the academic year deceiving mechanism of income – generation should stop; these are only few of the questions, the informers explained to our press office..
While the questions of university students problems and questions are then ones mentioned, the newly established students' congress in order to get recognition in foreign universities, was organizing students in tribes, strengthening EPRDF's structure in the university, and for this it was helping students to be members of their regional development associations, it was understood from the informers..
The informers disclosed that the students' congress was hand and gloves with the university administration while it's in contradiction with the student community, and the attempt to organize students in race was intended to wipe a pay the national feeling of Ethiopianness, they asked 67,000 Birr budget so as to strengthen the university administration's influence on students council and to build up the relationship it created with the administration..
It has been more than three months since the Tobia magazine put forward questions to the president's office with regards to payment of higher education and the general situation viewed in the university, "structural changes are being made and therefore, wait for us" was the response we got up to one.
From Tobia August 28, 1997
"The measure taken ... is Right, Proper and Timely" Prime Minister Meles
In the interview he gave to the special edition of Abiyotawi Democracy magazine which was published for the occasion of tenth anniversary of EPRDF, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi explained that since the measure which is being taken is in accordance with the law and order, it is right, proper and timely.
Does the government have some problems in maintaining peace and stability due to the recent division, opposition of Addis Ababa University students, the arrested people in relation to hooligans' looting and the death of Mr. Kinfe?
In a response to this question, he said the fact that these events occurred one after the others can't be reasons for the government's inability to maintain peace and stability..
With regards to the students' case, the prime minister stated that on the one hand there may be questions that should be raised and are proper but he believed that it would be difficult for him to say that most to the questions couldn't have been entertained by the administration of the university..
However, there was a situation where they attempted to use the students' activity for other purpose and since the majority of the students taking their stand, couldn't identify those who were used as instruments for the opposition, and since this situation was that they kind of blindly follow it made the problem complicated, this I could see he said.    .
"Some forces that were behind the students, not as seeking remedy for the queries but at the back of the questions as a camouflage to create confusion and have the dream and nightmare of pushing EPRDF, assuming it's crumbling and breaking up, and that it won't pass this May, so let's have a coup de tat," he explained..
With regard to the hooligans it was necessary to take strong measure previously, but since this was delayed, he believed, it contributed for the complexity of the problems and the problem has been considered in such a way as to give it lasting solution, and hence, the peace and stability of the city has become better then before, the prime minister Meles, explained..
Answering to the issue regarding the death of Mr. Kinfe Gebre Medhin, he said "The sacrificial death of Kinfe at this time indicates not that the regime couldn't maintain peace and security but, mostly cautionary measures that should be taken through agreement were not taken, he said.
In the future, through learning from each task a situation would be created to do a better job and, in general, the government has the capability and preparedness to assuredly keep the country's peace and stability.
Is EPRDF taking measures against oppositions based on the looting and riot?
With regards to the measures taken against professor Mesfin and others that made the case to be looked at suspiciously the prime minister responded, "The main thing is opposition organizations cannot live by being opportunist," he said.
Keeping democratic order means including punishing criminals and having them punished according to the country's law and order, and properly keeping the rights of non-criminal, while still put to justice one who's criminal, he pointed out.
Some of these people assumed and have the feeling that "if we are put behind bars, the whole world would shut, no body would touch us, and nobody asks if we are violating the law" he explained..
Prime minister Meles who disclosed that oppositions from now on should identify the battle field and the zones where bombs are planted and in accord with the law and regulation they could operate as they wish, so since the measure was taken in accord with the country's law and order, it was right, proper, and timely, he said.
From Addis Zemen May 25, 2001         .
The Library of the Clergy has been Neglected
A the clergy which has thousands of ancient books as it is the first and oldest institution, its worthy ancient books at the moment, are found to be at risk being damaged by rain and dust, the news that reached us from the clergy pointed out.
The condition of the library is so desperate that it's no better than a store and especially in the rainy season the books are found in a dilapidated leaking house, and the workers put newspapers on them in an effort to protect them from the rain, it was understood form the explanation.
These books which are expensive ancient relics and which are the properties of the church are supposed to have good shelves and be placed honorably and with care, but are now negligently thrown, covered with dust and showered with rain, it was disclosed.
Since wise and learned people who read and make research on these books were not given place in the clergy, many professionals in the clergy are saddened.
At this time, departments like preaching Gospel department, and educational department that are key to the widening of the church's doctrinal faith are not given focus, and so they don't have even a vehicle (a car) they are going for evangelical services, it was said.
The teachers had to wait for a bus even while going to evangelical services but most of the vehicles are all used only to accompany the patriarch, some observers disclosed..
The activities done in the clergy are modern and different kinds of working procedure which are saddening, said the observers; while yesterday the salaries that were not paid, the vehicles that were not given to the intellectuals, professionals of the clergy, those who grew up in the church and have given up their entire life to spiritual service, are today offered to those who came recently being called from their resident areas but who are not known by the church and serve them for their entertainments, they disclosed..
The salaries of the scholars of the church are low, they are also forbidden to take vehicles when they go out for evangelical services, and it was disclosed.
The issue of the library of the clergy that is without a ceiling as well as a good quality shelf for its valuable ancient books is critical, commentators disclosed..
It needs someone to take care of it, they said..
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
In Two Colleges and Alemaya University Dispersion was Don.
The Kotebe Teachers' College, Bahir Dar Teachers' college and the Alemaya Agricultural College which have for several years shown rapid progress with not apparent reason, their faculties and departments were obliged to stop and close the degree programs, become weakened as a result;.
In a report that reached us the agricultural economics, agricultural engineering and Forestry departments which are the backbones of Alemaya Agricultural University were decided to be closed as of 1998.
As the reason for the closure was not official, the fare of the lecturers who used to teach in those departments and faculties was also unknown..
Instead of the closed departments it was decided to start secondary teachers and Health officers training, the sources that reported to us disclosed.
the Alemaya Agricultural University which is the only agricultural university in Africa which operates with a lot of foreign aid, and its research center which was in Debrezeit town was given to the formerly known as Agricultural Research Institute and now Ethiopian Agricultural Research Organization, which shows that it is intended to totally devastate the university, say educational professionals, the animal science, which has been playing a great role in producing efficient professionals, is also encountering several obstacles, they said..
In a country where millions of tons of fertile soil are wasted annually, where the use of dam has not passed more than fifty percent, where one-third of the production yield is wasted only during harvest collection, closing the agricultural engineering department which was in Alemaya Agricultural University and stop producing professionals in this field is deliberately aimed at hurting the country, they criticized. .
The decision to close the agricultural economics department which graduated 1194 professionals in bachelor degree and 38 in master's degree in the last 35 years, has shocked many..
Although the Alemaya University and the Netherlands' Larensten Agricultural College in a study they conducted jointly in the 5 years between 1996 and 2000 alone 4 PH.D level, 117 master's level and 3590 bachelor and agricultural economists are needed by the country, the action of clothing this department has made many sorrowful.
The protection of Arid Zones, which was a department already to be included in Alemaya University, have included it in to Mekele University, for when they asked different kinds of aid, Alemaya usually takes it for its own, and so some said they wanted to weaken the University, as a result..
The Alemaya University was established before 40 years and by now it has a staff of 28 doctors, 104 masters level and 21 bachelors level professional.
With related news from Bahir Dar, the Bahir Dar Teachers' is the only one found in Kenya and Ethiopia below Sahara desert which give adult education; it's forced to stop giving educational programs as from the beginning of 1997 onwards, the fate of experts and teachers of each department is not known and nothing is officially stated.
The Bahir Dar Teacher's college which gets different aid, as a result of its adult education department, and this department has contributed and played greet role in producing citizens who are trained in various skills and creating their own jobs, solving social problems.
the sources which sent this report added that even though the college was to begin degree program deciding to cancel its diploma programs fully and adult Education program would decrease its standard.
Closing this department would not only be harmful to the country, but also would make loosen the foreign aid that used to come as a result of it..
The area that was thought to widen the college and, hence, fenced has now started to be given to investors, which would weaken the college, sources from the area disclosed.
In the mean time, the Kotebe Teachers' Education college which has now 28 years of age since its establishment, has been showing rapid progress in our country, and finished its preparation to graduate trainers in Master's degree, it is now obliged to discontinue its first degree /bachelor degree/ program, its representation would be for Region 14 Administration, interior sources disclosed to us..
The Kotebe Teachers college has not only been limited to graduate teachers in bachelor of education but prepares training, sets formats and produces graduate teachers to the colleges which have been formed recently in the regions: Dilla, Wendo Genet, Nazareth, Technique College, Makele, Bahir Dar and others.
The institute used to graduate teachers in degree programs with Mathematics, History, Geography, English language and Literature as well as Ethiopian languages and Literature, in general with five departments including Health and physical Education, sources of the report disclosed..
For the above departments, preparations of material, building, human resources were completed by the college, sources disclosed.
The Kotebe Teachers Education College not only graduated more than five times in degree programs that had already been started previously, but also with the relations it has with an institute in Germany named Ho Ha Ho and the Homerton which is under British Cambridge University, sends trainers in scholarship with various professions to learn for Master's and PH.D degrees, and it was disclosed that there are some who are under their draining..
The college has more than 20 assistant professors and teachers with various years of experience, it was known..
Established in 1970 under Addis Ababa University, strengthened during the process of work and become independent, after which the teachers who graduated became fruitful and were praised, several professionals witnessed.         .
In relation to this one whose name need to remain anonymous worker of ministry of Education, in the letter he sent through our address suggested that the Kotebe Teachers Education is one of the first institute that covers 69% teachers' need of our country.
Last September 1997 when the college received degree students and continued its teaching process, the minister of education questioned "Why did you receive students while you're told it's to be closed?.
And without any study and meeting conducted and minutes held in the ministry, the program was discontinued just because she ordered "since it's to be closed, don't receive students", stated the report we have.
The injustice done to this college which fulfills very modern language and science laboratory and other necessary pre-conditions, and whose contributions to the country is so great, when compared to the "Ethiopian civil service college" and the two college and one university which were opened in Tigray, that were intended to train servants of the regime which is given great care and focus, the formers condition is very regrettable and history won't forgive such injustice, the reporter explained, and one of the reasons given for taking this measure was "Two institutions which conduct similar degree programs in one region (region 14) are not necessary." .
From Tobia September 18, 1997
If any Ethiopian chooses another citizenship, it is disclosed that he/she would immediately loses his Ethiopian citizenship..
Ethiopian Deputy Police commissioner Major Alemseged Gebre Amlak in the interview he gave to the Vice of America on September 2 responded that according to the legislation passed on July 1930 with regards to citizenship on the day on Ethiopian took another citizenship, he/she immediately loses his/her Ethiopian citizenship.
The Major gave this resopnse to the question wondering whether most of the Eritreans who were evicted from Ethiopia have lived in Ethiopia for many years and are Ethiopians.
So why were they evicted, was the question of the radio reporter..
Responding as to why they were evicted, they said they were found operative forming clandestine political party and considered dangerous, evidence was also found that proved so, and their eviction was announced to the people..
Among the evicted ones, it was disclosed that there were people including priests..
Reasoning out their eviction, they assured that all of them were organized in groups under EPLF's underground organization, people's front for Democracy and Justice, were operating in various aspects, that is, in gathering information and propaganda work, and because this was proved they were evicted, they explained..
Although the Eritrean government is overestimating the figure in the media, the right number of evicted Eritreans, were only 5874 major Alemseged assured..
From Fiameta September 6, 1998
At least Let's honor the Current Legislatur.
As we are people of information anything said about information will concern us.
We followed last week's celebration of "Information Day" and what was said commemorating the date just like any other listener and reader, from outside.
Among the festivities presented to make the date colorful, was the symposium that evaluated the different looks of mass media.
But ideas representing the free press haven't been heard.
Even when they were heard, they were the ideas of few participant individuals.
This was because, they didn't want the presence of families of free press.
The "Information Day" which was said to have been organized integratively by Walta Information Center, Television Organization and Ethiopian science and Technology Commission, Opposition Organizations (at least which are said to be legally registered) and even the free press to which the date directly refers have been put aside, which Vividly points out whose ideas are boldly listened to and whose authority is wanted to be seen on the fore.
The drum that was beaten as "Free idea, Free Press, Free economy, Free election, Free Judicature," for democratic order has been clearly seen that it's used for the consumption of foreign propaganda so as to make sue the money from the International monetary Fund (IMF) and the world Bank comes.
What is amazing and sorrowful is to see the organization which claims to stand for the development of the country's science and technology, it victimized, otherwise, we know Walta Information Center and Television Organization.
It is not expected from the EPRDF's propaganda source, "Walta Information Center", which struggles to weaken the Ethiopian News Agency that has been serving the country for over fifty years, and is official News Source of the country, to have positive image for the free press..
Forum-84 which was established for the purpose of the new bureaucratic service, including the chairman by full of defectees of EPRP who were in prison and in the Dergue bureaucracy, we are not naïve to expect that it would be any different from the present Television organization.
At the time the "Information week" was commemorated, it's known that 18 free press journalists are in prison.
Nothing was said about them.
The International Journalist organization (            ) in the statement it released in 1997, that is, this year, categorized Prime Minister Meles Zenawi as one of the ten press enemies of the world.
This reality was not disclosed to the people who have been said so many things about them.  .
The ideas of political opposition organizations were made not to be entertained on the government mass media.
But for the sake of propaganda consumption, legislatures for working procedure of government mass media have passed on.
Next to the government media, the ruling party is trying its best to establish the monopoly of ideas by forming its own propaganda order calling them, Walta Information, Radio Fana, Abiyotawi Democracy, Efoyata, etc.
On the other hand, it opened a wide propaganda campaign on the free press.
All these problems were not mentioned on that date, "Information Day", which was praised a lot.
But in that forum, individuals who have been meddling all the way up to now, were observed to be seem critical, where we appreciated their ability to see the direction where the political wind blew.
If we get the opportunity our big question would have been, "the ruling party and the authoritative government, at least let them honor the legislature they passed on!" this was our question.
The Ethiopian Federal Democratic Republic Government in its Article 29 decreed that every individual has the right to hold on any attitude he believes in.
Nonetheless, individuals are chased by being called OLF, AAPO, and EPRP.
We think that being an OLF, AAPO or EPRP means holding to one political outlook.
We can't see why it has become a reason for being taking to custody or killed.
Leave alone other things, free press journalists are made to be arrested or accused for the ideas they put on their newspapers and magazines.
But according to the constitution and press low the free press has the right to get information.
But the door that takes to the information is sealed.
In the rights to hold and express ideas freely mentioned under the constitution, article 29 sub-article 6 "the sanction on the right to get ideas and information could be operational only by laws that are asked on the products of attitude can not be obstructed.
A clause that says like that is written.
The free press journalists, however, are even now are being arrested and accused, by the opinions they wrote (even in opinion articles), of "troubling the ideas of people".
When government realizes that there are problems in any life sectors it passes on problem-solving legislatures.
We know that there are several problems around press that do not help the development of press.
Yet, if not passing on legislature and solving the problem, the previously decreed legislatures which are operational should be honored.
Leaving alone what is being done in other countries like subsidizing and reducing tax for developing press which may be done only for friends, we say let the pressure and arrest stop..
From Tobia November 20, 1997
EPLF Arrested Thousands of Ethiopians in Commemoration of its Freedom
In commemoration of its 10th Freedom anniversary, EPLF put thousands of Ethiopians in its prison camps, the Ethiopian embassy in Eritrea disclosed..
The embassy disclosed yesterday including four Ethiopian embassy workers, many Ethiopians were taken from their residences and from the road and are now behind bars indifferent police stations, kebele offices and prison camps..
EPLF has continued strengthening its unjust acts as from May 22, 2001 and put them into what's called AdiAbeto camp, the embassy further disclosed.
From Addis Zemen May 25, 2001.
Congregation Stopped Partaking Holy Communion with the Patriarch
The patriarch led the mall on the annual commemoration day, January 30, 1998, at St. Urael Church but the congregation returned /home/ refusing to Partake Holy Communion with the patriarch, it was reported.
The reporter who was present in the occasion, quoting some eyewitnesses disclosed that, except children who were baptized and few people, those congregations who were looking forward to the commemoration date to partake Holy Communion, starting from the eve of the holiday, went away without it when they know the patriarch was leading the mass and Holy Communion.  .
Leave alone on its annual commemoration date, St. Urael is a church where Christian congregations fill up not only the premise in an ordinary day service, but also outside the compound..
The people who came to the church on January 30, 1998 was simply limittless.
Out of all these Christian congregation who came to take part in the holiday, the eye witnesses said the saw only limited number of people together with the children waiting to partake Holy communion, and not as expected as many people, and even many of whom went out of the church..
There were Christian members who expressed that they stopped attending masses in the presence of the patriarch, let alone partake the Holy Communion with him..
But many have been surprised by the unexpected new scene in St. Urael church.
It is just like a strike, they said with admiration..
The church where many people lined up to partake Holy Communion in an ordinary day church-service we who know what happened were humiliated.
Said the eye witnesses..
In the meantime the beer and fatty-meat gifts started sprouting again, internal sources disclosed.
In order to facilitate this program, the Secretary of the parish withdrew the prayer procession and seen wandering at Arat Kilo liquor distributors, pertinent sources revealed.
To be found in liquor house in the morning especially wearing the black attire from head to bottom like a patriarch is disrespect to our church, they thought..
We were ashamed to find him by a pick-up vehicle around the grocery area,
Even on a big holiday, they said.
pertinent sources.
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
The Teacher was Suspended from Work and Salary Under the Pretext of Politics.
The Teacher of the book at Gola St. Michael Church Tibebu Ayalew, was suspended from work and salary, it was reported.
Shameful and scandalous things are occasionally exhibited around church leaders..
The cause of Teacher Tibebu Ayalew's suspense from job and salary revolves around this issue, internal sources are saying.
It has been months since the disagreement between the body who enacted the suspension and the suspended individual was exposed; the report that indicated the ups and downs the teacher underwent even before the suspension suggested that after a long and series of misunderstandings, the teacher was suspended from both salary and work, under Como house of politics, the report that reached us disclosed.  .
The teacher of the Book was told that at first since he had not been presenting his job without sufficient reason, his December salary was suspended, but within a short time, his salary was released, yet a last warning was given stating that he should be working at any position the parish administrator usher deacon assigns earlier, it was possible to understand from the report..
It was also disclosed, however, higher bodies overruled the unjust bureaucracy the parish administrator exhibited.
Nevertheless, the conclusion for the suspension of the teacher from his work and salary was that he made a political speech..
Observers and audiences criticized the political reason attributed to the suspension; they were also obliged to contemptuously see the administrator who passed the suspension..
They said it's not expected from a person who claims to be a priest to throw away a teacher with pretext of politics who was in disagreement with..
With regards to the clashes between Eritrean and Ethiopian government, he was said to "engage in a speech that provokes people in to people, people in to government, congregations into the church, the church into the church, the church into the gov't..
Hence, his May, 1998 salary was suspended, and from June on wards he was suspended from job and salary; he has still been under restraint, and now appealing to higher bodies for justice, the related news stated..
Since there was a long-time discord between the parish administrator and the teacher of the Book, it would be very difficult to believe that the teacher was suspended due to his political speech, which left us with the option that the decision that was taken against the teacher may rather have emanated from their previous disagreement..
The fact that indicate it's related to personal vengeance was the act of assigning a reputed teacher of the Book to a lay-person's position, disregarding the command of the higher body (Leader of District Parish congregation Secretariat) who had passed the order based on a study which shows their own stand, observers underscored..
At a time where many such teachers are looked forward to, it would be an unfavorable comment from the officials, an act of authoritarian suspension, which harms the church, they also warned..
Any way, the teacher of the Book was suspended from work under the pretext of politics. .
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
Statement Given from Ethiopian Federal Democratic Governmen.
Since recently the instability that lived quite long and the disruption of learning-teaching process occurred, government has traveled a long distance to listen to the students' request and respond to those proper ones, it was disclosed in mass Medias.
Having listened in detail to the questions students forwarded, a discussion was held between the Ministry of Education and Student representatives in order to identify the proper and improper questions and agree on their remedies.
In the discussion held between government and the students, government accepted questions which it believed were proper..
The government proposed remedial notions that it believed to solve the problems raised around the administration and, more or less, agreement was reached on all issues.
At that moment the question that had not been resolved and didn't reach agreement with the students was the urgent pulling out of the security police of the University, and even for this, it was not without remedial suggestions, although the students were observed pushing hard without displaying patience.
While government proposed remedial suggestions that answered students questions and indeed that would satisfy students who wanted to scrape their administration problems, this remedy, however, could not be accepted by political organizations that held their own political agenda behind the students, and for few students who marched off determinedly.
These political organizations and some students who were members of them considered the temporary problem that was created in EPRDF as lasting weakness, planned chaos and lawlessness to rule over..
Therefore, the result was, through few students and mainly through the leadership of the city's hooligans, they attempted to carry out the herd activity and widen unrest in Addis Ababa city..
They considered that government doesn't have the diligence and preparedness to take legal measures and involved in activities of disturbing the peace of the people.
The Ethiopian Federal Democratic Government has never retreated from entertaining any proper question that is presented legally.
And even after this it would never fail short of its effort to entertain legal and proper questions.
However the government wouldn't accept any attempt to benefit out of chaos, in a misunderstanding of situations, with a baseless hope of assuming that EPRDF is weakened, and instigating disturbance and violence.
Since the prior task of any government is to maintain peace and stability, it won't pass with negligence the creation of disturbance by political organizations or some students who follow their suit and the violence instigated by especially city hooligans..
Due to this, Federal (government) decided to take strong and lasting measure on groups who disturb people's peace and security and incur damage on people's and government's property.
Based on this, the Federal Police is ordered to take all the necessary measures on illegal individuals who disturb people's peace and security.
The Federal Democratic Government strictly warns that students who are found at any edge of the country, especially higher education students, apart from presenting their questions, if they have some, in a legal and orderly fashion, if they try to incur damage on people's and government's property by them selves or in collaboration with other illegal bodies, the responsibility is theirs and theirs only.
In the mean time government warns political or so called human-rights organizations who operate to instigate chaos, being defeated by student's question, to be reserved from such acts..
Ethiopian Federal Democratic Governmen.
April 18, 2001
From Addis Zemen April 19, 2001.
The New Generation Leaders Who Were Looked Forward to Change Africa are Said to Lose Track
The deterioration of the successful relationship that never seemed to be shaken between Ethiopia and Eritrea has been shadowed by the intervention of World Soccer Cup that was looked forward to by many people around the world.
After the game resumed, however, we started wondering what Satan interfered between AddisAbaba and Asmara, what exactly was the wrong thing that happened?  .
For the last recent years, the two rations' leaders drew many news agencies and medias, as many adjectives of praise were attached to them: clever, open, organized, determined, proud, and on the whole, they were elevated as young.
Eritrean President, Isayas Afeworki and Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi were regarded among the new generation progressive African leaders.
The new-generation African leaders include Uganda's Yuweri Musevini and Ruwandan Paul Kagame.
People considered the leader of Democratic Congo , Lore Kavila, too, in this category of leaders.
Nevertheless, since he now couldn't go along with his partners in Kampala and Kigali, he was said to be dismissed from the group..
These new leaders have no doubt drawn the attention of other African peoples out of their respective land.
Whenever Yuweri Muserine speaks before Kenyan people they used to shower him with admiration.
Last year President Moi had not always been at ease when Congo's Kabila was mentioned due to the clashes between the change seeking rebels and government police.
In the national press, they wrote articles, in comparison, what happened to the ex-dictatorial leader of Zaire, Mobutu se se seko may happen to Moi if he continued on his stand and do not amend the constitution.
Besides, some opposition party leaders coined him a new name, Moibutu.
Just because Moi was very angry at the press, for they compared him with a dictator, he denied the criticism openly when he made a speech to the public..
Among those who put great faith on the new generation African leaders, were leaders of United States of American and South Africa.
These governments have widely talked about the resurrection of Africa through these leaders.
Although genuine political observers were worried by the fact that people's hearts were melted through these talks, i.e. these leaders becoming Africa's saviors, the shocking incident for many people was the war that broke between Eritrea and Ethiopia..
Evaluating it now, there is no doubt that thee new-generation African leaders have transformed the former ways of coming to power and handling issues in the leadership.
President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela in a recent conference of African leaders in Burkina Faso, questioned the significance of the legislation of Organization of African Unity that forbids one country not to interfere in another's internal affairs.  .
Governments  are expending the highest budget from their budgets in order to fight back internal rebels.
On the other hand, the clash between Asmara and Addis Ababa presented an Achilles heel for critics of new leaders to say that they are very quick to act militarily for political problems.
I my self was a big supporter of Musevini, but when I heard him repeatedly saying he's going to wipe away Joseph Konin and Lord Resistance Army, I lost my hope in him.
The recently appointed Kenyan government officials, especially those of them who have been for the last 3 years, said that President Moi moved a lot better democratically than the new leaders.
However, Moi has been in a state of high pressure, especially, from the donor group.
Presently, Kenyan political pundits and the civil society leaders are found in a stage that leads to a process of forming democratic constitution.
Even though confusion ad disloyalty rules over the practical process, we are moving, using the true Kenyan figure of speech, towards the solution.
We don't hear our people talking about going to the bush, rather is discussing about the means and ways to rule over democracy.
Commentator: John Giton.
Director of African Strategic Research Institute .
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
The Memory of "Roasted-Bean" Student
The orbit of the countryside student's memory draws even that of the city ones astonishing like a bolt from the blue transporting it to the place where it belongs.
The life of countryside means more than anything for the roasted-bean student.
The translation for the book, the lesson for the church song, the skill for poetry, localities like Dima Debrework...Axum Debre Abay...Zur Amba Bethleham Wadla...Chegodi Lij Anbera...Gunj Washera...all these are the learning and graduating places for the roasted-bin student; and these universities of roasted-bean student are found in the country..
While attending his classes, the roasted-bean student had so many memories, out of which we present the following for today..
The "student" never always lines mocking at people with his Amharic poetry..
Sometimes he, too in his turn, would be taunted at by his teachers.
He is a student who came from around Washera have been learning "usage of letters" and poetry of Washera from master Gedlu to learn the poetry of Wadla..
He was skillful.
But what good does this bring? He has a habit of theft..
He picks up whatever he gets (on his way).
Do you know how many students "leather grain bag" he ransacked, he might not he identified.
A lot! He's surprisingly strange..
He had "looted" from his earlier school, too.
What's surprising was his had already heard about it.
So that's enough.
His wise master Yared decided that he should leave before he infected the school.
Cause he was sick and fired of his theft..
He had him called and said to him "My Berhan , Go the your family, the education you got is sufficient...after all... with a diplomatic language."
He responded, "...Ok, but let me stay for a little while...until I finish what I started and learn grammar usage, but the master said, "No, No, what you learned...suffices you...and as I heard from your friends, you used to be good at it, in Washera, too".
Hey, you have finished all of it here...so go to your place.
And he had him take his departure.
He, too, understood.
On the morrow he packed off..
But such student of bad character is rare to find. .
Well, the roasted-bean student's goal is to widely learn the word of God..
And the majority of the students are dedicated to their cause..
In order to learn the gist of the word of God as it is taught in various localities, he raves from on place to another. .
So are many who remain at where they went..
While some of them give service in the skill they've graduated teaching the word of God to many, others travel to "remote end of the country", got married and live there, getting rich or poor without seeing back to his birth place..
There are even some who through others, turns as bad as can be even while he's at school.
Yes, the one who sees this and the futility of the world leaves school "run away" and would be shattered in a monastery..
While for others their parents expect to "see them reach some place and be somebody" they, contrary to their expectation, would suddenly come home turned monk, having his cap on his head.
Some of the cases are heart-breaking.
It's depressing..
He'd be caught by a certain kind of illness or suffer from contagious disease, and "perish" in a foreign land.
The mother who heard here son's death after a number of years in a fire accident while he was in his class, yelled in regret "I sent him to Washera to have him learned I heard he became sharp and fired" expressing metaphorically..
Except very few, it is customary for the majority of students not to tell where they came from and their names, in good times, let alone when they're ill..
While his name at home was "Biyazin Destaw Azmeraw ...charges his name to "Ezra Sutel Elias ..." when he is enrolled in school.
Worst of all, the mischievous student makes his name complicated when one ask him "what's your name?.
He'd say "Telgel Telfelsor".
When they mischievous student sees especially the innocent country side peasant found it difficult to pronounce the name, would laugh uproariously..
Even though the student laughed at times with certain occasions, deep down his heat he has sour grievance..
When he sometimes had nothing to eat, or a dog chased him from the house he stopped by to beg for food, he desperately longs for his home which is full of everything; his heroic father, his sympathetic sister and his mother who often cries her heart out for him it is then that he sits down lost in thought, "I wish my mother saw, I wish my sister saw when a dog chased me for a slice of breads"..
Humming away to him in tears..
Yet, when this student sometimes wants to beg for a slice of bread, we saw him doing funny things..
Was he teaching wisdom of switching a time of difficulty to laughter and systematically pass it?
Who knows? .
... Let's add for you another theater, in the country side, "come, and going round" means return after short time..
Or come later.
Just as we say "Go around and come".
One day the student went out begging, and he reached just as the griddle, disc of day in which bread is made was put on the fire, and the disc was not heated enough..
He begged, standing in front of the door.
The woman looking at him said, "Hey, student, the disc hasn't yet heated" she said to him.
The student responded "But you're heated and you can listen to my question.
The woman, who was wise in the language, and understood his mischievous ness, responded shortly by saying "OK, student, until I bake one or two bread go around and come".
The student didn't go any where, but he turned around his face and entered the house facing his back. .
He didn't realize the presence of her husband.
What do you want?" shouted the husband at him.
Your princess told me to turned round and enter..
The student replied.
But the student's humor didn't work out that day.
He didn't meet an innocent laughing farmer..
A trouble has come..
The farmer hit the student severely.    .
One day this farmer and the student suddenly met in a big wedding..
The student harbored the grudge against him..
But the farmer didn't take the student in to account..
He forgot it.  .
What angered the student most was this..
His belittling him..
Leave alone the others..
The student was not even considered an enemy...the feast of dining and wining went on at about evening, all become drunk,
Dancing and war chant had started.
When one took his seat the other stood to dance.
When one sang uproariously the other war chart.  .
All showed his bravery by displaying patriotism through war chants..
Everybody boasts war chant to show one's patriotism. .
The student had to display patriotism today.
He thought.
At least he had to show off his "brevity" through chants.
But then ... the farmer is a strong man.
What if he prodded him by provoking?
He was frightened.
He was worried.
When the student repeatedly said to himself "whatever comes" and sipped the local beer, he became drunk..
His small heart which was filled with fear suddenly enflamed with anger and regret, the student..
All of a sudden... , he said "I the hero, servent of the master," and stood up. .
People started listening to him attentively. .
Touching his upper garment made of tanned sheep skin with his stick he went to the crowds and got in the midst of them, starting his war chant.
I the hero" said the student.
Hurray! I the student, and hero, yes, a hero
Whose armor the poem, his whip the hymn book.
The gateway of the church, his den
The leather bag, his shield, the book of psalms its necklac.
Prayer his bulle.
Never surrenders in desperatio.
When a priest is troubled, people yell
Loots remain of food one and all
Who were there on the day of the memorial feast for the dead?
People like melkamu, Mamaru
Servant of the master who wears the hymn book
Never fears death, the student..
He said, and sat down.
It's all over; he said it all and got relieved..
But the audience up roared over him..
From Addis Zemen August 27, 1997.
The Border Issue would have decision on February 28
In order to give finality to the border controversy between EPRDF and Eritrean government the international tribunal that was seeing the case is expected to pass on a resolution in the coming February 28/2002.
In a related development, the security council of the United Nations ordered the two countries to accept unconditionally the resolution passed.
In its regular session on January 15, 2002, the Security Council, it was also possible to know that the Security Council assigned delegates that would execute the resolution of the international tribunal.
This team which was led by the Norwegian born ambassador Ali Peter Kolbay is said to make the EPRF and EPLF government give it their last assurance for accepting the resolution passed on by the International Court a week before the latter makes it officials, that is on February 21, 2002.
The resolution which this International Tribunal Passes on not only would be the last and necessarily going to be implemented but also the international community would give it full support, the written message that was read in the meeting of the Security Council disclosed.  .
After the border is demarcated on the map, by he international commission, the hammering of the "peg" on to the actual ground marking the positions would follow, it was pointed out.
However, as there are many buried explosives around the border, there's a fear from the outset that these would elongate the actual border demarcation activities, which was said to have been raised on the council's meeting..
From Tomar January 22, 2002
The Patriarch's Friends were overjoyed As a result of the Ban of Merha Tewahedo Newspaper!
The news paper that is published by the name "Merha Tewahedo" and had legal permission from Ministry of Trade and used to come out once in two weeks (on Friday) was banned in an order given from the Federal First Instance Court, and those who were patriarch's combatants and who didn't like the tabloid were overjoyed, internal sources disclosed to us..
The sides who argue that when Merha Tewahedo newspaper was first established it was officially disclosed that if anyone who's against the name could put the case to the court but none didn't appear then, so it would be inappropriate to ban the newspaper just by the clergy's vow, without the appearance of the owner in the court.
Appearing in court the owner of the tabloid asked the court to lift the ban, but he was told that the case wouldn't be seen except on the appointment date given to the clergy on March 24 1998, the court explained..
In this regard, lawyers claimed that the ban was not proper.
The real cause for the ban of the tabloid was believed to be mysterious and the patriarch was quoted as saying what the problem to ban this tabloid is? Is it implementer who was missing or? And he's said to have some respite due to the ban, internal sources explained..
The court wrote directly to the ministry of Trade and disclosed to Region 14 Police Commission and, in return, the ministry of Trade made it clear to Merha Tewahedo Organization, the letter was thought to have appealed to higher court, they underscored..
The cause for the tabloid to be hated among the patriarch and his friends, according to knowledgeable people, was because it exposes the day to day secrets of the clergy and since the editors are also people of the clergy, they have been continually exposing and from time to time would leave the clergy and their people naked, it was a measure to tackle the problem before it's too late, although some argued that "one which is rotten isn't frightened of rain" as the Ethiopian saying goes..
It's saddening not to see Merha Tewahedo on her appointment date, which is popular for its educative, important articles colorful and maintaining her religious contents; sorrowful to her customers tough pleasing Aba Paulos and his dears, believed that it would come out on March 26, 1998.
From Fiameta February 25, 1998
Ethiopian living Abroad Have Made Great Demonstrations Protesting Against EPRD.
In demonstrations conducted in Ottawa (Canada), Washington DC, London (England), Haig, Brussels, Sweden ...etc. as it is necessary and in different ways expressed their strange protest against TPLF/EPRDF saying that racial regulations should be reversed so as to cooperatively protect our country from EPLF, that fellow people who were kidnapped and whose address is not known should be disclosed, that chasing away oppositions, terrorizing, killing, kidnapping and torturing them should be stopped, and similar banners were carried and statements were shouted on the streets.
According to Hawarya who closely followed the Canadian side of the process and execution of opposition process in the great effort the coordinating committee made on the date (July 7/1999) in Ottawa, many Ethiopians who came from various places participated in the demonstration.
In this Ottawa demonstration youngsters participated widely, while the encouragement and strong participation and mothers and sisters showed should be mentioned here.
The demonstration was accompanied by police, carried slogans and banners, at times shouting the statements, colorfully passing in front of the Canadian parliament, then to TPLF/EPRDF embassy office, crossing the main road, keeping traffic regulations many by stander Canadians receiving leaflets and reading the slogans and even some of them joining in the demonstration by holding slogans, taking to the coordinators about the aim of the demonstration, showed their support by giving different signals.
As soon as the Ottawa demonstration was over, Ethiopians living in Ottawa held a reception to Ethiopians who came all the way there from other areas.
These Ethiopians living in Ottawa invited to their reception starting from an organization, who requested them permission for demonstration up to security – related preparations, including the peaceful participants in the demonstration, not only left them with appreciation but also, proved that there are Ethiopians everywhere who would spend their time and money for their country.
In the journey that was going on to Ottawa from various places, and in its return journey as we observed that of the Toronto, the continual agitating songs, and chanting and brotherly, sisterly love that was in the rented big bus was unforgettable.
At this time, as it's heard from most of the Ethiopians living in Diaspora, the fact that TPLF/EPRDF is not using the historical coincidence to reconcile with the people and opposition and not being ready to defend the attack waged against the country; in addition, the fact that it gave verdict of up to 20 years imprisonment, the fact that, as we heard recently, the renown medical scholar and founder and president of All Amhara People's Organization, professor Asrat Woldeyes, being behind bars for a long time and after having been tortured, though he was allowed to have medication, couldn't survive and passed away ...etc.
These all are proofs that the TPLF group can never be and want to charge and correct mistakes, they said.               .
Hence, such kind of opposition demonstrations and the struggle that goes on at different angles would be expected to go width and continuity.
Those who supported and are thinking of supporting when the "country is said to be attacked by aggressors" have now become hopeless and discouraged to the political measures TPLF had taken and is taking at the moment, this has become known to all..
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
Properties plundered by Illegal individuals are being returned through police search
Many people and government's properties which were illegally plundered the day before yesterday are being returned in different districts through police search.
The ENA reporters in their observation at district 2 and 5, they have seen police having the looters returned TVs, Decks, video cassettes, radios, watches and shoes from Anbesa shoe store.
And sieves of hold and various tools of jewelry stores are being under control together with criminals through police search and informants form the community.
In these districts dwellers are leading their normal lives in a stable situation, chairman of district 5 Miss Meseret Bekele and chairman of district 2 and sub district 13 Mr. Jenberu disclosed.
Police is having a tight security in every place, it was disclosed.
Similarly, the disturbance and plundering that occurred the day before yesterday in Addis Ababa by few students and hooligans was completely controlled yesterday and the people are leading their daily lives, the city is also in perfect stability.
According to the Ethiopian News Agency reporters' observation the day before yesterday there was great plundering form government and private properties, and seeing such kind of plundering was not a very common act among Ethiopians and there told that it's indecent.
From Addis Zemen April 20, 200.
In the Election Held in Somalia Region the Incumbent party is leading
In the election held last September 3 in Somalia region for regional and council of representatives, the incumbent party is leading, the electoral board disclosed.
According to the disclosure of the electoral board yesterday, out of three parties and privately competed individuals 23 seats for council of representatives and 168 seats for regional council, 470 candidates had competed.
Based on the result so far attained, the Somali People Democratic Party (SPDP) is leading in all the nine election zones, the electoral board told..
Out of the 1,150,000 people who was registered to vote in the region, were than three-fourth gave votes and the participation of the people in the election was great, explained in related news.
From the start up to the end, the election process didn't face that much problem, some observers told.
It was possible to know that in the election in both councils the Somali People Democratic Party presented 191, the United Somali Democratic Forces, 123, the West Somali Democratic Party 81, and privately 156 candidates, totally for 191 seats 551 candidates were presented. .
In the mean time, in two election regions of Gode zone, United Somali Democratic Forces (USDF) and Somali People Democratic Party /SPDP/candidates won, the zonal electoral board coordinator Mr. Wondwosen Wube disclosed last Monday..
Out of the five election regions in the zone, the results of the three regions couldn't reach the zone due to communication problem, and hence, was not possible to make winners official, Mr. Wondwosen mentioned.
In the two election regions were counting was done, the winners would get acceptance if the National Election Board receive and approves, the zonal electoral board coordinator explained.
Form Addis Zemen September 6, 200.
A call has been made for Opposition Organizations to Form A coalitio.
A War is being set on Fire in Afar
Tension due to Arrest in Asab – Concern in Asayt.
Recently a conference on peace and democracy has been conducted in regional and zonal level, where leadership reshuffling was said to occur in Afar, and where ARDUF, the opposition activist leadership members, were said to have come to the peaceful forum, redundant clashes are taking place in the region in a short-time, and Asaita town is being protected by machine guns, it was disclosed.
After the clash in Afambo and the president, Mr. Ismael's residence had been hit by a launcher grenade, Asaita town was attacked in a week's time, where electric light and communication were also disconnected..
Asaita town residents who were concerned about this situation, few of them went to Nazareth town while most residents, assuming they could be attacked at night in their homes, started frequenting to stay out to the fields at night, it was disclosed.
The clash between EPRDF army and ARDUF forces are spreading to other areas and war is being set on fire, it was disclosed.
In the mean time, the EPLF army which happened to be in Djibouti was seriously attacked by ADRUF and FRUD coalition operation, so in order to strengthen its forces, it recently conducted mass arrest in Asab town.
On the other hand, the Afar Revolutionary Democratic, Unity Front (ARDUF) and the Sidama people Liberation Front (SPLF) leaving aside the separate struggle that they used to conduct, for it didn't help any good except elongating the minority national ruling class who claim to rule Ethiopia in the pretext of Federal regime, integrate their forces and agreed to struggle in coalition, and disclosed this to others calling all opposition political organizations to join their coalition.
The chair persons of the two organizations Mr. Mohammed Gaaz and Mr. Wolde Amanuel Dubale recently have met in London and signed a agreement, releasing a mutual statement saying that maintaining the existence of each organization, they expressed they have reached a mutual agreement to form a coalition between Afar and Sidama peoples, together with the rest of Ethiopians so that the country could be saved from racial politics and dictatorial regime of one political organization.
The two organizations were able to reach this agreement: .
1. In order to peacefully resolve the problem created in the country, the separate effort they made was given a response from EPRDF that showed force and didn't want to open doors for peaceful negotiation;.
2. The suppression and intervention TPLF/EPRDF regime is making on Afar and Sidama people's political, cultural and economic life, there has been found no other alternative to keep the legal and self-protection right of the two people, from the perspective of the present practical situation; ARDUF and SPLF, integrating the political, diplomatic and military struggle of Afar and Sidama peoples, and in order to keep their national and democratic rights, they believed to form the mutual cooperation.
3. ARDUF and SPLF agreed to resolve any misunderstanding between the two people peacefully and strengthen their healthy relations.
4. ARDUF and SPLF agreed to recognize the two people's right of self-determination and respect their democratic rights.
Both organizations took the multiparty political regime in to consideration, and through peacefully resolving misunderstandings with all democratic and national forces of the country, have reached a mutual consensus to oblige the dictatorial regime which held power in the country to subdue to all-embracing elected government which can be accountable for democratic order and the people.
5. Both organizations believe that the constitution that was drafted by EPRDF and put operational doesn't have power distribution and it's led by Stalin's ideology, reflects a one-party dictatorship.
We realized that the principle of self administration that was said to be given to the regions is indirectly fenced by the ruling regime, hence, it couldn't make it control the government which is in power.
Therefore, both sides understand that the constitution which is operational at present doesn't reflect the basic rights of citizens which is decreed in chapter three and doesn't have an order of free court of justice, which opens doors for human rights violation and killings of peaceful citizens..
6. ARDUF and SPLF strongly condemns the TPLF/EPRDF divide-and rule policy and the distrust that is wanted to spread among Ethiopia people, and in its place, they facilitate the situation where all Ethiopians could live trusting one another and in brotherly cooperative spirit..
7. ARDUF and SPLF request to urgently leave the areas the Tigrean forces who camped in Afar and Sidama, who have been instruments to elongate the years of the ruling regime, and are suppressing the peace, humanity, freedom and democracy of the people and human rights violation.  .
8. ARDUF and SPLF make a call for all political opposition organizations which are struggling for true democracy, the right to self-administration, subduing to the rule of law and peacefully resolving this understanding, to stand by their side.
9. Taking in to account the complicated situation the controversy of the country brought about, ARDUF and SPLF call for the international community to stop, for the time being, the comprehensive aid they offer and listen to the shouts of Afar and Sidama people who are found in a tormented and oppressed situation.
The two organizations request and remind the international community especially countries which have diplomatic and economic relations with TPLF/EPRDF to put pressure on the regime so as to make it respect the basic human rights of its citizens and resolve misunderstandings through peaceful means of negotiation rather than through force..
From Tobia October 30, 1997
690 Ethiopians Entered their Country from Asmara, 220 Eritreans were seen off Through Rama
690 Ethiopian civilians who were in Eritrea entered their country, Ethiopian Red Cross Association Tigray central Zone Branch Office disclosed.
Head of the office Mrs. Roman Zemichael expressed yesterday that the Ethiopians entered Adowa coming through adiquala, - Rama.
Having been identified by the international Red Cross the returnees entered their country, Ethiopian officials received them the head of the office told..
It's known that last February 17, 2001 488 Ethiopians returned to their homeland in a similar way.
In a similar way, based on the request they made to go to their country, 220 Eritreans with recognition of the international Red Cross, were seen off through Rama. .
Ethiopian Red Cross Association, secretary of the Adigrat office Mr. Berhane Alemu disclosed that Eritreans who were seen off to their country were 155 from Tigray eastern zone and 65 from Makele.
The secretary who reminded that the Eritreans were seen off for the sake of a nation's security, they were living peacefully using their wealth and properties properly and with their human rights kept, before their journey they sold what's to be sold and, what they wanted for themselves, kept with then and went to their country, the secretary disclosed.
From Addis Zemen March 3, 200.
Cars of Higher Officers were Snatched from them
The deputy commander-in-chief of the defense army Transport, Birgadier General Gebre Egziabeher is being evaluated by 6 Generals who were appointed after the reformation with regards to corruption and untidiness that he had for so many times made and dissolved work structured so as to help individuals and regarding human resource management he was following disorderly working procedure, but he may not face charges, internal sources disclosed.
In related development, cars which were under the ownership of the military institution Generals and higher officers that were bought with expensive foreign currency are made to be gathered at the camp in Gofa, it was disclosed.
The officers who used three and four cars as their own and entertain themselves and their families with the government gas, the budget of gas in the army was extremely high, the related news explained.   .
For those officers who are said to need cars for their work, the transport section has now formed a committee and is working to give one car each, the news also disclosed.
Nonetheless, there's a concern that this disorderly and superfluous transport use is still to continue in different forms, some information pointed out.
From Kokeb February 4, 200.
As of Today people are to go in to Retreat for seven days
So as to pray for God for His mercy to make peace reign in Ethiopian Orthodox Church and in general for our country there would be a retreat in the Merciful Saint Michael church that lasts for seven consecutive days as of from December 9, 1998.
The retreat that stays for seven days starts just at 3 o'clock in the afternoon until the end of the last day, oath and intercession and prayer would be carried out, the fellow groups who know about the retreat explained.
Moreover, these fellow groups reminded that if these are no peace and love the people couldn't lead comfortable lives, hence energy Christian should be available in this great retreat and together should pray and shout to God.     .
In addition, God is near for those who shout (call upon) Him from the bottom of their heart; and shouting to God as one heart, one idea is the task of Christians, they said.
In this retreat that lasts from 9-12-98 up to 15-15-98 many Christians are said to be served, they pointed out.
And if laity who does not know about the retreat should come and share the blessing, they said..
He wished a good retreat..
From Fiameta December 10, 199.
The American Ambassador Pleaded Businessmen!
In a trade conference held in New Orleans, America, American Ambassador April 24 for Ethiopia sent a pleading message for the business people to come to Ethiopia..
According to Ambassador David shinn the economy of the horn of Africa at present is found in resurrection, but he didn't deny that there are some problems.
Moreover, the ambassador explained to the participants that Ethiopia is 3rd next to Egypt and Nigeria in the number of population, export hide and skin..
With regards to coffee sale he explained that 17% of it is bought by America and is found 2nd next to Germany..
The ambassador also unveiled to the participants that 3 years back around 40 business people were in the country but at present 180 American companies are present. .
In general, the ambassador pleased the business people to come and invest their money..
That Ethiopian is a democratic country and he said other things, too, Observers criticized the ambassador saying he's a spokes person of EPRDF.  .
From Fiameta April 29, 1998
242 Eritrean war Captives Returned to their Country  .
In the agreement reached between Eritrea and Ethiopia, 242 Eritrean war captives who were kept in Dedesa captive Center started to go to their countries yesterday, the International Red Cross Committee disclosed.
The captives who started from Dedesa yesterday morning would reach Dangela when the night fell and pass the night there, the committee disclosed.
The Eritrean war captives who are traveling being supported by the committee, keeping their human rights and given the necessary care, would pass their country's border the coming Sunday, the committee disclosed.
The information that came out from Dedesa captive's center recently showed that 54 Sawa trainees and old-timer EPLF soldiers, went to Yemen, Germany, Italy, America an other countries, on their own will.
Based on the question 220 Eritrean put forwarded to go their country, last March 1, traveled with the recognition of international Red Cross, the committee also disclosed.
From Addis Zemen March 9, 200.
The Secretary who Looted the Cathedral's Money was again Exposed to Crime.
Deacon Haile Ghiorgis Mamo who took 6500 Birr but never retuned to the church, flew to another church and was again exposed to crime in the church were is working as a secretary, it was reported. .
Out of the 6500.00(six thousand five hundred) beer he took from the cathedral, the secretary returned only 1000 Birr, denying the remaining? It was decided in a court session held on March 5, 1997 that he pay the 5500 Birr he hasn't returned yet, and 300 Birr loss, although he hasn't paid as yet, for he kept low profile in the place he took a transfer.  .
His not paying the money brought about many disputes among many innocent fathers, observers told. .
The Addis Ababa Office of preaching assembly wrote a letter ordering deacon Haile Ghiorgis to return the money to the cathedral, and Afe Memhir Haile Marim Gebre Libanos was suspended from job the following day after this letter was written..
The story didn't end here, on December 27, 1998 he took 260 dollar and 450 Birr that was given by laity who made vows, making use of the chaotic coincidence but when the church administrator asked him, he replied I forgot it at home in my pocket of the clothes I have just changed, and I will bring it tomorrow; later he pleaded to deacon Fantahun Mihret not to expose him, but later falsely accused of the controller, deacon Fantahun, of taking the money from him, misleading the office of preaching making the controller to be suspended form job, bringing misery to both people, the report explained..
The secretary who's said to be smart aleck and has the ability to tie him self with higher bodies and who undermines preaching assembly of Petros we Paulos whom he work with as well as the secretary at times put his signature on documents even while the official is around; he's so money-minded, and due to this he asked bribe from the contractor who does lament work and statue, and forbid him his contract money for not giving him bribe, although after so many up and downs the contractor's share was made to be paid, the report pointed out..
Because this secretary is known its demagogue nature different misdeeds, the administrator of the church and the secretary of the preaching assembly suspected that he might destroy documents and as of June 12, 1998 has sealed the office, although the secretary hid and come to the office on June 3 at 5 o'clock in the morning and removed the sealed paper and attempted to take various documents when suddenly caught red-handed by the church security guards, went to district 25 police station helped by police offices, it was known..
But according to the observers, due to the special relations the secretary had with Aba Gebre Michael and Mr. Yared the salary for Deacon Haile Ghiorgis was raised by 173.00 Birr and reached 763.00 Birr, though the budget allocated for the secretary of the church was 590.00 Birr; yet, he was not satisfied with the favor he received and his remaining discontent is regrettable, they said..
There are commentator who say "Before the tear dries".
Haile Ghiorgis Mamo's friendship goes as far as the patriarch, and at one time relying on the patriarch's friendship, he had a confrontation with Aba Gerima, in which case the latter sent priest Haile Ghiougis to some remote areas as a demotion, and wandered for almost light months; Aba Paulos, whom he relied fully couldn't save him, as the Ethiopian saying goes "a donkey's husband doesn't save the wife from hyena"; so the secretary who was told not to repeat such misdeed and returned to his work, was again into it before the tear dried, which was shameful act, concluded the commentators.
However the Secretary once again on may 29, 1998 his where about was not traced after he had taken 100 dollars which was given as vow offering, in a pretext of exchanging it into Ethiopian Birr, insiders are telling..
Since the church's preaching assembly was aware of the Secretary's lack of skill and ethical problem, it suspended him from his work and salary..
Other commentators suggested that it's unthinkable for a worker who took 5500.00 Birr of a church and was not requested to be suspended form his work and salary: for if there were a judge he would have returned the money he took.          .
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
The Board Postponed the time Table by a Month when it would make Election Results Official
The Ethiopian National Electoral Board decided to postpone the time schedule by a month when it would announce election results.
Acting Registrar at the office of party Registration, Mr. Makonen Wondimu disclosed that the board postponed the time schedule in a meeting it conducted yesterday;
The reason as to why the time table was postponed was because the board believed that it needed additional time to add up the election results of higher educational students from the various polling stations and make it official.
Besides, in order to investigate and identify the complaints and petitions presented from different parties an finish all the election procedures and make official, it has found it impossible with the previous time table, it was disclosed.
Therefore, in order to make the results official on a national level, the previously schedule June 9, 2005 has been postponed by one month, and it has disclosed that results would be announced on July 1 2005 in all the country on a board level.
The board extended its time schedule based on the amended election law proclamation 111/87 and proclamation 438/97.
More over, Ethiopian electoral board announced that out of the total polling stations, it received temporary results of 515 polling stations.
From Addis Zemen June 4, 2005
The commission gave Response to the Question Raised Vis-à-vis Eritrans
We talked to the pertinent bodies of Office of the commission about Eritreans who used to work in United Nations African Economic Commission but now expired.
The responses which were given to Fiameta for the questions we raised would come out in our coming Wednesday edition, but the questions we raised are published in this edition believing it may serve for awareness.
United Nations
African Economic Commission
A.A subject:- Asking about details of Eritreans who used to work in the commissio.
1.Is it possible to have the names of 27 Eritreans who used to work for the commission?
2.Does Ethiopian government have the authority to expire these Eritreans, for they work in the United Nations organization?
3.Staffs of the United Nations should work free from politics.
Nevertheless, it's known that Eritreans who work in ECA were working form being a member of EPLF up to Chairmanship of Eritrean community.
Knowing all these, why were they kept in ECA?
4.It has been in the legislation that administration workers of United Nations should be employed form the incumbent country.
However, up to recently, Eritreans were kept in their positions in administrative works at ECA.
Why?
5.Instead of returning him to Eritrea, why was chairman of Eritrean Community Mr. Mesfin Haileselassie was with ECA cooperation, sent to Nairobi?
6.After 15 days Mr. Mesfin Haileselassie left the county, it is known that his office was opened by a security group led by the Nigerian Olo Kodana..
During this time Eritrean name lists and other documents written in Tigrina language were found.
What does your office know about this issue?
7.The money Eritreans who work in ECA have in Ethiopia has said to have been transferred to ECA account after they have asked for it before a month.
How much is this true?
8.Would Ertreans, who have now been sheltered in some embassies and are going to be evicted, go to Asmara or to the country of their preference.
9.Would Eritreans be transferred to similar offices in an optional county or would be expired after offering them their service remuneration.
10.Is there any way ECA could prove that these lists of Eritreans who were now said to be evicted are really Eritreans?
If there is/are individuals who were falsely claimed to be Eritreans, could the organization defend them?
We thank you in advance for the cooperation and answers given to us.
Dawit Kebed.
Editorial Chairman
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
The Relics that were taken from St. Mary Lideta, Church Disappeared
One Tablet of the Law was Under Police contro.
The unique relics that were taken at different times from the sanctuary of St. Mary church by the officials of the church office, threatening the head of the treasury house of the sanctuary had disappeared, it was disclosed.
Among these priceless unique antiquities, golden mantles, silver sistrums, silver prayers sticks, written documents made on parchment, are found.
In a pretext of borrowing them for the wedding ceremony of the secretary of the sanctuary, Deacon Fisseha Kidane kal, several expensive and modern carpets had never been returned, the report from the area pointed out.
The illegal acts and theft performed in the sanctuary are by now being exposed, and in this shameful act the secretary and including these "so-called controller" and financial bodies seem to not only to be suspicious of being drowned in to it, but are surely told to have been taking part in it, it was disclosed. .
The report explained that from those spouses that grew up from childhood up to the age of marriage in a pretext of "the wedding certificate price, 3000 (3 thousand) Birr was stolen illegally, and had been the cause for the failure of the spouses chances to go abroad; in general it's from this sanctuary that such despicable looting was conducted.
The spouses believed that they must take the wedding certificate from the church "that we grew up and got married", but it was despicable to see such shameful and unclean crime committed by officials who were given responsibility. .
The spouses detailing the injustice committed up on them requested the church to pay moral compensation, paying the money that was taken from them illegally, while the secretary was sent to prison but after a while were released on bail for the long sickness together with the shock he got made him in severe health crisis, it was disclosed.
The secretary who was said to have had many changed in the court was called "thief! Thief!" by the people around the area the court while appearing these, the news that came from there pointed out..
The report which expressed that the secretary had for long stopped going to his office due to sickness, also pointed out that although the office of National Preaching in a letter written to him by No. 8030/28/99, July 31, 1999 requested him to hand over the seal of the office, he declined to do so.
As a result of this exposure of financial and property embezzlement all the pertinent necessary offices of documentation are still sealed.
The area Christian laity and priests unanimously agreed to have him "audited" where as there are still positions taken to "have him audited by government auditors".
As the embezzlement of Lideta church's finance and property have become aggravated from time to time, as a result of administrative deficiency there are priests of the sanctuary who are striving to take the case to the legal institution and take the necessary follow-up, but the secretary's group are heard to have made an attempt of attack, and are said to have plans to do so now, it was disclosed.
After the new preaching forum and administrator started strict control, it was unbelievably witnessed to have gotten 280,000 (two hundred eighty thousand) Birr only in a month time, which surprised many.     .
The secretary as well as its groups whom the income have stopped coming, are trying to hide their wrongs, that had already been obvious to all, and are now in public attempting to connect the case with politics irrelevantly, are plotting to accuse the rest, the report explained..
In the mean time, it was disclosed that one tablet of the law was caught jut before it was sold by district 22 police.
While nothing is known as to where the tablet of the law came from, the person who was in possession of it and the tablet of the law were caught by priests of the Lideta church and district 22 police force, had stayed for some time in district 22 police station, and were sent to central police investigation and coordination office, the news that came from the area disclosed..
Up to the time this report was organized, nothing is known as to what happened to the tablet of the Law that went to the central police.
Nonetheless, since the individual who was said to sell the tablet of the law by 70 (seventy) Birr was caught red handed, observers said it was a historical work..
From Fiameta August 25, 1999
Meles Zenawi presents a 32-page report today.
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of EPRDF government presents a general quarterly report to the council of representatives today.
In this 32 pages report although it may not be so different from his previous reports, it's disclosed from the report that we got that he wanted to put pressure on some decisive issues.
In the report he presented the opposition parties and the free press under the same heading, he stated that his government plans to perform an integrated work to create a better relationship his government has with the free press..
In order to make the free press operate under the law and order of the regional governments and as to what kind of measure the government should take a wide study is bring underway..
To study the positive and negative sides of the free press, identifying the ethical behavior of the media, why and how the laws of the country are violated and how should they be respected, a wide work is being conducted.".
Says Mr. Meles' report, "...we believe a conducive environment would be created to strengthen the press which play constructive role and correct or sift those which have destructive aim and mission."
He said.
With regards to the army that would be reduced, the report stated that it had successfully conducted the army force human resource reduction plan. .
In order to make the remaining force combat efficiency and preparedness excel more than any other time, make its outlook according to what government intends, the conducted evaluation and training bore fruits, it was stated.
As to reducing the military and housing problem and the building of contingent force, a study is nearing completion, it's stated in the report.
With regards to foreign relations, one of the issues the report mentioned was the case of Djibouti. .
The relations the country had with Djibouti was good but in the midst of continuing friendship, some problems have cropped up occasionally, the report disclosed..
Unless the root causes, of these problems have been identified, government is aware that they could develop in to a dangerous characteristic, it's underscored in the report.
The Somalian situation which is related to terrorism has been widely included in this report, "Unless terrorism is fought with determination, peace won't reign in Somalia," and continued, "except trying to bring peace in Somalia, it's impossible to fight terrorism permanently an in a lasting situation..
It said.
If the international communities have the interest and capability to do away with terrorism from Somalia, we believe that a much more fruitful work could be done with fellow Somalians and the surrounding counters.
Hence, Ethiopia in her capability to make IGHAD's decision practical would be willing to work cooperatively with all sides..
Said the report.
The report that raised certain issues regarding Ethiop-Eritrean relations, praised the ongoing debate that is conducted at international level.
The report that praised the contribution of historical searchers who are friends of Ethiopia, also mentioned that, "we have contracted the lawyers with lots of money who bore fruit representing Yemen" during the time of Yemen and Eritrean border conflict, the report disclosed. .
In the report that would be presented in the parliament today, other than the MPs, Ethiopian government ambassadors and diplomats who are currently attending the meeting in the ministry of foreign affairs are expected to participate, parliamentarian sources disclosed..
From Tomar January 29, 2002.
Ethiopian Unity Front Released a statement!!
Ethiopian Unity front (EUF) announced in the statement it released on March 9, 1998 that it is a coalition front formed by EDFC, Benshangul Peoples Freedom Movement, one wing of ‘Kefagn' (that's ‘Kefagn' peoples Patriotic Movement).
This front who's led by the secretary Mr. Mersha Yoseph and announced by various national and foreign media, released a statement vis-à-vis the coalition..
Based on the release of this statement which came out on March 5, 1998, it's at present engaged in killing injuring and taking captives soldiers in gorilla fighting, confiscating different automatic, semi-automatic ammunitions and other important materials..
Three comrades were killed on the side of EUF while other 4 were injured lightly, it said..
In addition this statement explained that most of the fighting's were conducted in Gondar region, Chilga district.     .
On the other hand, the newspaper which comes out every two weeks and the gazette of EUF, Admas gazette, in its 2nd volume No. 4, April 8, 1998 edition, disclosed that Ethiopian Unity Front Support an Aid coordination committee are devotedly doing their activities elsewhere..
Based on this, the support and Aid committee which is found in Netherlands (Holland) made its statement official..
According to the explanation of this committee...the solution for the severe problems our people have, at the present as well as in the future is undoubtedly when the kidnapping and suppression stops and ever happens, the equality of all Ethiopian people is assured and their rights respected..
And this calls for bitter sacrifice...first of all, those who sacrificed their precious and only life for their cause and those unique Ethiopians who will sacrifice have special responsibility and duty for Ethiopia and he children, and concluded its statement by questing "A promise is a debt of faith and not of a father or a mother"..
Although continued statements are being made regarding the Ethiopian Unity Front, no response has been given by the government..
Except that occasionally government bodies say that this is a rebel activity; there was no time it gave recognition to Ethiopian Unity Front..
Ethiopian unity front has for the first time revealed its military activities with the help of photographs.   .
From Fiameta April 29, 1998
Editoria.
A New Direction in a New Year
Today it's the day the Ethiopian New Year, 1990 begins and from now on we will be saying farewell to the year which we call "the old year", 1998.
When we feel that we are now in the New Year we should also feel how much we lagged behind the other nations.
In a normal chronometry, today we are eight years back.
However, this has been the result of our calendar.
When we look at it from the stand point of our real existence, what should worry us is our remoteness in light years in comparison with those who reached great development stage.
23 years ago today the military forces that shook the government of HaileSelassie I, they officially disclosed that more than 100 thousand people died in Wollo and Tigray due to drought and famine that resulted from drought. .
After that we all started exposing the flaws accusing the regime.
Add this continued for long.
If it was according to what we said, if it was in accordance to our accusations, there wouldn't be famine any more, and even one citizen wouldn't have died as a result of lack of food.
Yet, around 1984 – 1985 that same guest, drought visited more than 9million people..
It brought along with it a special kind of disease called "Ergotism".
Once again, we became proofs for the international philanthropists of famine propaganda, once again for the routine poverty.
At this moment, we are in the hands of another government. .
When this government came to power, it vowed not to see famine..
It bragged to show to the world Ethiopia's prosperity in crops, the land's blessing and its natural endowment..
In fact, it was broadcasted before the world as having brought about results within a short period of time..
But the reality on the ground shows that millions of Ethiopians are dying from drought and famine.
From now on guns would be changed in to plough "it was said.
Nevertheless, we still have clashes and civil wars.
As we see it from the main report of our newspaper, although they say "its peace", children of the country are dying from war that is hidden form the people.   .
Why?
The death-toll in drought, contagious diseased and others such as malaria and those who are terrorized by lack of peace are countless.
Out the 57 million Ethiopian people, perhaps for few of them a reliable shield may have been built against famine and disease.
But the majority of the Ethiopian population is the victim of the famine, disease and war.
So, it's naïve to think that the Ethiopian people would have something to hope for in the New Year..
The term Ethiopian people doesn't refer to the few, modern city dwellers.
When we say Ethiopian people we don't mean those government officials who work at Arat Kilo, and live at Bole district.
These do, by no means, represent the majority of the Ethiopian people. .
At these places, champagne could pour out, whisky could be drunk, and an ox could be slaughtered. .
If we try to measure the living standard of the majority of the population by this scale, it would be a sin.
Because the Ethiopian population has for ages been put down, suppressed and suffering and even to day didn't say "enough"..
It's a population whose throat always dry and famished..
As if this were not enough, its national dignity, whom it relies on has been violated and vanished, and his hope is being robbed from him..
Even Ethiopianness which is his last public pride lost value..
While the conditions are not as such commendable to say "A good year has come" out hearts would fill wit hope when he hear that there are fellow people in some places who shout for unity.
We are pleased to see the work-lover people of Gurage coming to unity, humiliating the "children" who were saying "we're not Gurages" and disturb the peace.
On the question of whether the people of silte is Gurage, or not, the people chose to be unified rather than divided.
The people of Gurage taking the Ethiopian flag as the sole embelm raised a principle named "in unity mutual development".
It's for all a gesture of good example.
When we hear and see government mass media that used to spread the poison of racism among people yesterday, are now condemning "narrowness and racism", we came to understand that the seed of unity the united forces planted and developed stated producing fruit..
Therefore, we celebrate the New Year watering this good seed and promising to bear more fruit.
In a spirit of national reconciliation, let's bury racist politics and hatred, and stand united on poverty, famine and demagogue.
We don't want any of our fellow individual to wake up suddenly in the middle of the night with a dying hope, and with a departure of good feeling.
One should not continue cursing itself, "I'm destined to ..."
Instead, as of today he has to struggle to take his destiny in his own hands, to make his country his own, to decide his future life himself.
There's no other mundane fore that wipes his tears, amend his hope.     .
Anyway, Happy New Year.
From Tobia September 11, 1997
Our Youth Team Passed for the World Cup in Argentina; An Important Milestone is Registered.
The Ethiopian Youth National Team Yesterday defeated South African team at Addis Ababa Stadium in a wide margin 4 – 1 holding first position in its group and assured that it has passed for Argentina's Youth soccer World Cup.
Our Youth team has succeeded in achieving its goal of passing for the semi-final for the 12th African Youth Soccer champion through the goals scored by Hussien Seman and Yordanos Abay in the first half, and Zewdu Bekele and Ashenafi Girma in the second half..
According to the decision of the African Soccer Federation (CAF) to cancel Cameroon's and Egypt's results and replay to defeat one another, on Saturday, Ethiopian Youth team bet 4 to 1, that is, defeating by 2 more goals, in 4 points and 2 goal difference, it stood first.
At the same time, in a match held between Egypt and Cameroon at Abebe Bikila Stadium, Egypt beating 3 to 1, passed for the semi final being 2nd from its group..
Mr. Melaku Petros representative of Federal sport Commission, Mr Tsehaye G/Egziabeher, leader of the team, Mr. Tamene Yerdaw, assistant coach of the team, coach of South African team, Captain of the team, Defyalew Tesfaye and Ashenafi Girma whom we talked immediately after the game said they were satisfied on the results achieved and happy and thank the Ethiopian people for its co inexhaustible moral support it renders for it enabled them to become successful..
The fair decision of CAF not only showed its good heartedness for the development of football but, above all, it made us get the opportunity to pass for world Youth Soccer cup, said Mr. Melaku Petros, and continued that the result is critical to the country's football development and heartily thanked all who helped and supported for the success of the competition, and the people.  .
The Youth African Coach on his part said except that the air was heavy, they didn't face any obstacles and he didn't regret his team didn't pass for semi-final..
He was satisfied with the support the spectators gave them and then he passed his congratulations message to the Ethiopian people. .
Foreign journalists and experts who followed the games, from the stadium pointed out that Ethiopian team got what it deserved and found the support of the spectators fantastic and wished our team reached for the final cup..
The spectators in the stadium and the people who were following the game on television came from different quarters and gathered around the stadium expressing their extreme joy through dance, music and cars' horns, lighting cars and waving flags, turning the city in to jubilation, the whole evening.  .
From Addis Zemen March 27, 2001
Sudan Government is to file Charges Against Ethiopians who kidnapped Airplanes..
The Sudan government is to file charges of being terrorist against five Ethiopians who kidnapped one Air force Airplanes while it was having local flight, obliging it to land in Sudan, according to Reuters..
Reuters quoting Al-Anba daily Sudanese newspaper from Khartoum, in the report it broadcasted the day before yesterday, the kidnappers would also be filed charges of putting in danger the lives of peaceful citizens..
The Sudanese Foreign minister, Ismael previously told that according to the agreement reached with the kidnappers, the charges would be viewed in Sudan..
The minister was heard being quoted that they may home death sentence, the report reminded..
The report also disclosed that Ethiopia asked the kidnappers to be given to her.
It's to be recalled that the five kidnappers after having obliged the airplane that was having a local flight on April 26, 2001 landed it in Kartoum, released the people on board and gave themselves up to the Sudan government..
From Addis Zemen May 15, 2001   .
There's Worry Ethiopia Might Lose Abay Due to Algiers Agreement .
After the Ethio-Eritrean border conflict that lasted over two years was completed with military victory of Ethiopia, the Algiers agreement that was signed in the hope to bring lasting place is said to put at risk Ethiopia's ownership of Abay.
The Ethiopian Democratic Party (EDP) in a statement it gave regarding the public demonstration it called on Sunday February 11, 2002 at Masqel Square from 9:00 o'clock on wards, stated that if the agreement is not finalized soon, it could be considered as giving in Abay just like that of Asab, it said.
Since the Ethio-Eritrean peace agreement signed in Algiers, capital of Algeria in December, 2001 mainly rested up on the 1900, 1902 and the 1908 colonization treaty Ethiopian and Italian governments singed, it gives away Ethiopian's benefits, and, hence, signing, this document knowing its repercussions, said EDP's statements, put in to question its sympathetic feeling to the country.
In addition, the Algiers agreement quoted from the treaty make between Ethiopia and Italian governments, so the EPLF government could not negotiate on them; the treaties were made under the compulsion of the Italian government and not under equivalent benefit, they do not have acceptability in international law; besides, they were violated in 1936 due to the Italian invasion and based on the peace treaty Italy made in 1955 with the winners of World War II (America, England, Russia) she promised never to claim Eritrean as a colony and, so since they are cancelled, they are considered dead and buried, they said.    .
While those who gave responses to the raised questions in the press conference were higher officials of EDP, they stated that if Ethiopian agrees to be governed by these out dated laws in front of the international community, in the same token, she would be obliged to do so with other treaties for it was not only with Italy that she signed a treaty in 1910, they said.
TPLF/EPRDF is bringing out treaties from the grave which Ethiopia signed under compulsion and trying to give them legal basis, and especially the treaty Emperor Menelik signed with Italians in 1910 was the main source of their concern, EDP stated.
The treaty that was signed with the former colonizer of Egypt and Sudan, England, decreed that Ethiopia can not work any thing with Abay river without consulting Sudan and Egypt, and if EPRDF gave Asab with the 1902 treaty, it cold be realized now that the question of Abay would be the next thing under consideration, EDP higher officials said. .
The officials who gave responses for the questions raised during this press conference pointed out that since the United Nations decided Eritrea to unite with her country with federation in 1950 and based on the decision reps of Eritrea passed on in 1962, the federation decree was violated and Eritrea's issue had been decided to be incorporated in the unified sovereign state of Ethiopia, so all the treaties the Algiers agreement mentioned do not have legal basis, they explained.
For the question that reminded that the former government fought more to the land than to the people with regards to Eritrea, they responded EDP's focus was to bring the people with its land to Ethiopia, it was disclosed.  .
EDP holding this stand point continued the agitation it started to carry out a public meeting on February 13, 2002 at Masqel Square. .
From the Press February 6, 2002
The Patriarch continued Dismissing People out of Wor.
One Holy Father Too Encountered Suspensio.
The suspension of former holy fathers from their jobs as it is, the patriarch has continued dismissing more people from their work..
Sources quoting Holy Father Melake Aba Mihret Yimer stated that he has been brutally treated, inflicted injustice, suspended from job and when he appealed, nobody heard him for half a year now, and unfairness imposed upon the church by the patriarch still persists, explained the sources..
Melake Selam Aba Mihret has been working in different capacities and responsibilities for over 20 years and has been Chief Administrator in many churches; he was suspended from his 40 years church service by this patriarch, he explained..
The main cause for the suspension of this Holy Father from his work was the claim that an ascetic who criticized the patriarch was allowed to teach in the church whom he served as an administrator, and the suspension was enforced on him from the letter written by Nazreth clergy..
However, the chief Holy Father of Nazareth town, Nebure Ed Kifle Yohannes Mekonnen, disclosed that he took this measure of suspension on the Holy Father under the influence and command of the patriarch, and when Melake Selam Aba Mihret came to appeal to the patriarch, he wasn't welcomed; it has now been eight months since he was suspended. .
The cause for the tightening of the suspension after the patriarch discussed the issue with the chief Holy Father of Nazareth was believed to be his dire hatred to the ascetic..
Although the patriarch closed his doors over the suspended Holy Father, the administrator is still begging to be considered, he pointed out.
However, the efforts have been in vain..
We found out that measure of suspension took upon Melake Selam aba Mihret Yimer, who was transferred to Nazareth St. Gabriel from Addis Ababa, just because he was accused of not controlling the ascetic, reveals the patriarch's hatred to the ascetic..
Any way the 50 year old Holy Father have been a victim and his suffering as a result of the patriarch's hated to the ascetic.
These sources clearly stated that the patriarch is avenging his hatred of the ascetic on the poor administrator of the church, Melake Selam..
Melake Selam who was suspended form his job since March 1998 without having other additional reason, except that the ascetic were free to teach in his, church, has been continuously appealing to the patriarch at his place, though of no avail, internal sources reported. .
From Fiameta October 21, 1998
Twenty-eight MPs are to Leave the Council  .
In their representation by the people about twenty-eight MPs are to be ousted from the appointment they were given in the council, sources of the council disclosed to Tomar newspaper.
According to the sources, these EPRDF members whom most of them have first degree were given examination and after passing it they were needed to work in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and in various embassies.
Among these members of the council who are to leave their seats in parliament and to work full time in government work, Mr. Belete Rada, Mr. Yohannes Ginda, Mr. Ibrahim Abdela (from OPDO); Mr. Abdulaziz Ahmed, Mr. Shemsedin Ahmed (from Somali), and Mr. Denberu Alemu (form Southern Region) could be mentioned; it is also disclosed that there are two individuals from Gembela region and three people from TPLF.
According to the close sources to the issues, these members of the council were made to leave for they were recently raising strong questions regarding the salary of the MPs; and to avoid them in case they would bring forward other questions in the future.
The measure that was to be taken therefore, on these members who are believed to have better education was to remove them form the parliament and give them increment in the office of the legislative body so that they would keep silent, it was believed.
Those who see the measure that was to be taken in this perspective showed that while appointees in the office of the legislative, body get increments and high salaries, for MPs salaries are no made to improve and as recently questions have been raised a round this issue.
In a meeting held a week ago in one meeting of the council, this issue was raised; that the salaries of ministers who are also MPs are high; that ministers whom they appointed goby cars while these members do not have vehicles were said to be raised.
At that time, the House speaker Dawit Yohannes told them that the Ministers can get high salaries for they are workers of the office of legislative body,
To this remark of Mr. Dawit Yohannes some MPs suggested that either the ministers work in the parliament as well as in their ministries and let us get whatever benefit they get, in an equivalent level, or assign other professional people in their place.
At this time the house speaker Dawity Yohannes retorted, "We are elected to serve the people, but we didn't come here in search of money" it was said. .
In response to this speech of Mr. Dawit, one parliament member fired back, "If we came here to serve people, we all have to pay equal sacrifice," at this time the house speaker's temper flared at the meeting and said, "If at all I resign from this council, I would live by driving taxi," at which point the participants laughed.
It is to be recalled that his Excellency Mr. Dawit Yohannes used to live in driving a taxi while he was in the America at the time of his struggle.
Although it's not known whether there would be another election to substitute those members whom EPRDF is to take out of the council, according to observers, the EPRDF members who are needed to stay in the MP are those whose educational level are not more than diploma level.  .
Most of the MPs of EPRDF members who came form the regions were workers of agricultural development, elementary school teachers, farmers and small business people, the information available indicated according to the sources these reports..
From Tomar January 22, 2002
The Calf that got used to Sucking ...
The Eritrea's Red Sea Corporation was asked to pay in dollar... in Eritrea, tension still reigned
The Red Sea corporation or better know as 09, Eritrean business corporation won the bid to buy sesame from Humera, but while asking to make the payment in the "old" Ethiopian Birr collected from Eritrea, the pertinent Tigrean officieals requested the company to make the payment in dollars, ruling out acceptability, it was disclosed.
The company in the preceding years made several Ethiopian business people out of the market, by winning the be same bid for buying, amassing of lot of profit and the Tigrean officials ruled out this year's bid not only because they wanted to have them paid in dollars.
It is because they were annoyed to see this agricultural product that came from Tigray being exported preparing it as it came from Eritrea, and the Tigrean officials took this measure to punish them, our reporter from the area disclosed.
As the disagreement the bid created hasn't settled up to now -- the authorities of the Red Sea company, not only tried to convince the economic officials of Tigray but are trying to persuade the central government officials, while the issue was referred by the area people as "the calf that got used to sucking ......" quoting Ethiopian proverb.
Earlier it was reared to bring controversies for the fact that Ethiopian officials said the business transactions of the two countries would be conducted through dollar, white on the Eritrean side they had a strong interest that the transaction be through Nakfa and Birr it was to be recalled.
The statement both country's national bank governors gave to Reporter magazine showed that these was a wide difference between the officials of he two countries.
While the Eritrean officials and their consultants stick to "Nakfa" and "Birr" as means of exchange between the two countries, the Ethiopian National bank governor held dollar as a medium of business transactions.
On the other hand, the case of almost 3500 Ethiopian youngsters that were kidnapped from different towns of Eritrea at midnight twenty days before (most of whom were Tigrean nationals) hasn't got resolved.     .
The whereabouts of the youngsters not known after they expressed their opposition at Sawa military training center.
Their parents, forming a committee, put forward their appeal to Tigray administrative officials..
Although the Tigrean administrative officials had already made a secret arrangement to discuss with Eritrean government there has been no result yet.
Many believe that the youngsters were either put behind bars or else were made to work on Aligder Farming gathering cotton with a Serious army encircling.
Our reporter disclosed quoting some parents that there were some children who were attacked by gun fire shot from EPLF soldiers while they were attempting to escape, and they are worried.
The other news that reached as, was that a radio reporter in Asab town killed a colonel, who was his boss.
The assassinated colonel was the area commander-in-chief.
The operator was instigated to kill his boss due to his boss' receiving a message to conduct a military campaign to put the area youth in a mass arrest, take them to military training, and disarm the area farmers, which annoyed the operator, it was disclosed.
In order not to subdue himself under the hands of EPLF security forces, he immediately killed himself.
In the mean time, Eritrean accused that Sudan Army planes crossed the border and conducted an attack.
Sudan on her part said that in order to fulfill America's mission, apart fro helping oppositions, Eritrea sent infantry and her mechanized army, too, to the south, disclosed recently.
Since Eritrea didn't find enough to help oppositions only on the eastern front in her campaign towards Sudan, so she sent several army and artilleries to the South, Sudanese chairman of the Security and peace council, General Mohammed Abdella disclosed recently to "Akber Alyoum", his country's newspaper.
Eritrea, on her part, the Sudanese warplanes crossed up to 10 kms through gash and Setit districts, attacking the area.   .
Moreover, the Sudanese oppositions have widened their differences, and this created a problem for Mr. Isayas for not going his way, which is the other problem of Eritrea.
Sudan is investigating the opposition movement that had started in the western lowlands of Eritrea so that they become victorious over EPLF, there are some elites who are heard "... (Eritrean National Coalition)..." should be formed..
Among these Eritrean elites one of them was Dr. Tesfaye Medhane who was present in the annual festival Sewrawi Bayto prepared and presented a research paper highlighting the importance of the coalition. .
However, the organization which arranged the forum didn't accept the idea, the Indian Ocean Letters recently disclosed.
Sewrawi Bayto in its own paper, "Eritrean Newsletter" disclosed that it supported the establishment of the coaliton, but then, didn't want to work cooperatively with factions who made their aim the establishment of Islamic regime.
The national council which has been led by Abdela Idris, and the Islamic group that has been led by Arafat are operating as members of the coalition, Indian Ocean News Letter, mentioned.
The other thing that made Sudanese case difficult for Eritrea is the passivity of Ethiopia.
The anti-EPRDF government force are strengthening on the side of Sudan border, so it took out certain number of troops from the border area, while the activities of Sudan Embassy in Addis Ababa, has showed improvements.         .
The Sudan Club that is situated around Sarbet area has been opened and started to be functional, which could be one indication for this, as some said.
This change of stand is believed to be the main cause for the disagreement between the two countries;
On the Southeastern side, too the area that connects Tigrean and Afar Regions has been an obstacle for peace in Eritrea.
While there's an occasional clash with EPRDF army, priority is given to those who do not accept being Eritrean, the activity which is going on around Afar area.
The area is also dangerous for EPRDF, too, for they previously had had mutual military campaign but without getting results.      .
Among the different efforts to abort Afar activities recently, Ethiopia and Eritrea made a mutual military training.
In the man time last October 30, 1997 Yemen warned Eritrean government to stop the searching for natural gas.
According to Reuter's disclosure, it was the Yemeni foreign ministry that sent the warning to Eritrea.
The Yemeni Socialist Party newspaper, "Altawra" on its pat disclosed that the organization which signed a treaty in search of natural gas was ANGASO, the American National Gas Search Organization.
This organization whose lead quarter is in Huston, got a permission to search natural gas on an area on nine million hectare width, at the moment is digging three wells to start its activities, the Yemeni government warning expressed;
the Eritrean government hasn't said anything about the warning writer by Yemeni government.
It was disclosed that Yemen won't accept the decision given by the International Tribunal on the petition for Hanish Islamds and it is mandatory to prepare for war, conducting agitation under ground;
And internally, in Eritrea at this moment the Eritrean people is expressing its hatred of Mr. Isayas' regime although it doesn't get a forum that enabled it openly express its ideas, fade up with the unsystematic mass arrest of the youth, the bombs the oppositions blast in towns and the country.
Different sectors of the community are leaving the area heading towards Ethiopia and Sudan, which was part of this hatred;
Isayas Afeworki who was tensioned by these repeated crisis, had a mild surgery in the United states and came back to Ethiopia, where he has been in hiding from the public since then, which created various feelings among the public.
Although Mr. Isayas, was believed by all, to have been in hiding due to health problems, it's not known as to what kind of ailment he has?
There are some who said he had a mental sickness.
Mr. Issayas had arranged a forum always on September to answer questions that were said to be raised by the people.
But this year, the questions were raised but they haven't been responded, which exposed him.
Besides, the man is said to have secretly gave abroad for medication.
Some observers said that the right time for Isayas to leave power, by what ever yardsticks, is now, nonetheless.
Others, are questioning that due to his dictatorial characteristics, who's going to substitute his position?
They are worried that in the race of substituting him, could create a greater problem.
Especially, now that many observers fear that the difference that has been forcefully suppressed in districts and religion could burst out.
The fact that there is no opposition that may topple EPLF from its power and could lead the country, is the other problem, as some observers disclosed..
From Tobia November 20, 1997
NADF Generals Saved Meles
Yared Tibebu, who played key role in establishing EPDF along with Tamirat Layne who's imprisoned, in the article he wrote from America said, "I'm worried of the fate of Addisu Legesse".
Mr. Yared in his article published on Zega newspaper said that apart from Mr. Addis, the Eritrean Bereket Simon is the target of "narrow" TPLF members, so I'm worried of his fate, too.
In addition, " what makes the issue more complicated is prime minister Miles fears the joint arms of Deputy Prime Minister, Addisu Legesse and his minister of information, Mr. Bereket Simon...W, he said.
As to the situation in the army, "when the TPLF leadership was known to have the danger of faction, Addisu and General Haile Tilahun met NADF army officers said, "As there may be a danger of government coup de tat be vigilant," and the officers made NADF members on guard.
So after the situation was calmed, it was said that the NADF members proudly said, "We showed them, for the second time" scoffing at TPLF officers and soldiers.
This doesn't necessarily mean that Meles Zenawi who became closer to NADF would continue in the same shade.
If he gets a loyal Tigrean national their is no doubt his choice would be that.
For example, even if General Haile helped him out during his time of difficulty, he wouldn't like to give him full charge of Air Force, so he's put him in a secondary position of commander-in-chief."
He said.
From Menilik, January 18, 2002  .
Three Ethiopian Business organizations who are Engaged in the private Sector Got International Award
Three Ethiopian Business Organizations who were engaged in the private sector got international award prepared by International Research, Business and Technological Efforts Expansion advancement Organization.
The organizations that got the twenty-seven annual award that was given in Germany, Frankfurt city last Monday, March 4, 2001 were Bahir Dar Tour and Travel Agency, Africa Insurance Company Share Company and Aleto Lucks Import and Export Organization.
Among the criteria these organizations met were customers' needs, satisfaction and healthy guest entertainment strategy, as well as Information usage, and analysis method are included.  .
Mr. Wondwosen Lakew, Manager of Bahir Dar Tour and Travel Agency, yesterday disclosed that since his tour and travel organization offered the proper entertainment to tourists who came to Ethiopia, the tourists didn't present any complaints to their country's travel agency when they returned.
The manager also disclosed that the other criteria their selection was Fesort Hotel, the hotel which the company at present is building for the purpose of giving services to tourist and its status as international standard..
As the German Voice Radio disclosed the day before yesterday, the three Ethiopian Organizations were chosen in their miscellaneous public services an in the midst of economists they were given the awards, mentioning that they met the requirement of the quality standard of the International Awarding organization and were found excelling their competitors. .
From Addis Zemen March 8, 200.
UNICEF for Eritrea and America for Ethiopia Donated Ai.
As of recently the number of displaced people have increased both from Eritrea and Ethiopia..
Especially those people who run form Eritrean war zones and move to the different centers of shelters in Tigray like Erob, Gulo Mehada, Mereb, Bademe and Sheraro received food and supplies from the America government.
On the other hand it was disclosed that UNICEF is providing broad-range aid to Eritreans who were displaced in the various towns of Eritrea.
Last week alone, UNICEF provided more than half a million Birr aid to the displaced..
It's to be recalled that UNICEF gave medicine and dry food aid for the displaced in Eritrea..
On the Ethiopian side, the enormous aid provided by the American government is still continuing..
Based on its agreement to provide continuous aid for 6 months, their first round aids were given to 150 thousand displaced people..
The aid American government provides in terms of money is reported to reach 70 million dollars.     .
From Fiameta October 21, 1998
Individual who were Caught transporting Heroin were Charged.
ENA – Four foreign nationals who were found transporting dangerous herb called appeared in the Federal Higher Court First criminal bench Court of Session.
These accused individuals who were nationals of Nigeria, Togo and Tanzania were caught and arrested at Bole International Air port last years for they were found having more than 3, 800 gram heroin, the Prosecutor General pointed out..
All herb transporters tried to pal the heroin by swallowing a package that was prepared for this purpose and especially one of them tried to pall swallowing 1520 gram, it disclosed..
According to the prosecutor General's description it was understood that among the accused individuals, three of them were transit passengers who were traveling from India by Ethiopia Airlines.
But the one who possesses the 1,520 grams of Heroin started form Holland and when he reached Bole Airport he was caught, the file of the charge described in detail..
The Federal Higher Court First criminal bench Court of Session that was held on last Friday ordered assignment of translators for the accused and gave an optional date for December 2, 1998 to investigate whether the Court of Session has authority or not to view the case..
From Addis Zemen December 2, 1998
Injured Armies Promised to Fight against EPLF /Shaebia/
The abrupt war that broke out in three fronts in May between Ethiopia and Eritrea was the cause for hundreds of people's death; since the two countries accuse each other of initiating the clashes, border tension has been aggravated, and although both countries agree through U.S. mediation not to conduct air-attacks, CNN reported that there is  clear that fighting on the ground may continue; in the mean time, formerly injured armies have be registered to go to the war-front, the report stated.
The CNN reporter who broadcasted this news from Adigrat on June 23 stated that the civilian-targeted air bombing by Eritrea took the lives of 48 civilians, killed hundreds of elderly people and injured ex-combatants, and this filled them with rage and initiated their patriotic feeling, register and go to the war again.
A government official form Adigrat district by the name Andualem pointed out that out of the 500 volunteers registered, only 200 of them were not granted permission for they didn't qualify, while the remaining were allowed to join, the report stated.
Injured ex-combatants with mental impairment and those in wheel chairs also asked to be granted permission to defend their countries in the battlefield, but since most of them didn't qualify, permission was not granted, and hence, become sad, the report added.
In Tigray, many considered it as their own war for they felt as if their friends deserted them.
CNN reporter quoting officials told that pride in the nation-nationality has been strengthening and thousands of ex-combatants have voluntarily joined, took a second time training and went to the front.
I've never expected to fight again, said Gebre Amlak, filled with anger, who lost his left leg in the fight that took place in 1988, and he continued, "but now I'll fight because this situation calls for prompt action and I'm prepared to give not only my right leg, but my life, too," CNN reporter concluded quoting an ex-combatant..
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
Sudanese and Djibouti Leaders passed a Message of Condolenc.
Oumer Hassen Albeshir, Sudan Republic President and the country's Defense Minister Major General Bakri Hassen Salih expressed their deep sympathy on the death of Mr. Kinfe Gebremedhin..
In the message President Hassen Albeshir for Prime Minister Meles Zenawi and Major General Bakri for Deputy Prime Minister and Defense Minister Tefera Walwa Sent, they expressed that they heard Mr. Kinfe's death with great shock.
In a condolence message the president and the defense minister sent, they reminded that Mr. Kinfe contributed greatly with regards to establishing security and peace in the two sisterly countries..
In the commiseration the Sudan President and minister of Defense individually offered, they expressed their sympathy Mr. Kinfe's family and fiends as well as to all Ethiopians over the death of General Manager of Authority for security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs.     .
Moreover, Djibouti's president Ismael Omar Gele expressed his deep sympathy to Prime Minister Meles Zenawi over the death of Mr. Kinfe..
President Ismael in his commiseration expressed that he heard the sad news of assassination of Mr. Kinfe who was General Manager of Authority for Security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs..
The assassination of Betrayal on Mr. Kinfe who was a great servant of Ethiopian government, and whom he shared great friendship with, has been a shock to Djibouti's President, Foreign Affairs Ministry disclosed.
The president expressed that with his efficiency and loyalty, Mr. Kinfe would be greatly missed, the president expressed..
President Ismael disclosed that whoever knew Mr. Kinfe who was always generously willing to serve; his readiness and good behavior would like him and give him respect.
The president of Djibouti, in his message, said he would share the Sorrow with his family and his close relatives..
The message president Ismael sent to Prime Minister, Meles expressing his sorrow over the death of Mr. Kinfe, General Manager of Security, Immigration and Refugee Affairs, was broadcasted in Djibouti's mass media..
From Addis Zemen May 15, 2001    .
There have been obstacles not to teach lessons to children in their mother tongue
The decision to teach Non-Oromo children, who live in zones of Oromia regional administration in their native languages, Amharic, as from 1998 academic year onwards have faced obstacles by administrative and educational departments in Debrezeit, Nazareth, and eastern Harerghe, it was disclosed;
This international decree which the United Nations passed on and which the Ethiopian Federal Democratic Republic government also ratified it in its constitution, the authorities didn't want to implement it disallowing the borrowing of texts written in Amharic language, warning teachers not to teach, they are just wasting the children's golden time, according to the reports that reached us;
In 12 primary & junior secondary schools that are found in eastern shoa zone, Nazareth Town, the hidden intrigue done on children of Amharic speakers has become the worst of all, the sources mentioned, the situation that is seen in the town seems to have the inclination to suppress students who have other native languages learn in one Language;
The details of the intrigue done on the children are that attempting to teach them with a language they don't speak as a mother tongue before, with a Latin letter, with teachers who didn't take training, unwillingly through worry and great difficulty, just wasting the children's golden time, the sources disclosed;
Even if in 1997 through a lot of efforts made by parents, and through so many ups and downs, they have made higher officials decide that children learn with their native language, the zonal education department and on the administrative sides this was made not practical, they even started to consider it political upon those individuals who follow these and openly or indirectly problems were made to occur on them, it was disclosed;
At the end of the same year in the schools children who were below 18 years were made to choose the language they would like to learn the coming year, among whom the parents of 1187 chosen Amharic while 542 preferred to learn through Oromifa with Latin alphabets, although this was not made practical, the sources recalled.
Today, it is not with the language the parents chose for their kinds that they learn, but students are assigned at any school where the authorities chose for them, without the consent of parents.
Without making any preparations for the lesson by the pertinent zonal education department officials, the 1998 academic year has started;
In Nazareth No.3 primary and junior secondary school, Mr. Zewdu Debela, the principal of the school at the beginning of the school gathered the school teachers told them that except fourth and eight grade, there' wasn't any teaching books so teachers getting in to other classes have no other work except controlling the students and warned them not to use the former books written in Amharic and forbade the store keeper, to lend these books;
In this way, the children, who are the citizens that would be replacing today' generation, their early youth time is wasted in futility; while teachers, instead of producing productive citizens, are making them unwillingly, burdens of a country, the sources disclosed;
In the mean time, parents in Ada Liben district, Debrezeit town and county-loving elderly people appealed to higher authorities and similarly got acceptance, but the implementing bodies are striving to avert the situation, the report which reached us indicated;
In a meeting held in Debrezeit town on September 4, 1997 at the Hall of Emperor Lebnedengel School, teachers of Oromifa, parents board members an selected Oromo nationals who were expected to protest the proposed idea, participated but this intrigue was exposed, according to the report, the administrative and education bureau officials warned that those who learned in Amharic wouldn't get jobs;
Out of the decree of the United Nations and the constitution that the government approved, saying that children of six and eight should decide the language they would be learning and making them sign was just wrong, said the report, but due to the people's cautious and active participation in the meeting, after a long and tiresome dispute and argument it was decided that parents and children should choose the language, though not without some conspiracy, a fruit was gotten at last, it disclosed;
Although the result was as shown in the table, when parents went to register their children, they told them, "We don't have places for Amharic speakers.
We have places only for Oromia speakers.
We don't have books.
If you don't learn in the Oromifa language, you wouldn't get work ground here.
Go, transfer to another school.
Every precedence to Oromifa, etc...
By saying such annoying things they made sure that parents become furious, the report disclosed;
The oromifa language that has been given from 1st – 6th grade up to now, is told to be given to higher grades starting from 7th grade from this year on wards in different districts and towns of eastern Harerge, which made many non-Oromo speakers to leave their education, our eastern Ethiopia reporter disclosed; although parents who have the financial capability were able to resolve the problem by sending their kinds to Amharic-speaking schools, parents who have poor, small and meager income had no choice, so they either forced their kinds to learn with the language they don't know or keep them to home, the reporter disclosed quoting the parents;    .
Narrow-racist officials and teachers who strive to chip away at the rights these parents and country-loving citizens, who followed the case up to the end and after many ups and downs, have then respected, should be exposed, reminded some sympathizer citizens and pointed out that parents should not lose hope due to the confusion that was created;
The people and government should struggle this hidden and obvious intrigue enacted upon a generation asked the parents and especially requested the central government and the Oromia Regional Administration which passed on the decision, to take immediate measure.      .
From Tobia November 13, 1997
Preparation is Underway to Pass an Aviation La.
(ENA): In order to enable Ethiopian Investors (to) embark on air transport services, a law that makes this done is in preparation, the Civil Aviation authority disclosed..
The authority disclosed that the aviation law which is to be formulated would put in place legislative decree that enable ownership of airplane, establishment of air ports with rules and regulations they abide by, and how to operate air transport business.
The authority which explains that those who are going to embark on this career as well as those who hare already been giving services need to have law and regulation that they should follow; it is also disclosed that organizing the documents such as separate proclamations, regulations and instructions that are under operation in line with the practical situation of the country and common global practice would have great benefit for the activities of the sector..
Besides, in order to efficiently control and enforce strong punishment resolution upon airplane hijacking, including air brigandage and other different crimes, the presence of the law is mandatory.                        .
According to the statement of the authority, it would help to integrate national and international organizations and bear fruit vis-à-vis searching air plane and rescuing it as well as saving lives and properties at the airport.
The law apart from greatly assisting the air transport business not to have chaotic operating system, it would also keep its service and economic security intact, and it's disclosed. .
While there has not been serious difficulty so far not having aviation rules in Ethiopia, occasional problems were there vis-à-vis search of air plane and rescuing, air security and others.     .
From Addis Zemen August 13, 1997
Editorial
The Multiplicity of Statement Bring About Nothin.
It's known that the All Amhara People's Organization (AAPO) was an organization that was established among the first ones and it had many members in Addis Ababa and at the level of regions.
Apart form this it drew many Ethiopian people through its activities during the first years of its establishment.
The existence of the organization became questionable after its president the late professor Asrat was put behind bars.
After that let alone to continue its struggle with a unified aim and spirit, its members fell apart and fail to do their job and due to this crippled the organization.
Not only did a lot of central committee members go out from the organization, but also youth associations were also dismantled in some places.
The oppositions accused on their part that it's the first deputy president General Nekatebeb who's responsible for this.
On the other hand, the statement recently given by AAPO blamed the oppositions.
We would like to remind that since the multiplicity of statements bring about nothing, in order to maintain the existence of the organization and make its previous strengthened activities continue successfully, it's imperative and have no other resolve to mistakes, negotiate and with a tool of forbearance uniting for a true cause.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
The Memory of the Brutally Killed Ascetic Fekade Selassie is to be observed tomorro.
The memory of ascetic Fekade Selassie who was killed in cold blood in St. Stephen church on January 9, 1998, is to be colorfully observed tomorrow by Ethiopians both in the country and overseas..
Ascetic Fekade Selassie who was brutally killed by gun shots on Thursday January 9, 1998 and whose funeral rite was conducted on the fourth day at St. Michael church, where the sanctuary of clemency turned out for him a wrath of God, it is exactly 2 years tomorrow since he was inhumanly killed at the presence of the Ark of he Tabernacle as well as religious leaders..
Since he passed away, the Christian congregation has never failed to show its fellowship in religious processions such as prayer for the dead on the third day, up to the annual memorial day; tomorrow, that is January 9, 1999 there will be prayer for the dead at St. Michael church, where as after mass, luncheon will be served for the disabled; Ethiopian abroad, too are said to colorfully observe the 2nd year memorial..
Regarding the prayer for the dead and the luncheon for the program, the congregation has started its preparation long ago, sources disclosed; while all the preparations have been completed in the country, money was sent from abroad for buying oxen, sources indicated..
Similar kind of observance is going to take place overseas, the sources pointed out..
At the time of his death, attempts had been done not to give him a burial place, yet his funeral ceremony finally took place at St. Michael church were it is believed to have no administrative control by the patriarch and have different kind of fellowship; however a statue hasn't been erected as yet due to some problems, but now every preparation is being completed, internal sources explained.
It's to be recalled that due to the assassination of the ascetic, members of ‘Associations of Saints' have still been attending court proceedings.        .
From Fiameta January 8, 1999
Tigray and TPLF – The Political Orbit.
The Time is approaching for the Leadership and Comrades to Evaluate Themselves
Reportage (3)
Situations indicate that the time is nearing for evaluating the role played and the real meaning of the sacrifices that leadership and comrades of TPLF paid in the context to the many years relation they have had with EPLF, EPLF's influence on Ethiopian politics and, in general, the feeling it left on Ethiopia, especially on the people of Tigray.
The third reportage focuses on the issues of the region and views the implication of the relation ship of the two regions.
Whenever Tigray is mentioned her relations with Eritrea can ever be neglected.
The relationship doesn't only emanate from it geographical position but the relations the two parties have had so far.
The bases of their relations were many, but the main ones are Mr. Isayas and Mr. Meles.
The political analysts who evaluate the content of the relationship both from the point of view of Eritrea as well as from Ethiopian perspective, say that both sides used to cooperatively fight the military junta, and after they held power in Addis Ababa and Asmara, they started putting oppositions behind bars and are playing a role in delaying the case of Eritreans living in Addis Ababa not to get resolve.
In a response Mr. Meles gave to one Eritrean newspaper, said, "Our relationship in reality is beyond confederation" while Mr. Isayas stated in Asar, A magazine written in Tigregna language, "Our borders would be meaningless after some time," the message was not obscure.
The Eritrean – Tigrean conferences being conducted time and again in Asmara and Makale, the fact that Ethiopian Civil code is being translated from Amharic to Tigregna, Tigray Development Association covering the cost, the fact that the number of Eritreans officials in Addis Ababa being numerous, the fact that Tigreans could use the Metsewa port, Eritrean consulate being in Tigray and Tigrigna becoming the language of work, all could boil down to proofs for the conception of the would-be established " Tigrean Tigrign" government, it is widely talked over. .
The fact that a huge dam that was being constructed at Tekeze river, twice that of Melka Wakena being under construction is to be seen in relation to this.
Its practicability, however, could incite civil war between the Eritrean lowlanders and highlanders.
The said main conspirators of this plot, Mr. Woldeab Woldemariam, at one time was repeatedly injured and sent out of the country, it was recalled.
With regards to Tigray, except to Mr.  Meles and his few followers, it is expected that it has no special meaning to remaining people of Tigray other than the one held by Ethiopian people.
It won't be acceptable for Tigrean people, too.
The two leaders (Meles and Isayas) are attempting to cover up their in tensions in the pretext of horn of Africa, the situation is being exposed, the opposition is also widening, so they're too worried.
It has been seven years since Eritrea seceded.
Before the secession was official among the controversial issues most of them are still not resolved.
The sides parts of the community who are worried about the relationships that are not properly designed, hold their own outlook; TPLF army is highly involved in this issues.
Because not only willingly but even while fighting against it, it's still allowing Eritrea to secede, so now is looking back to its role..
Although Eritrea is said to demarcate her border and left, there are some agreements which were made by the two sides (Ethiopia and Eritrea) and are not clear to the army or the people, and now that Eritrea is in confrontation due to the mutual agreement the two countries have, a confrontation which the army doesn't like;
Rather than returning its, favor for what has been done to it, EPLF army especially in the borderlines with Tigray, attempting to rise in revolt and wage an a attack made TPLF troops not only furious, but pushed it to put forward questions on the issue to its superior officials, the analysts of the situation say.
TPLF leadership don't have unanimous standpoint in relation to the relationship between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
One side says, "Since we joined EPLF and fought the rest of the Ethiopian people and become victorious, today also we should continue standing with Eritrea."
The said cause which it mentioned is not simply taken from history, it is still trying to suppress the oppositions that are seen at the moment, it prefers to cooperatively work with Eritrea, especially to win over ARDUF which is operating around the two borders and which considers the Afar as belonging to Ethiopia.
In order to strengthen this friendship, EPLF has to be made beneficiary from Ethiopian wealth without any condition; allowing Eritrea to us Ethiopian money in Eritrea for exchange (for the last six years); building a modern condominium for Eritrean consulate office in Tigray; belittling the activity that's going to settle Eritreans' case so that it's not on the public talk, has been functional as a strategy for work relations.
This is not alone..
The team in its interest to elongate EPLF's life span, it has repeatedly put behind bars and sent them out from the country those organizations which oppose EPLF.
However, later the outlook of this side has become defeated and Eritrean's issue has become out of control, these are situations that indicate this..
The other TPLF leadership on its side say, "After we cooperatively fought defeated the military junta, we don't have a remaining mutual agenda."
This side says "we should see Eritrea as a neighboring country while the rest of the Ethiopian people should be seen as Ethiopian..
Eritreans living in Ethiopia, too, on their own free decision could live as Ethiopians or neighboring country nationals..
When the situation at present is evaluated it seems that this outlook is getting acceptance.
The fact that now and them the controlling mechanism conducted in the toll stations in border lines of Eritrea and Ethiopia becoming strengthened, the fact that Eritrean nationals living in Tigray were said to forcefully change their properties in to money, the fact that Ethiopian identity card was forbidden to Eritreans living in Makale and its surroundings, are all to be viewed in this perspective..
These sides who are forced to hold various outlooks are said to be differentiated as these who previously joined the EPLF, those who took their primary level military and political training and even took part in the fighting for a short time and returned to Tigray, and those who directly went to the deserts of Tigray.
Ethiopian and Eritrean Ministers' Mutual Commission annually met in August and signed agreements which were not clear..
Tamerat Layne who used to lead the Commission on Ethiopian side up to last year was ousted from his positions, but then after the meeting discontinued.
This situation amplifies the situation of Mr. Tamerat Layne who was said to be ousted from his post, due to corruption, was in actual facts may have been ousted due to the stand point he took on Eritrea, it is said.
The outlook of Tigrean people, too, is said to have been divided on this issue.
Here, it would be appropriate to mention the complaints Tigreans who live in Addis Ababa raise.
Most of them say,... "If Eritrea claims to be a free country, her citizens, too should be considered foreigners, here..
Why do they take our work in the government, in business and in renting houses, in the name of Tigrean Speaker?
They ask.
Others looking in to it deeply say that it has to be amended not from temporary benefits point of view, but from the perspective of putting the situation of citizens in to order through legislation.
At this time, the difference in outlook on this issue between Tigreans who live in Addis Ababa and TPLF has become alarmingly increasing..
Except Tigrean nationals the Addis Ababa dwellers don't raise questions about the illegal relationship of Eritrea and Ethiopia.
The reason for this is the fact that what they have raised earlier in different forms didn't get acceptance..
TPLF listens to people's voice not willingly but when it's obliged to do so, so let it wait till then.
But there are those who attempted to make TPLF accountable for all the difficult situations created in the country, in general.
However, the suggestion of many is that there should be a demarcation between the outlook of TPLF and that of the people of Tigray.
The situation of Eritreans living in Ethiopia seems to be complicated.
Some of them were of anti-unity stand and supporters of EPLF since the time the organization was in the bush..
They didn't realize that the secession of Eritrea means the end of their being Ethiopian.
There were many who gave their support to Eritrea during the time of referendum.
After the independence most of them went to Asmara and wanted to construct a house, establish an organization, wanted to work in their profession, etc and asked the government, but "where ware you during the struggle?
was the question they were confronted with and returned shamefully.
Those who haven't contributed to EPLF form their wealth and who stood for unity were take and arrested on the morrow of independence.
As a result, the feelings of the Eritreans, too, were changed.
They started retreating.
At this time, those who have communication with the Eritrean embassy in Addis Ababa are few; those who used to say "we are foreigners" to Ethiopians as a mockery have now started asking their friends for forgiveness.
Besides they are now saying "Let alone being alive, even our corpse doesn't go to Eritrea," they said.
The money they got selling their properties have now been reinvesting it to establish organizations.
Apart from working silently, it's said that they have become the first to pay government taxes.
When most of them speak of their future fate, "...the secession of Eritrea from Ethiopia is intended for the benefit of EPLF, and they don't get any benefit out of it so, we wish if there's some one who could avert he secession,..." they are saying; the other thing that should be seen is the relationship of the two organizations.
TPLF and EPLF that replaced the military junta in Addis Ababa and held power in Addis Ababa and Asmara, though seems to they have had good relationship the growing difference is something that has become widely talked about.
Sides who are calmly following the situation are saying that even from the outset the relationship was based on Meles Zenawi and Isayas Afework is personal and blood ties but it didn't have reliable basis.  .
Even if there's a dream of unity between Tigray and Eritrea in the future, it would be the unity of the two people but not the rest, the sources disclosed.
They underscore the strong feeling the people of Tigray have for its Ethiopian ness.
While the two individuals have been able to cover up the differences us yet, the people of the two regions have, apart from defaming one another, transformed in to military clashes since recently, internal sources pointed out..
Indian Ocean Newsletter" no.780 under the title "...The difference that has started Widening" presented a wide report with regard to this issue.
The newspaper mentioned that since the difference came as a result of deviation of direction, it would rather widen but not tapered off.   .
Especially, two weeks ago, since the temporary clashes between EPLF and TPLF soldiers surfaced, and for the time being unknown number of casualties (look at the main news) worry and concern reigns in Asmara and Makale towns, it's disclosed.
TPLF government is agitating the people underground against TPLF..
Including those who have been dismissed from EPLF army for various reasons for the last six years, there's a call for everyone who has in one way or another experience with guns. .
The area which the clashes took place, shire on the side of Tigray and Seraye, Gash and Setit districts on the side of Eritrea are found in one direction.
The second area is the connecting zone of Agame district, Afar and Eritrean Danakel district.
The obvious reason mentioned for this clash is border controversy.
The gun fire exchange that was heard especially around Danakil's area started due to a fertile land around a river.
The reason for the aggravation of the situation at Shire occurred while the EPLF was moving to now the grains it had planted, found resistance by TPLF soldiers, reports form western Tigray zone uncovered.
In the mean time, so as to give different name to the clash and to calm down the squabble, the TPLF army that attacked the EPLF army were said as if they had been those ex-TPLF soldiers who separated itself from the leadership.
Meles and Isayas whom the situation was beyond their control, met secretly in Makale and Asmara.
The main agenda of their meeting was said to discuss ways to loosen the tension.
But according to other observers' belief, the main agenda of the meeting was Mr. Isayas brought an assignment form America with regards to Sudan, they said..
According to these observers, the cause to aggravate the conflict between TPLF and EPLF was not only the border tension but also Ethiopia's softening relationship with Sudan, Behind EPLF.
The cause for not conducting the annual Ethiopian and Eritrean Ministers' meeting for the last four years what was led by Tamerat Layne on Ethiopian side, was the widening of their differences, it was told..
As the differences widen, the support of the people for the two leaders has reduced.     .
Although the Eritrean people have great hatred on Mr. Isayas, it couldn't bring out its protest openly due to the security and controlling mechanism.
On Ethiopian side, especially around the people of Tigray and TPLF, Meles' activities so far as well as his blood tie and friendship with Isayas couldn't make him maintain Ethiopia's benefits, so he should be evaluated, this rumor is spreading.
Moreover, there's a feeling that his organization and the responsibility he held in government needs another person, it was said.
In general, there are many who say that the time has approached when the TPLF leadership and comrades who have been sacrificing including their lives, to evaluate themselves and take a stand together with the people of Tigray and generally with the interest of Ethiopians.
From Tobia October 16, 1997
Ambassador Sahnun Pressing Eritrea to Accept the Peace Plan.
Since United Nations has great concern and fear that the tension between Ethiopia and Eritrea may develop as an all-out war, the secretary General Kofi Annan sent his special envoy to the region last Tuesday and discussed with Eritrea's President Isayas Afeworki, BBC radio reported..
It is to be recalled that the Eritrean government had, in principle, accepted the peace plans proposed by the organization, but put forward questions for further details..
Even though OAU has unwaveringly responded for the questions raised by Eritrea, the Eritrean leadership is still staggering not to accept the peace plans..
The envoy sent by the United Nations secretary led by Ambassador Mohammed Sahnuh went to the region in order to enable the Eritrean government accept the peace plans as promptly, it is stated.
After this last effort, if Eritrea didn't accept the peace plans, United Nations is expected to take sanction measures. .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
780 Ethiopians Returned to their Country from Sudan
780 Ethiopians who used to live in Sudan as immigrants returned to their country, the Amhara Rehabilitation Development Organization (ARDO) disclosed.
Mr. Mengesha Jatu, Head of the Gondar Immigrants coordination disclosed that the 17th round returnees who came to Gondar via Metema stayed for ten years in Khartoum.
After having stayed for two days, the returnees were given a nine month full-time provision and one thousand ninety Birr for building their financial capacity and would be seen off to their respective regions, the head stated..
ARDO cooperating with the United Nations High Commission for Refugees have been able to return to their country 9, 910 refugees including these ones, he explained and up to the coming the beginning of April, more than 4, 090 Ethiopians would return to their country.
From Addis Zemen March 1, 200.
Notes from Awasa Prison!
(From Dawit Kebede.
March 23
Weeks have passed since a report about the South Ethiopia President's abduction reached our office.
After many meetings and arguments I reached a decision to publish the news..
But before that I called in the president's office..
It was not possible to investigate the situation..
When we called in to some people in Awasa to ask about the abduction, they told us that years have passed since they heard the news years on here say level..
We couldn't go beyond this to investigate the matter..
The news was allowed to be published..
March 24
As soon as the news title "The President had his people abduct a 17 year old girl for him was written on the monitor of the computer, the computer specialist turned his face and gazed at me.
Then, smiling, he put forward his hand.
He said, "OK, good bye" and we shook hands.
After that the details of the report were written..
Tomorrow it will be available for the public..
March 25
After an hour of the news of the president's abduction, the news paper disappeared from the market.
More telephone messages than in the ordinary days started pouring to the office..
While this was going on, a preparation was underway in Awassa town, southern Ethiopia, to send me to prison.
It was then that armed forces were sent to my place to put me behind bars in Awasa prisons..
The police armed forces at Awasa air port were assigned to keep an eye on Awasa prison..
One division army started patrolling the prison in shifts..
Before he was arrested in this prison, the writer of this news had undergone suffering in Addis Ababa.
Central government and Addis Ababa police were desperately looking for him..
It was in the midst of all these that Southern armed forces conducted a successful abduction.
The story goes like this..
Thursday April 2/98
Suddenly a telephone called..
It was From Addis Ababa Police commission Office..
I was told to reach the police station today..
As soon as I told him I couldn't come with such a hurry notice but I could reach there the next week, the call turned off..
After an hour the telephone rang..
It was from the Federal Central Police..
It was the lieutenant..
He have me a hard and fast order to reach there without wasting time..
Since you told me the charges I was accused of were many,...and since I can't bring bail for all these charges today, I asked him if I could go at another time..
But after the lieutenant insistently told me that I should come immediately and report and only after that I would call my guarantor, the telephone hang.
And I started my immediate journey; to the Central Police..
When I reached there they were in a meeting..
I had to stay for more than 30 minutes and I did.
Later I was given an investigator police and gave my words..
However, unlike the lieutenant's promise, I was obliged to go bail at least calling one guarantor, and give fingerprints..
Lastly, the head of the Central Police Force gave an order on the telephone that I should come to his office..
Starting from around the Central Police up to piazza area I met many journalists.
They were pleased to see me out of the station peacefully..
We stayed together until its dusk.
When I went home, having departed from my friends, in the moon light the conversation I had with top official was reverberating.
If you must disappear you will Even if I said to him "you can't" I was shocked..
Of course, if I must die, I will.  However, I can't die a cowardly death..
When I got home, I understood that situations were different..
I was told that as soon as my leg stepped out, the police came home and ransacked my house.
How could it be? The integration and coordination became a puzzle to me for a while..
Friday April 3
I didn't get time to get into my office..
I was with the two Italian ladies in the evening..
My friend, the artist, was with me.
I introduced them, we spent the evening together..
I saw people holding two torches coming in front of me..
They came closer to me and told me the whole things..
And today the area was surrounded by police cars, armed people and civilians and I was being looked for..
They got in to the house again and ransacked ..
After I heard that I couldn't sleep in the night..
Next I called overseas..
I told them about what's happening and departed..
Having prepared for the next Wednesday last edition, I took some rest.
Saturday April 4
The night hasn't yet given way to the day..
When I went out of my house and looked around, I saw strange civilians in the area..
What I feared happened..
After 5 minutes they controlled me with a force I couldn't tell at present..
They took me with a green car that says "police 196" and drove fast.
This one was a search or kidnap group that was sent from southern Ethiopia..
Although the act was not appropriate, the task of kidnapping was conducted and continued our way to the capital of southern Ethiopia, Awasa..
My biological father was with me and the police officers until shashemene town..
But we didn't go together from shashemene onwards..
We have few minutes remaining before reaching Awasa, a city which is situated 275 kilometers from Addis Ababa.
The journey which we stated in the morning was completed after going through the Addis Ababa and Oromia regions then to black water..
This Black Water is a natural border line that separates Oromia from Southern region..
While the water is naturally black, reflection of light of the sun set of the water given the river a resemblance of blood color.
A flowing black river resembling - - black blood..
When we reached Awasa crossing black river, the police were welcomed..
The southern Ethiopia Justice Office Head Mr. Zerihun came to me adjourning his meeting..
He is young..
But you can read shrewdness in his eyes..
He told me about all the situations..
Especially he's concerned about the air line who was abducted by the president of southern Region, that's why I was abducted (?) from Addis Ababa; although the committed act was unjustified, there was nothing I could do, except being cautioned. .
Before I was arrested in the prison which is found in the police department, I saw people whose hands were tied in chains behind bars and they also saw me entering my room..
Two policemen were arrested in this prison, gave me a welcoming reception. .
But when the Justice Berau Head came again to the cell where I was put, the two policemen went out, we talked about the reasons I was arrested, and related issues..
Where we can agree, we agreed..
But with the rest leave alone to agree ... what I said to him didn't give him sense; what he said to me didn't give me sense..
(In the Evening) I ate dinner with the police officers..
The two police officers had high positions in southern Ethiopia, but later were transferred to some other work, until they were called for question and put behind bars..
I was aware of the people and the town through these police officers..
I was forced to accept imprisonment in southern Ethiopia..
I was told in black and white that unless you told us about the abduction of the president's girl or the person who told you other secrets, we won't release, you we won't leave you.
And I told them I won't be cooperative..
They can't get (what they went) through polite questioning, leave alone through forceful means..
It was a question unheard of and I thought how dare he asked me like this..
Sunday April 5/98
The head of justice Bureau came Sunday morning and started the usual tedious nag..
He shouted at me I talked back to him...after that he left..
After he left the each prisoner as well as the shift worker was talking; they all were talking.
Fortunately, he wouldn't hear to all of these and hence, he is lucky..
Apart from being a day for cleaning today families will come..
Nobody could come from Addis Ababa to visit me..
I was not allowed to talk to my brother-in-low who came from a town few kilometers far from Awasa.
It was only later that I knew I was not allowed to meet any visitor..
The order was given by the young head of Justice Bureau, Zerihun..
Monday April 6
I was called to come to Zerihun's office..
It was a big spacious room the floor of which was covered by a flower-paint rug..
He didn't take up an issue out of the ordinary..
Yet, his present speech was not that of a friend, but of a boss or in authority and, therefore it was mixed with anger and yell..
Do you say you are a journalist? he asked me.
You too claim you're a man of justice and yet put me behind bars without any change" he said.
And so on.
You wrote in your tabloid a person was killed, but where did you see this happened?" asked in vexation..
To show you evidence I won't take you farther; it would be sufficient to mention a prisoner in chain whom you arrested after you killed his father and mother in this jail," I said, we argued..
For long.
While I couldn't express the whole argument I had with him for hours, he finally allowed me to call to my lawyer counselor in Addis Ababa..
When I went out from his office he gave an order to the police..
That I should stay alone in the cell, and to move the officers to another place..
And it was so as he said.
I remained alone..
In the afternoon they took me to the court..
This was no confusion and queue..
Before I was given another appointment date, I had said what I needed to say to the judge.
How I had been kidnapped and arrived we from Addis Ababa, and about the criminal charges filed against me, how through the office of Prosecutor General, I gave my words to the Addis Ababa Central Police Office and how I went out on bail..
I told him that I cannot be accused twice with one charge, give my words and calling a guarantor twice was out of the legal enactment, and hence, I wouldn't cooperate..
Nevertheless, the court ordered me to appear on April 13 after completion of the investigation. .
I was taken to the police after Department I had gone out from the court..
There I talked with the deputy police commissioner about my case..
At the end of our discussion, he promised according to my request that no one should come to me, and even if one comes to me one is not allowed to enter my class for which I considered it as a peace of mind..
Yet, my staying behind bars has become inevitable..
When the sun was about to set, Head of Justice Bureau came..
Including what I had said to the court, I told him many things..
I told him filled with fury with arrest and persecution their won't yield any result, and I wouldn't cooperate with illegal enactment and he wouldn't escape from being accountable in the future.
Together with my rage, the day couldn't make me feel OK. .
But at night I saw a dream filled with hope..
Since long ago whenever I saw, that in my dream, I missed a train or airplane or car, the plan I had set out then wouldn't be successful; it's assign of a bad omen.   .
Today at night I saw that there was something terrible happening in Addis, and I was in search of a taxi; one taxi came filled up to the brim with people. .
After I ran some distance, the taxi stopped and I boarded in with difficulty..
Therefore, I assumed the coming days to be bright and full of hope..
Many People do not have strong faith in dreams and the like..
However, it is something important to see good dreams in a prison where that there's no hope..
Tuesday April 7
Today it's Id-Al Adha (Arafa) for Muslims and Hosana for Christians. .
And a day of hope for me..
When the sun was about to set, I was looking out of the window from my prison cell..
Excepting the trees, the cars and different people that move here and these, have special meaning for me..
To be a prisoner and stay out of freedom and moving freely are two different things..
And, therefore, the life beyond prison is tempting..
While I was looking outside the prison all the usual car of the head of the office came..
The prisoner who was breathing the outside air freely entered his room with a mixed condition of stability and hurry..
Because the head came.
Closing the door which was ajar, I went to my window waiting for the head of the office that was coming from afar..
After exchanged greetings with the head we kept quiet for a certain time..
"What's up?" I said breaking the ice.
"Nothing.".
"How about you, didn't you charge your mind?"
"No, I didn't"
"Don't you tell who handover you this secret?"
First of all the press law doesn't oblige me to tell the source of the news even to the court leave alone to the police..
And you don't get any thing by putting behind bars.
"How?"
You'd rather not touch the untouchable and aggravate the issue..
When you dig a hole for me I'd the same for you for I'm also human..
You are accountable for improperly using your authority.
If that was not the case I wouldn't get in to the ditch alone. .
Just know this.
I said..
I was right..
After he explained to me there was no pitch that was dug, he brought up those discouraging words.
Then you won't fly and go like a bird.
Until you reveal the secrets, you'll remain behind bars, up to the time you're fed up..
He said to me..
Since the conversation started to make me laugh, I took it into some kind of joke.
"Hey listen!" I said.
"OK?"
Let's see it differently.
For instance, I wrote too that the crime was committed by the president and his followers..
This as it is as a professional lawyer why don't you ask them to be requested? I asked..
I couldn't see his facial expression for my eyes traveled to the sun set while I was talking to him.
But I presume he was looking in to my eyes..
After having talked good and bad, he said "I appreciate your courage"; said out of sarcasm or not, I suspected that he had a shift of attitude..
Yet, he was annoying..
Mentioning about the tabloids that came out with issues pertaining to me these days, he said "We will see the Addis Ababa journalists take you out from here coming by helicopter landing by parachute..
It was usual him to annoy me like that..
Wednesday April 8
I was called and entered the lead of the bureau's office..
He and I read that day's newspapers that wrote about news related to me in that office..
He seemed to have realized that his act of touching the untouchables have now made situations worse..
Is there any related news? he asked me.
The president at first had his girl abducted, now had a journalist abducted I said to him.
My response seemed to have vexed him as well as made him laugh..
The officers who were at first with me were called but I didn't know what they were told ... whether it was from "shying away" or some other reasons they attempted not to be seen with or talking to me..
The situation was funny..
They told me with fear and jokingly that they could be persecuted if they were seen together with me, let alone conversing.
Even exchanging greeting was not possible.
I don't think they saw even the title of the newspaper which I brought that day let alone reading the news..
God knows what they did to them to have been fearful..
In the evening, the over-hasty security guards (comrades) took the newspaper from me and they read about my imprisonment there, and when they realized that they were reading politics, they stood dried like lot's wife..
That same night an urgent call was made to them and underwent evaluation or criticism..
I could hear from my room the criticism leveled at even those guards whom I gave coffee from the thermos bottle..
Especially they were harshly criticizing him..
You never know what unusual measures would be taken against you for doing so! They told him.
I started laughing alone..
And indeed, no one knows what kind of strange measures would be taken against him..
Thursday: - I was accompanied to wash my face..
The comrades used to talk to me freely when we were alone like that moment..
Today Afternoon
I had to negotiate about so many issues..
The first was to publish ruling out the previous news; it would be inevitable to restrain my self from mentioning the other issues.
In the evening, security guards (comrades) from another shift unaware of what it dealt with said, "let's see the newspaper" and start reading, but suddenly didn't know where to put it back..
Among them who read the newspaper un knowingly was the head of the evaluation or criticism..
When he knew it was a political newspaper, he tells like an electric shock..
Either he threw it away or put it somewhere slowly, gazing at people around him as to whether they saw him..
However, they didn't forgive him..
They were arguing in the night..
I started laughing thinking about their situation..
No one knows what kind of strange measures would be taken against him, too..
That day evening
I saw a friend of mine who's abroad..
We were laughing like our olden days, happened to me after I came to the South..
Both of us have one principle of life..
It says "There are as many tests in life..
But look at the greener side of the test, not the negative ones..
This is what we say to each other whenever we're in the midst of trouble..
And hence, now, I started entertaining looking at funny side of life..
Until I go out of this prison there would be some things I could laugh at..
My abduction was by itself very amazing, while I was troubled about the girl's abduction..
Although there was a lot to be said, I don't have papers to write on..
It would be great if this paper sees publication; I would have liked to talk longer had this been considered sinful and aggravated my imprisonment.).
From Fiameta April 29, 1998
Kefagn Ethiopian Patriot's Front Held a Meeting in Stockholm
Ethiopians living in Sweden and the surrounding areas (Nordic countries) held a meeting in Stockholm (Sweden) on September, 1997.
In this meeting where from about 150-250 Ethiopians participate, the invited guest was head of the front's foreign affairs, Dr. Andualem Mulaw.
Dr. Andualem's speech focused on the ongoing destructive mission in Ethiopia, that is, the ruling party which brought itself to power through Kalashnikov is widening its destructive policies from one end to the other part of the country, and was detailing these destructions, it was possible to know from the report the rep of the front sent us from Sweden.
In the meeting, messages that were sent from the reps of the army of the front and leadership members to their fellow country people living abroad were read.
Ethiopians, who have been present in the meeting having unshakable faith in Ethiopia's existence, raised several questions and presented suggestions, where the head of the foreign affairs gave proper explanation and responses, the report pointed out.
In the report it was disclosed that Kefagn Ethiopian Army members who are in armed struggle in the country are discharging their duties as Ethiopian in the county spreading every where without restricted in space, in the north in Tigray, Gondar, Gojam, Shoa, Wollo, Bale, Arsi and Harerghe and Afar..
From Tobia November 13, 1997
Ethiopia Called for International Pressure on Eritrea to Accept United Nations Resolution
Ethiopia called for international pressure on Eritrea, last Wednesday to take out her troops he based in Ethiopian regions as soon as possible, reuters news agency stated..
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi also called for both countries on the same day to accept the United Nations resolutions which states that both countries should immediately stop their border clashes.
The Eritrean authorities haven't expressed their full acceptance to the resolution of the security council of the United Nations," said Meles to reuters.
And when he further explained the strategies of Eritreans, "Rather than fully accepting the organization's resolution, they decided to choose whatever suits them, and as if they took up the main issue they attempt to deliberately skip the key ones.
Reuters quoting the statement of Ethiopian Foreign Ministry detailed that the international community has the responsibility to continue putting pressure on the Eritrean government to take out its troops from Ethiopian locations, based on the proposal Ethiopia presented to the international community, and which was accepted by mediators and later by the organization of African unity..
Last June 28, the African leaders summit meting of the OAU approved with maximum vote the peace plan resolution of the United Nations Security council that could peacefully resolve their border clashes, and calls for both countries to avoid using force and abide by the peace plans.
It was to be recalled earlier that the Eritrean President had ruled out the resolution passed on by the OAU claiming that it basically took up the United States peace plan, while the same resolution was presented to them after having been supported by the Security Council, the Eritrea leadership said they accepted it.
Although the peace plan requires Eritrea to move her army back to where it was before the clash, there's no similar sanction for Ethiopia, the statement said.
We're not close to peaceful situation; whether we're close to war is determined by the way Eritrea responds to the UN resolution, and when Eritrea leaves the occupied land," said Meles to reuters.
Dignitaries that consist of ministers were sent to Europe the request the international community to put pressure on Eritrea to accept and respect all the Security Council resolutions and take out her armies from the occupied Ethiopian territories, reuter told quoting Mr. Meles.   .
On the other hand, Mr.Meles pointed out that Ethiopia hasn't occupied Eritrean territory, and in fact, TPlF and his EPRDF government had criticisms for letting Eritrea scede from Ethiopia, reuters stated.
Finally, with regards to the last option, if the peaceful means turns out gloomy, Meles said, If all peaceful means fail, we have the capacity as well as the power to take back our territories.
However, we prefer the peaceful means.
It's we who accepted Eritrea's independence knowing that we would be without ports.
But now the Eritrean leadership who are disseminating concocted stories was unable to convince their people why they hated their real friend, said reuters quoting Meles.
Since the border clash and escalated tension in the area, there have been 3 attempts, one after the other, starting from United States and Ruwandan governments, up to United Nations Security council so as to make both countries to peacefully resolve their problems, declaring ceasefire; Eritrea didn't accept it for all the peaceful resolutions insist on Eritrea's leaving the occupied Ethiopian land.
Diplomats said that both countries can, with a short notice, bring up to 350,000 army, this report said.                     .
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
Eritrea and Ethiopian business Transactions is said to be conducted in Foreign Currency
After Ethiopian and Eritrean new money notes became operational, the business transactions that would be conducted is going to be with foreign currency, just like other countries, and this has been agreed in principle level, the governor of the National Bank disclosed.
September 17, 1998.
The Addis Zemen Newspaper which appeared on this date reported quoting what the manager told Abiyotawi Democracy newspaper that Ethiopia was obliged to produce a new money notes mainly not because Eritrea printed a new one, but it deemed necessary to produce one that doesn't violated the constitution, he disclosed.
Even if Eritrea didn't produce bank notes, Ethiopian bank notes would have inevitably changed, given the fact nowadays the embezzlement conducted by photocopying the notes, and in order to protect this, new notes are deemed necessary, the bank governor said, newspaper reported.  .
From Tobia October 23, 1997
Tamerat Layne was Admitted to the Hospital
The former prime minister of the transitional government, Tamerat Layne became sick and admitted to a hospital three weeks after having told and advised former friends who were in power to confess their sins.
It's to be recalled that Tamrat Layne disclosed to Ethiopian people that there was an attempt to kill his sons, quoting an Ethiopian proverb "silence didn't help even the female lamb".
Tamerat Layne who was even slapped while he was in prison (he is expected to reveal this story in due process) has as of recently got people's support in his effort to defend the charges he's been accused of in the Supreme Court.
Especially his appeal which was made official through Menelik newspaper, has put Tamerat among the elites for he has written a scholarly paper in the prison, observers stated.
It's known that Mr. Tamerat's wife and children are now leading a refugee life out of the country.
While Tamerat was in power, his opponents in a pretext to sympathize with his wife opened up a defamation campaign, it was recalled.
Nevertheless, his wife wasn't defeated by gossips and took side with her husband and embarrassed them, close sources indicated.
Tamrat Layne said, in the appeal that appeared in Menlik Newspaper, "for my former friends, who have brought me here, I don't wish them to be thrown behind bars an suffer and befall wrong upon then just like me, just like my kids, I don't want their kids to face an invitation for death; just like my family, I don't ever wish their family to be in exile and the rest to suffer in their own country.
Just as they wish for me, I don't at any cost, wish them to be famished and die of hunger.
All these are the satanic appearance, their in human character, but not at all human nature.
What I wish them is to pray that they got a pure heart.
Rather than saying we're the only one who stand for this country, throwing this contemptuous and rigid attitude, forgetting their child game, James play which they call "reformation", they'd better coordinate all the people under unified aims, without giving names christened them, the elites and professionals who claim to stand for Ethiopian prosperity, it would be better if they use the last chance to project this country from the possible abyss she may fall in to.
The sun's inclined but not set completely.
But she is asking for a heart and a change of attitude.
1.If the date of the Second Coming suddenly comes,
The snap fastener of the soul, the iron gate of life ..... wouldn't save,
2 Retreating wouldn't help, nor would partaking holy communion,
3.Now is the time for confession, now is the time for prayer ...... today is the time for             forsaking the world,
Said the teacher, preacher, while advising his spiritual son."
From Satenaw January 28, 2002
Djibouti's Guled is Expected to Resign
According to sources from Djibouti, Hassen Guled Aptidon who has ruled Djibouti for 22 years is expected to announce his resignation this week.
It was also pointed out that his years of presidency lasts next May, but has no intention to be re-elected..
Guled as of recently has been in a state of serious health hazard, the same source disclosed..
Radio Djibouti revealed that the popular Role for progress Party will choose a candidate in its meeting by the end of this week.
The party may choose Ismael Umer Guleh, sources in Djibouti pointed out..
Djibouti is found in the strategic area around the Red Sea and has less than one million people..
Djibouti has still very strong ties with France, France Army bases itself permanently there.   .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
It's over for the Coalition?
TPLF and EPLF soldiers fought against one another – the President's residence was hit by a grenade launcher;
TPLF and EPLF soldiers who have had unity of combat for many years to secede Eritrea from Ethiopia and to bring TPLF to power, fought one another for two days by the side of Afar region, north eastern reporter of Tobia disclosed.
The unity of combat between Eritrean President Mr. Isayas Afeworki and Ethiopia's Prime Minister Mr. Meles Zenawi's blood-tie and special promise that stayed for more than 20 years, had already brought complaints and questions among the Tigrean people but it led to blood shed only during the clash that broke in an attempt to control sewerage of a river that was located around Afar and Eritrean border; there is a river found on the northern side of Dalol district called "Beda" which flows to Eritrea, that people of Eritrea and Dalol district use it for vegetable and fruit plantation.
During the struggle TPLF camped half of its army from Dedebit in this area and used to produce a lot of vegetable yield, while, on the other hand, EPLF, too used part of the area, but after 1991 it was divided in to two and named, Eritrean Beda, Afar Beda.
So as to have full control of this vegetable land named "Beda", that is the Eritrean Beda and "the Afar Beda" together, Eritrea /EPLF/ camped an army from 1991-1997 on the area.
The EPLF army passed the border and entered Dalol district in the second week of July and kidnapped the executive committee members of district 5, the zone 2 council reported to Afar national administrative government.  .
The president of the region Mr. Ismalel Ali Sero was born in Zone 2 district at Dalol, "Beda",and among the kidnapped council members two of them were his close relatives, and he said from the outset the Eritrean army which camped in Dalol troubled the people of the area, and urged the Ethiopian Federal Democratic government to camp its army at Dalol, and to release the arrested council members.
The council members who were released after two months were in a highly miserable condition, and to calm down the fury of the surrounding area, EPRDF had camped its soldiers at Dalol district, at a place called "Beda" Afar, it was to be recalled.
The Eritrean consulate in Asayita town asked the Afar National Administrative government, Federal government to uproot the EPRDF army from "Bada"..
As Mr. Ismael Ali Sero who was born and grown in this area, herding goats, he remembered once in December 1976 when he was kidnapped from his family by That, used to eat papaya and Plum, Banana and Orange-in abundance and he strongly argued that the EPRDF army should not leave this place for EPLF's present attempt is dangerous and could even be contentious for the future..
In the mean time, on September 10, 1998 while Afar people from Beda, were drinking their cattle's looking at their vegetables, EPLF fired guns.
The Afar people of Beda retaliated.
Since the war didn't calm down, the EPRDF soldiers stood by the side of the Afars and the exchange of gun fire stopped only because it became dark.
On another day, that is on October 3, 1998, another war broke out and in both sides there were injuries and deaths.
Although the Tigrean National Administrative government president Gebru Asrat and one EPLF commander-in-chief stopped the war temporarily, as long as the Eritrean army has a plan to take over "Beda" the war has just started, not ended.
Reliable sources are saying that EPRDF army has a plan not to defend EPLF but to send them away.
It's not to be thought that TPLF would give in "Beda" to EPLF, for she was an ancient place of products and provisions."
The sign for the worsening of the friendship of the two associates in struggle could be seen from Beda, as the saying goes "holding each other at bay."
Moreover, the Afar National Administrative government prepared a 4-week conference in July, where the assistant secretary, Mohammed Mufti was accused of being collaborator of assigning part of the AGGMU army to join EPRDF army, although the whole plot was disclosed to be that of EPRDF and not of the assistant secretary of AGGMU.
While the individual was on duty work to Djibouti, the Djibouti government has extradited him to EPRDF government and stayed in prison.
After he was imprisoned at unknown location in Addis Ababa for a year, Mohammed Mefti was made to attend the conference, unwillingly, and then was sent to prison, it was said.
The fury of the AGGUM army and the Afar people was so much so that it passed the limit, but then since the Afar people believe in reconciliation (it is administered by old people), it asked Mr. Ismael Ali Sero to release Mr. Mohammed.
But Sero said I don't ask a brigand to be released.
At a time when the question was suspended, last October 8, 1998, two grenade launcher were fired on the residence of President of Afar National Administrative Government, Mr. Ismael Ali Sero, in which Mr. Ismael Ali's properties were destroyed.
But since he was for along time at Holeta taking a course, he was rescued from being dead.
Mr. Ali lives in one of the recently completed 100 economy-houses, the houses were not allowed for the assigned professionals in the region, and were occupied by TPLF representative, Tekle Berhan, Eritrean consulate representative and other executive committee members of the regional administration.
After the shock created by the attack, the officials as well as residents are leaving the houses.
In an attempt to kill the deputy president, Mr. Ousman Anisa, in 1997, the brother of the deputy president was killed, had both presidents are now in the jaws of AGGMU.
For the past three days, it was possible to know that a clash has broken out between AGGMU and EPRDF in the same area of Afar region, and the fight continued at Afambo Asayita, where lots of Helicopters are observed going to and fro. .
From Tobia October 16, 1997
The Farmer Discovered Three Improved Teff Seeds
Nazareth (ENA): In his 11years study on selection of Teff seeds in eastern Shoa at three districts, one farmer disclosed that he discovered three seeds that could give better yields..
The Teff Seeds discovered by the farmer is proved by professionals are no less than those best seeds that are found in formal research. .
In the annual crop festival aimed at evaluating the activities of the farmers who were embraced in the extension package, the farmer who discovered the farmer from wolenchiti district, Mr. Sisay Tekle Selassie, explained that the seeds have the capability to reach for harvest in a short time and to withstand drought..
He also pointed out that since 1987 he has been selecting different Teff seeds and completed the gathering work in 1990.
In his two years study test, Mr. Sisay explained that he got more than 20 quintals of yield per hectar, gave these selected seeds to 10 farmers and the cultivated Teff is found in good condition.
The farmer explained that these Teff seeds would give similar yield with the ones discovered at Awash Melkasa Agricultural Research Center..
The farmer named the three new Teff seeds Fitsum, Iyasu and Kidist, after his children and the names have got recognition in the research center and farmers are using them, he disclosed..
He explained that among these seeds of Teff, the one named Fitsum is planted on 3.5 hectar land and it would start sprouting in 30 days..
The Teff seeds have received admiration from professionals who came for a visit from Alemaya Agriculture University, Mr. Sisay told..
For the last three years he has been embraced in the extension package and due to the support rendered from professionals he told that he bought two yoked oxen and built a house with corrugated iron roof.  .
During this crop evaluation festival, the zonal Agriculture Department head, Mr. Getachew Beyene pointed out that the farmer has registered a great result that's no less than that of research centers, by discovering Teff seeds in his own efforts..
Mr. Melese Temesgen, coordinator of National Agricultural Mechanization research section at Awash Melkasa Research Center, on his part explained that the discovery of the three seeds by the farmer through the support of the center have been found in good condition on the tilled land..
From Addis Zemen September 23, 1997
The Draught Team is Excoriating the Patriarch.
Aba Paulos and Aba Gerima said Love unto Grave! Are head over Heels in love with one Anther!    .
In the General Assembly of the Holy Synod which was conducted since May 12, 1998 for 7 consecutive days, Aba Gerima who was dismissed from his position of general manager and secretary of the Holy Synod was promoted to another position due to the firm love he had with the patriarch. .
Although the Synod took the former authority general manager and other, from Aba Gerima accusing him for mistreating church, Aba Paulos and Aba Gerima, who over head over heels in love with one another moved above to the new building, "patriarch palace" taking a nearby office with in the building, the new sources from the clergy disclosed..
As soon as Aba Paulos dismissed the meeting of the members of the Synod, Aba Paulos immediately gave promotion to Aba Gerima as special secretary and higher official of foreign Relations, explained these sources, although the assembly of the synod didn't give Aba Gerima any position, except deposing him form the previous positions, as the case with him was similar to those workers who were suspended from their jobs, if not worse than theirs, sources indicated. .
Not limited by this, Aba Gerima was given full right to administer the finance together with the manager of the office of country preaching, it was disclosed..
According to workers of the clergy, they were not sure of the secrets behind the assignment of Aba Gerima to administer the finance, but it is a riddle as to why this kind of working has been devised for the first time, administering the finance by both General Manager of the clergy and General Manager of the Addis Ababa Office of preaching..
These workers disclosed that Aba Paulos, regardless of the decision of the Synod or the general manager would do anything he likes, for he considers both as nothing..
Even now unless a new law is in place that restricts the patriarch's power and authority, "changing bands alone doesn't solve the inner problem of the clergy, referring to the change of general managers, and are against the patriarch's unaccountable working ways workers who wanted to remain un anonymous mentioned.
On the other hand, the draught teams who have now been suspended form work and salary, are excoriating the patriarch; internal sources disclosed..
The team who has made nervous the churches of Addis, starting from the position it had to please the patriarch, how can the patriarch be willing when we were suspended from work, started a hatred and defamation campaign, internal sources told..
The draught team stated that they didn't do anything without his knowledge, they have been loyal to his orders, but when bad times some and he wanted to expose them saying I'm clean from all these, it seems that they would expose everything, it is told; the recent news has been new to all..
That it's the expectation of many the draught team who said they didn't do worse things that the administration of Aba Paulos and Aba Gerima, seem to focus its opposition against the patriarch..
Any way, their association which bases itself on mundane things, are said in the process of demolishing as their members are finishing their resources, internal sources disclosed..
The money they collected being expended to useless things is God's work, they said..
From Fiameta June 24, 1998
The Monks' Scandal Proved once more!
What we were told in the February 17th and 23rd 1998 editions of Fiameta news paper, have been proved once again by some insiders regarding the ethical corruption of two monks who were removed from DireDawa.
The insiders who were disappointed and were present as observers at the place expressed that Aba Melkamu Mekonnen and Aba Gebre Hiwot Bekele at a nearby area known as Feres Megala, "Amare Leqor House" on December 31 1998, they spent drinking the night and went to the bedrooms where they were seen flirting with the prostitutes, but due to the expensive money the latter requested, they had had arguments and as a result were exposed, the area sources disclosed..
The monks who were the administrators of Saint Michael and Saint Mary Churches were said to frequent this liquor house and the other customers and the people in the surrounding area who were able to observe the argument between the monks and the commercial sex workers, some tried to mediate others shouting and attempted to hit these monks for they had humiliated them, and as people increased pouring to the place some even went as far as snatching their cap and cross.
Due to this problem, church teacher Tedla, Mr. Assefa, Mr. Fisseha and others proposed that they should not enter the sanctuary of the church but both monks went to Addis Ababa, the report disclosed..
On the other side, it was reported that "they were found in the hotel when they were about to be robed by brigands".
However, the observers wondered as to why they were found in the hotel during that time, and why didn't they return home before later?.
Close people to him said that Aba Melkamu complained that it was Aba Gebrehiwot who encouraged him to go there..
For the sake of the church, we were indebted not to publish all the detail reports it reached us on 1-5-98 regarding the two monks' ethical misbehavior under a title 'It's Finished'.
From Fiameta April 1, 1998
Editoria.
It calls for a Belief from the Bottom of the Hear.
It has been five years since the existence of the legislation of the free press has become legally approved.
Although a lot could be said about the fact that proclamation 34/85 is not clear and from the angle of the penalty it may bring about on the free press it has its own share of making sure that the foundation and central pillar of democracy, the right to speak and write, and prohibition of censor ship has been legalized.
Side by side the products of the free press even before the press proclamation was decreed, and after, that, are paying heavy sacrifice with regards to the people's right to know, and has contributed one big chapter in the history of our country.
The freedom to speak and write has, once again, been validated. .
For the first time in the history of the country, numerous newspapers and magazines grew and developed people's out look.
The existence of newspapers and magazines by itself is not an end.
What's called press freedom is not the bodily existence of the press products.
Products of the press should publish and disclose all the news that need to reach the public so that the government could work openly and in a legal way.
Performing the work of the free press means, with out government intervention, the journalist delivering news to the public in a responsible feeling and assisting to amend themselves by criticizing the destructive tendencies of the government..
Is the Ethiopian Free Press in a level that could do this?.
No.
The reason it could not do this emanates from the free press itself and especially from EPRDF, gov't from which it claimed "the freedom was gotten by my struggle".
There could be shortage of experience on the side of the free press.
As a result, it can not be said there aren't any problems out of the ethics of journalism.
This straightforward flaw, however, the free press is the mouthpiece of oppositions."
The free press is the gathering of the defeated sides.
Having claimed that there was no need to attack with the sword of propaganda.
Before teaching and correcting, there's no problem that could be resolved by chasing and arresting the free press journalists.
Basically there is no reason a journalist could be arrested claiming for investigation due to press crime, unless he/she is sentenced to imprisonment.
When we analyze the problems of the free press today in our country, we don't see the government in power has a belief from the bottom of the heart from the widening of democracy and strengthening of the free press in our country.
The products of the free press that are seen in Addis Ababa and few towns of the country, if they were intended to show off the democracy, a great intrigue is being made on the democracy.
The people want the government of the people, a government which hears the queries of the people, and a government that works openly and legally.
And to bring about such a government, the people do not have a better tool other than expressing its ideas feely, willingly voting.
For this, the principal forum is the free press.
Those who open a hate-campaign on the free press are the only ones who went to live on the shoulders of the people without the willingness of the people.
It's not without a reason that we say that there's no interest among the current governors to strengthen the free press.        .
On the one hand, the incumbent party and the government structure it controls strengths its own propaganda Medias, it opens a propaganda campaign on the free press which operate on small financial and human resource capability.
From the perspective of the press law and the country's other legislations, while journalists, who committed press crime could be accused and, if found guilty, penalized, they are gathered and put behind bars by investigation departments.                                    .
The Campaign opened by the EPRDF's press "Revolutionary Democracy" recently and the campaign opened against Ethiop, Wenchif, Urji and other newspapers openly shows the not-so-good attitude the government has on the free press.
The sanction befell up on newspapers and magazines not to promote their papers in radio and television, the now-and-then penalty of imprisonment and money upon the editors of free press are not the reflections of good attitude.
According to the very many letters we receive form the public, reading a free press for a government worker may lead him/her to be considered as opposition and even lead to be evaluated.
Especially in the Tigray and Amhara regions the products of the press are read in secret.
It means that the people are made to be out of the democratic process.
The press law itself which has counted five years since its inception should be viewed again from the perspective of constitutional decree.
The EFDR constitution, Article 29 the rights to have a different out look and to express one's ideas freely "could be sanctioned only based on the laws that would be decreed on the principle that the freedom to get access of ideas and information could not be sanctioned by its content of ideas and the result of ideas it may bring about," it has such a forceful expression.
The press law was not amended in line with this principle..
Charges are still filed against newspapers claiming "troubling people's ideas".
The constitution knows the right to get information.
But the free press is forbidden to get government's information.
If the free press is strengthened the beneficiary is not only the public.
Press for the government is a principal method of looking in to itself and take measures of correction.
And a government which doesn't look into itself would eventually lead itself to failure. .
Therefore, government would be the first beneficiary if it evaluates its outlook on the free press and make corrections, at the 5th anniversary of the press proclamation.
Confrontation with the free press and democratic forces wouldn't take anywhere.
Hence, the problems we pointed out at this juncture should be viewed properly.
It is only then that we can say that democracy and free press are believed from the bottom of the heart by the current power holders..
From Tobia October 23, 1997
Message from Fiameta
The Key to control the currently spreading malaria epidemic is to establish its own organization.
Since recently even the highland areas of Ethiopia have been hearts of mosquito and it's not only regrettable to see many people dying but also make historically accountable in the future.
The fact that there was an independent center for malaria-control on a national level with different branches elsewhere that was established based on a research that epidemic would occur in certain temperate Zones and lowland areas, spraying pesticides including with airplane, teaching both victims of malaria and those who aren't infected with it used to play an important role, and as a result, malaria has never been major enemy to Ethiopian people..
As soon as the EPRDF government took power it demolished this office and, in the pretext of restructuring, assigned it to be established in the regional administration giving ay to the scattering of professionals, and the problem was created..
If quick measures are not taken with clear understanding to avert the situation, the number of casualties will escalate. .
Although the people In Gojam, Northern and Eastern Shoa have long become victims of malaria, it won't be a panacea to accuse one another, rather than seeking immediate solution..
To oust the minister of Health from his position or taking measures on others couldn't be a solution..
Malaria epidemic just like locust plague is a campaign that is to be launched nation-wide and continent-wise in combination, not something to be left only for the regions..
So, we recommend that a nation wide malaria control and prevention office be established, and let the urgent task of protection and wiping away of malaria starts.     .
From Fiameta February 19, 1999
Ethiopia Accepted the Lifting of the sanction on Ammunition
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs disclosed that Ethiopia accepted the decision to lift the sanction from getting access to ammunition the day before yesterday which the United Nations had put on Ethiopia and Eritrea..
In a statement the ministry of foreign affairs released yesterday, it said that the fact that the Security Council expressed the sanction from getting access of ammunition which had been put on both countries wouldn't continue pointed out that the sanction is lifted..
The sanction from accessing ammunition the Security Council had put on for the last year reminded Ethiopia that injustice act of being sufferer of aggression, she was equally became victim of the sanction like the aggressor, the statement disclosed.
The statement that was released form the Security Council the day before yesterday reminded that in order to bring about stability in the horn of Africa, both countries should focus on economic development and negotiation rather than buying ammunition and other military activities, yet, Ethiopia, from the very beginning, when aggression was waged against her, believed that the international community would condemn the aggression, and this would happen.    .
The peaceful effort Ethiopia has been making to reverse the situation, not able to call her aggressor an aggressor and the fact that she couldn't execute international law, her effort became futile, the statement disclosed.
However, the lesson that was gotten form the past experience an aggressor should not, in any way, be encouraged, and it is only then that countries who gave precedence for their economic development would, without any impediment, meet their goals, the statement disclosed..
The statement disclosed that it is only then that lasing peace and stability would reign in the continent..
From Addis Zemen May 17, 2001 .
Ethiopia and Eritrean currency are said to be changed on the same date!!
While it has been several months since Eritrean made it official that Ethiopian Birr can be exchanged for "Nakfa", she hasn't made it operational yet.
The associate reports for Fiameta in Asmara quoting some sources said that both currencies would be changed on the same date.
The Eritrean currency has not been changed because Ethiopia hasn't been showing any interest on the issue, said the report quoting Teka Beyene, Eritrean Bank Governor.
But according to the recent agreement it is reported that both parties would change the previous Birr.
Although Eritrea proposed for both currencies to have equal exchange value, Ethiopia proposed that they should conduct commercial transactions with (American) dollar when they deal with big business.
This idea of putting dollar more often than Nakfa in trade troubles Eritrean officials..
The idea that the potential value of Nakfa could become lower as compared to Ethiopian Birr has been held by many people from various quarters.
Eritrean Bank governor Ato Taka Beyene, on his part, said that Eritrean Nakfa would be evaluated at the end of every fiscal year would be discussed upon and measures would be taken.
There are some observers who claim that this means if Nakfa's exchange values deteriorate, Eritreans would have once again a dream of using Ethiopian Birr..
In connection of this it was reported that the future Ethio-Eritrean trade relations would put Nakfa's buying power into question, for Ethiopia doesn't have many items to import from Eritrea.
On the other hand, Nakfa's impact on Ethiopian Birr is very negligible and its power many even be less than the present currencies in Somalia and Djibouti..
Meanwhile, both parties had been conducting continous meetings so as to make the change of the previous currency operational the same day.
Internal sources also suggest that the change may be take place in one of the Saturdays..
From Fiameta October 29, 1997
One village was destroyed in the war in the southern side of Juba
A great dameage occured in the heavy fight couducted by the Southern Somali factions, BBC reported.
In this continous fighting around the southern side of Juba, a village namded Hosinjo was fully devastated, BBC reported.
It was disclosed that the only remaining thing was the village mosque.
In this fighting, indivduals with 50 in number were killed and the fight was conducted between Ogaden and Shikhal clans on a claim of land, it was uncovered.
On the other hand, the fight that is going on between Hussien Iydid and oppostion Militia factions is becoming heavy, BBC reported.
The fight was supported by machine guns and in the heavy fight conducted at Kore Wole between Iydid and the faction, degel, Iydid's force was heavily attacked and was obliged to run away, while Degel's force controlled Kereyolen town, it was reported..
In this fight Degel's force was given support from another opposition, Kerehan Weyn and caught more than 100 automatic rifles, it's repoted.
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
Sudan Disclosed it is only Sudan and Egypt that have Priority Right on the Use of Abay River..
Sherif Al Tuhami, Sudanese Minister of Irrigation and Water Resources in the statement he gave to Reuters on Monday, said since Sudan and Egypt have for 700 years based their civilizations and agriculture on Abay, they have priority rights with regards to the use of Abay..
The minister who discussed about this issue last Monday with Reuters, stated that his country planned to build hydroelectric dams using Abay water, and for the construction they invited private foreign companies and the begotten product is said to be sold, he pointed out.
For the question Reuter asked him about Ethiopia's interest regarding the equitable share of Abay Rivers, he replied Ethiopia has to put forward he request for discussion and if it's not against the utilization procedure, he said, they'll find ways to cooperate with her..
And by saying so tried to present Ethiopia as if she doesn't have rights..
Asked what if Ethiopia wanted to use more water and took her own measure, Tuhami replied that I don't think Ethiopia would do that..
They know what this may result in..
It's very dangerous, he said..
Ethiopia which is the source of Tikur abay river doesn't know about the agreement Egypt and Sudan made pertaining to the division of water in 1959.
This agreement allocated 55.8 billion cubic meter water to Egypt while Sudan would take 18.5 billion cubic meter water..
From Fiameta Sunday edition September 3, 1998           .
From Fiameta September 6, 1998
The Continuation of Fiameta Newspaper would Strengthen the Effort of the Press
Colonel Kassahun Terfe – Editorial Board Member of Fiameta Newspaper
It's not difficult to see for anyone the contribution of press products such as magazines and newspapers in teaching people and to enable it stand for its rights by knowing its freedom in the democratic world.
However, since many newspapers, due to different reasons, stopped their work the contribution they were making has discontinued.
Among these Fiameta newspaper was one.
The edition in chief of Fiameta newspaper Mr. Dawit Kebede stopped working for certain weeks because he was encountered by pressures of several charges and so couldn't work at case.
Since the contribution the newspaper made in enlightening people was so great, the press family took the responsibility and started it all over again for they believed that it shouldn't give up and is now showing a good start.
While we would like to appreciate these groups for taking such an initiative, we would personally give our suggestions for the newspapers which are out of work to come again strengthened and start all over again.
From Fiameta December 30, 1999
A Daily Newspaper which is to be Distributed in Six Countries would start Publication on Monday
The company named "sub-saharan Informer" has completed its preparation to publish a colored daily newspaper that is to make its appearance in six African countries, including Ethiopia..
The English newspaper whose name is said to be "The Sub-Informer" would have 32 pages and is decided to make its distribution 124 thousand copies each day, the company disclosed. .
Sub-sharan Informer which has opened bureau for months in different African countries and have been studying the market, has how laid all the necessary preparations for publications..
According to the information gathered from the organization the publication of the news paper begins in Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nairobi, Tanzania and Uganda..
The largest number of copies of the newspaper, 37 thousand, would be distributed in Nigeria while the lowest number of publication is 5 thousand which is in Ethiopia..
The content of the newspaper is divided into two: The part where common news is shared among all the countries, and special features prepared especially for each country's consumption would be the other part.
It's disclosed that the company's offices opened in different countries would combine and organize their news through the internet..
When the newspaper publication starts in South Africa, Zimbabwe and Zambia after 8 months, the number of countries where the newspaper would be available rises to nine, and daily distribution of the paper would also rise to double 240 thousand, the company stated its plans.  .
With at least 8 of its pages being colored, the Sub-Saharn Informer would be the first news paper to be available in many African countries..
The cost of advertisement publication the company asks for would be fair and the market price of a newspaper is 3 Birr and 50 cents, the company disclosed.   .
From Addis Admas January 12, 200.
The American Government Signed A 30 Million Birr Agreemen.
Makele:- The American government signed a 30 million Birr agreement yesterday with Tigray National Regional Government and non-government organizations, which operate in the region..
The offered money would be expended on residence houses of Gule Mehada and Irob Districts ruined by the war, health institutions, schools, water projects and to protect the explosives, to give strengthened education on HIV AIDS and for the purchasing of goods, the regional administration disclosed.  .
The aid agreement was signed by American Ambassador to Ethiopia Mr. Tibor Nadze and Tigrean Region Regional Administrative Government social Department Head Dr Solomon Enquay and representatives of Tigray Development Association, the Catholic Aid Service, Cooperation International and Medicine San Frontiers..
Out of the offered money, 16 million Birr would be expended through Tigrean Development Association..
In his speech during this time, Ambassador Tibor Nadze pointed out that the American government has strong relationship with Tigrean people and reminded that earlier his government distributed 167 thousand tons of cereals of foods for those who were displaced from their house and proportions by war and victims of drought, and is now giving aid for execution of development works..
Dr. Solomon Enquacy on his part pointed out that the regional government and non-governmental organizations have been prepared to work together and thanked the American government for the aid it offered.
The displaced people from Gulo Mehada and Irob District people who were present during the aid agreement suggested that even though their invaded homes were freed by the heroic army, the magnitude of looting conducted was so high and the area was enclosed by explosives, they're still living in the bushes and fields, so called for other governments to follow suit..
From Addis Zemen May 11, 2001
The Administrator was told to have his Fingers on the Till with Regards to the Church's Money.
The administrator of Bole Debre Mihret St. Michael church, Aba Gebre Tsadik Wolde Ghiorgis took the 10,000 Birr money that was donated by a benevolent laity, forbidding it to be registered in the accounts leader, Model 30.
The money was donated by a benevolent Christian who is the owner of Axum hotel, the report detailed, and after having announced through the microphone for the Christian laity, Aba Gebretsadik forbade that the money shouldn't go to the accounts' ledger through official receipt, despite the oppositions mounting form various similar officials, of the church, asking the entry of the money through official means.
The workers who felt responsible and were aware that the 10.000 Birr shouldn't be wasted in arrogance by the administrator appealed to Addis Ababa Office of Preaching, and the latter sent four investigating workers of the office in a letter written by No. 1188/40/90 on March 8, 1998 and the administrator admitted that he received the 10,000 and signed on a document to which these auditors gave to the general manager of Office of National reaching, Aba GebreMichael Beyne who made it obscure, it was disclosed.
The money that laity brought as a token of love shouldn't be wasted as one recklessly wished, the report pointed out, and those workers who raised this question as to why the money was wasted and opposed the former, were harmed, the report explained..
The report criticized quoting the Ethiopian saying "while the rat ate, the shrubs were beaten".
Aba Gebretsadik is presently having constructed a building with mystic intention with collaborators and the church's water is wasted, and in the name of the church he has built 3 rooms house in approximately 2000 square centimeters of the church premise, the ox that was given to the church as a holy offering was slaughtered all with his own decision, the report added.
The other thing that very much saddened the workers and the surrounding laity was the obscurity displayed, by the patriarch's cousin, Mr. Yared and Aba GebreMichael while the people appealed to them as higher authorities, and the administrator feeling proud by the afforested authorities started building a private house with in the premise of the church, reported those who couldn't find fairness in their appeal.
In the mean time, despite the many extra cars they have the Addis Ababa church and Monastery was ordered to send the money for the purchase of a car to be awarded to the patriarch and the receipt of the expenditure of this car which Aba GebreMichael urgently ordered, was presented to the office of National preaching, it was disclosed..
The extra money that was taken from various churches in the pretext of buying a car is contentious and even previously these were poor churches who were incapable but obliged to pay their share, some people disclosed.        .
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
The 50th Anniversary of Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce was Celebrated with different occasions
The 50th anniversary of the Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce is being celebrated from November 4, 1998 up to November 14, 1998 with international trade fair symposium and different festivities.
In the 3rd Addis Chamber International Trade Fair which was intended to coincide with the occasion, 181 organizations, local and foreign, predicated and presented their produces, out of which 64 of them were foreign companies.
This trade fair which was believed to play a pivotal role in widening trade and investment, connecting seller and buyer as well as strengthening technological transition, would be open for 12 days from November 4, 1998 onwards.
In relation to this trade fair, an international symposium under the leading aim "making the most of Ethiopian Economic Environment" was held from November 9-10, 1998.
In this symposium that was held in African Economic Commission meeting hall, higher government officials, local and foreign elites and business delegates presented research papers that pointed out the problems and remedies of Ethiopian local and international trade..
Among the papers presented, in order to benefit from international trade and investment, Ethiopia needs political and social stability and it is expected from the government to play a crucial role in strengthening and encouraging the private sector.
From Tobia November 13, 1997
Issayas said He would Agree on the Peace Plans if Priority is given to Cease-Fire and Border Demarcation.
Since the border conflict surfaced between Ethiopia and Eritrea, peace plans that first initiated by United States and Rwanda which comprise 4 points were proposed to both countries to avoid an all-out war, Ethiopia accepts while Eritrea over ruled..
Again for the 2nd round-talk, the African leaders' summit meeting in Burkina Faso discussed the issue as the main agenda and took the place plan as it is, decided that the two governments should execute it the Eritrean President overruled it for the second time; the African News service said that the OAU dignitaries who went to Asmara talk Eritrea's president confirmed that if the dignitaries give priorities on the basic problems, he will agree on the mediation.
In his press statement, Issayas Afeworki asserted that is the demarcation of the border and cease-fire, and besides he calls for direct talk with Ethiopian leaders, the news service pointed out..
In the complaints Eritrean government Presented it accused at the time the world community calls for peaceful resolutions for the escalting tension between the two countries, Ethiopian government is waging war, last year it occupied Atsi-Murug which is found in Bada, and now Beademe, the root cause for the present conflict.
The Eritrean President expressed his acceptance of United Nations Peace Decision whole, the 8 points out of the 9 ones but not the article which requests his troops to go out of Beademe.   .
On the whole, Eritrea's position is that Beademe and Sheraro are in Eritrea's teritory and, hence, she can't take out her troops out of these places, and first let the border be demarcated and cease fire reigns, reported the news service.
On the other hand, Yemane G/Meskel, advisor to Eritrea's President repeatedly told Reuters that unless peace prevails, Eritrea's army will not leave the occupied locations..
From Fiameta July 10, 1998
It was disclosed that Eritrea would recently pull out her troops from the security Zone that's going to be established.
In order to continue the process of establishing a temporary security zones between Ethiopian and Eritrean troops, Eritrean troops would start moving backwards as from May 5, 2001 ENA reported quoting the United Nations mission for Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The mission in its statement yesterday, recalled that Eritrea didn't fulfill her duties to pull out her troops by last March 2, 2001, being against some issues on the would-be established temporary security zone at the Southern border, but now decided to take out her troops after five days without any conditions.
However, the country disclosed that she expected some amendments from the United Nations Mission to give focus and resolve the complaints Eritrea has vis-à-vis the temporary security zone southern border..
The mission pointed out that Eritrea disclosed her decision to pull out her troops with out any condition from the would-be established temporary security zone in a meeting held in Asmara with the deputy of Kofi Anan and representative of United Nations Mission for Ethiopia and Eritrea, Ian martin and the mission's Force commander-in-chief major General Patrick Kamert.
The special messenger of the secretary of the United Nations in Addis Ababa, Legwayla Joseph legwayla, said the decision is encouraging and expressed his acceptance.
The next military coordinating commission meeting that would be led by the mission's Force Commander-in-chief and where high military representatives of both countries are participating, is planned to be held on May 6, 2001, it was disclosed.
On the other hand, with regards to the bomb blast at the Eritrean's Tsorena on three United Nations vehicles that injured Canadian Peace Forces and as to the claim Eritrean radio broadcasted accusing Ethiopia for planting it, he replied for the time being the mission couldn't prove which side planted the bomb..
The spokesperson told for the United Nations Integrative Regional Information Network (IRIN) that since that mission didn't get full information pertaining bombs, it is not in a position to prove such kind of information.
The mission's spokesperson for bombs coordinator committee in Asmara, Fil Lewis on his part said that the report the radio broadcasted is what was given by the Eritrean Political commissioner and not by the mission, walta Information Center reported..
It is to be recalled that as a result of an ammunition that went off by itself due to a bomb explosion in Eritrea on March 12, 13 and 18, 2001, a damage was brought about on vechiles and Soldiers of United Nations Mission for Ethiopia and Eritrea.
From Addis Zemen March 31, 2001
Eritrean Catholic Priests were said to Create Problems in Saint Joseph School
Two Eritrean teachers in Saint Joseph boys' school are doing harm students reported victims to our office..
These Eritreans are speeding their acts which are done in the spirit of revenge, they said.
The director of the school brother Paulos wolde Aregay and Brother Woldu Hailu, who went together to the religious teaching institution, expressed that they have been proud of their being Eritrean, and after the clash between the two countries surfaced, they have started putting pressures on students and teachers, they disclosed..
One of these was that they sent out students, who were taking school leaving examinations this year, just a week before their examination in an excuse of disciplinary case..
While explaining about the harms these two Eritreans did to them, they said that the Saint Joseph teachers have no rights..
These teachers are not allowed to gather and conduct meetings; even during their free period time, they were not permitted to meet one another, for each teacher would be obliged to stay in the class where he happens to be..
Even when they want to dismiss students, they write letters on the students and have them signed by teachers of as to take measures, they disclosed..
Particularly brother woldu Hailu, accuses students himself or having them accused with no apparent reason, and made a call to their parents deeply insulting them, doing something which is not expected from a teacher, they added..
The source also disclosed that the school doesn't have Parents' committee and the Ministry of Education doesn't take any control on the school, wondering how long would this continue?   .
Why has the government kept silent?  .
They concluded their suggestions.
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
The priest monk said he's looking for a work as a driver of a taxi as the door of the clergy was closed for him!
The Priest used to grow up in the church from childhood on wards, from deaconhood to priesthood, from monkhood to abbacy; served the church in various spiritual responsibilities, but as of recently, the door of the clergy has been closed upon him and he is not given salary and dismissed from work, so he's looking for a job, even if it was driving a taxi, he explained.
A father whose name wanted to remain anonymous (a priest monk) said that he appealed to the patriarch repeatedly for he was sick and tired of the ups and downs, but that was also of no avail, and since he has a driving license, he is at present obliged to look for a job as a driver of taxi, he told.
The present clergy who's said to be felled with family members and where nothing Christian is being reflected has turned out to be a surprise to many, as she started closing doors upon her own children.  .
The priest expressed that it was after waiting patiently for long and seeing that the clergy is collecting people through blood-ties, and relations in terms benefit, not through justice, instead, chasing away children of the church, and gathering males and females who have no role in the church, that it was when the misery reached its climax that he was forced to look for private jobs, the priest expressed.
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
The Clergy Released a Statement on Chief Ayalew!
The clergy which is said to be filled with unrest and disturbance released a statement criticizing the chairman of the assembly of scholars, chief Ayalew Tamiru, under the title "Condemnation without having priesthood?"
It released the statement this month.
The chief also gave a response saying it "Empty".
The priests and the laity who saw this statement which was full of insults and which was released at a time of Lout when priests and the laity were found fasting praying and let reading for prayer, were deeply saddened, the suggestions that came out from different directions pointed out.
The publication of the clergy in "church News" in its August 15, 1999 edition under the title, "A statement released by the clergy" excoriated Chief Ayalew with plain insulting words - the statement.
The statement which convicted the dignified elderly man and a "scholar" who served the church for 50 years Chief Ayalew Tamiru calling his Excellency as plain "he" put the church at a mercy; and was a reflection of an expression of the officials' hatred on Chief Ayalew, and it opened a door for the church to become distrubed in the time ahead, just like the previous years..
the message came out in response to what chief Ayalew said with regards to the ordination of arch-bishops on July 13, 1999 on a free press newspaper, Time, under the title "The arch-bishops should have been ordained on Sunday rather than on Monday for it violated the dogma of the church..
The statement was released in response to this convicting and criticizing it.
While the message of chief Ayalew was basically the ordination should have taken place on Sunday, the clergy's statement, said "the ordination from arch-bishop to the patriarchood was given to the holy apostles not on Sunday but on some other day". .
The statement expressed through this that the earlier apostles were also arch-bishops and patriarchs.
Moreover, the statement belittled chief Ayalew's message by elaborating, "The ordination up to patriarch-hood was performed on the day of Ascension.
The Ascension was on Thursday ... As our Lord ordained priesthood on Sunday, He also ordained bishops on other days."
The statement denigrated Chief Ayalew's message by that.
The use of words in the statement was rude, indecent and not expected from the church's press, and except few, the majority workers of the clergy found it disgusting, the related news pointed out..
There are some who say, "The statement rather than seeking correction, it widened the long-standing problem of the church as well as it disappointed many for releasing statement expressing (the Lord's disciples) were bishops, patriarchs."
There are people who were critical about this statement.
There are sides who speak that other than the unrest and disturbance, the church is also going backwards in her spiritual performances.
Leave alone the rest, these sides say, "Let alone this statement which was full of insults and that came out on August '99 on its church News, is a response for what was written in June and July, which had been read and written long ago, the fact that this elderly and ancient church not releasing new works that are done timely by itself is indicative of shortage of people within the institution, they said.
While these days new beliefs release publications monthly and weekly and even shorter than this time length, establishing book stores in every quarter and widening their beliefs, it's sorrowful to see the earlier church turning in to an insulting forum, they are not few who admit this.
There are other who expressed their appreciation saying that if there's one body that's active and operates on its won interest and effort, it's the group called "Mahbere Kidusan".
It has been painful for all to see yesterday, today, last year, the year before last the church being full of turmoil and losing her peace and unity.
"The unlucky church" they said with sorrow.
The chief, in response to the statement from the clergy, stated that he has served the church more than fifty years, and that he is not new for the church and the laity, that he very well knows the church's overall discipline, and that he has worked what ever he has to, and said that the statement released from the clergy was far from the Biblical truth.
In his response entitled "The Euphorbia of Monday and Her Blessing" in a private news paper, it was possible to understand that the church doesn't have people who grew up in spiritual knowledge.
The comment written on chief Ayalew was completely irrelevant and inappropriate, professional religious people suggested.
The chief not only criticized the statement by saying "Empty and Linseed" but also elaborated by mentioning the right evidence – in his response.
Not only is chief Ayalew known by being a scholar, but he's a real professional, who's believed to be anointed by God and able to express his knowledge and the dogma of the church in good condition, as most agree.
Therefore, the statement of the clergy mentioned that the ordination of the bishops in not necessarily on Sunday while Chief Ayalew came up with a statement saying "Arch-bishops should be ordained on Sunday, the election should also be made on Sunday.
This has said by Apostles in Didskilie, Article 37 scholars in Spiritual Justice Article 5 they wrote, ordered this."
He wrote the basic tangible evidence.
Many say that the clergy made a statement just to express her hatred on Chief Ayalew, otherwise, the church didn't have earlier, doesn't have now and won't have in the future a multi-purpose professional like chief Ayalew.
From Fiameta August 25, 1999
America Warned Her Citizens!.
ELF Protested against Ethiopia, Opposition Organizations Protested against Eritrea!
The American Foreign Affairs Office requested American citizens to be far away from the tensioned areas of Ethiopia and Eritrea.
American citizen workers who are located around the border are made to transfer to another place until situations calm down, the office disclosed.
The areas mentioned are Tigreay, northern Afar, south of Keren town and south-eastern Eritrea.
It was disclosed that United States government workers were also made to go out from Eritrean Mendefera towns sough and eastern parts, from Asab, too.
The office warned the Americans to go out form the mentioned areas.
In the mean time, the organization which is in exile and opposition for EPLF, ELF protested against Ethiopia's claim of land and expressed its support for EPLF.
According to the statement of ELF, the present claim of land Ethiopia requested belongs to Eritrea, it described.
According to the sources which claim to be close to the issue, said, Bademe was under the control of ELF and in a war fought with EPLF it was taken from them for they were defeated and EPLF gave it to TPLF temporarily as a camp, these sources are heard saying.
On the other hand, opposition organization to EPRDF, condemn Eritrea's aggression from the perspective of a sovereign nation.
In particular, EDU which controlled the surrounding areas of Beademe at the time of armed struggle stated in the released statement that Beademe is Ethiopia's.
The AU Amhara peoples organization (AAPO), Ethiopian peace and Democracy Alternative Force (EPDA), All Ethiopian Socialist Movement (AESM), Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), Ethiopian People Revolutionary Party (EPRP), Medhin Democratic Party gave statements on the current issues.
Among these opposition organizations, EPRP's statement said, "It's not surprising if Meles rose today being sympathetic for Ethiopia whom he has betrayed up to now, and if he doesn't get people to be victims for his usual intrigues,...he used to say that what you said as history is a hundred year history, and not a district but he has Eritrea seceded.   .
If he wanted to withstand with the tail having given the elephant today, it doesn't surpass from being funny,.
He said.
The Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) on its part, reminded that citizens should not participate in this war; citizens should not involve in a clash that doesn't bring about any economic and political change in their life, it said..
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
Athlete Haile Gebreselassie was awarded an Honorary Law Doctoral Degre.
Athlete Haile Gebreselassie disclosed that he received an honorary law doctoral degree from Ireland National University.
Athlete Haile was awarded the honorary doctorate for his international contribution and participation in working with various social and humanitarian organizations.
The newspaper reported that Haile was selected as a candidate for his doctorate due to his being a winner in athletics for 12 years, as well as his cooperative work with United Nations children's Fund and other humanitarian organizations..
He was selected among 15 intellectuals and finally became among the three winners, he disclosed to the Ethiopian News agency yesterday..
The individuals who were awarded similar doctorate degree were Mr. Vincent Doile, editor-in-chief of Irish Independent newspaper, John Burton, the presently serving ambassador and diplomat to the European Union in America, "Irish Independent" reported.
Among the criterion that enabled him to be selected was his success in preparing athletic competition of International Standard in Addis Ababa, it explained. .
From Addis Zemen April 27, 2005
Ethiopian Diplomats in Switzerland are said to Have Relations with Shabian (EPLF) Agents
Ethiopian Embassies and consulates are still said to be not free from Eritreans.
Among these consulates, Ethiopian consulate in Geneva is main instance, according to the statement reached us from the place..
Previously in the consulates rather than serving Ethiopians, priority was being given to Eritreans, cooperation was given in having Ethiopian passports, and investment access was being facilitated to them in Addis as well as elsewhere in the country, the consulate plays an ideal role in enabling them with these..
Among the people who came to Ethiopia and invested on animal husbandry and loading trucks, Ato Gebre Meskel Tsegaye is to be mentioned..
Ato Gebre Meskel was close to both EPLF and TPLF people..
Recently, this individual's business activities have been discontinued, and he was obliged to be expelled from the country..
Although Ato Gebre Meskel Gebre Hiwot is now out of Ethiopia, his relations to the consulate was not only strong but also received a great support form Ethiopian diplomats in Switz-Geneva so as to enable him invest in Ethiopia..
The secretary of the consulate, Ato Teferi Meles' father, Ato Meles Desta has, up to recent times, been assigned to work together with the Eritrean citizen G/Meskel Tsegay, and this was done as a cover, said the individuals whom we talked pertaining the matter..
With regards to the secretary of Ethiopian consulate in Switz-Geneva, Ato Teferi meles' relations with the Eritrean Gebre Meskel, its obvious to all, interior sources added..
If we take an instance, when Teferi went to Addis Ababa for his wedding, it was Gebre meskel Tsegay who covered all his wedding, it was Gebre Meskel Tsegay who covered all his wedding expenses, and in fact, he was also among his best men.
So their relation was so close and strong.
As a result of this relation, many intrigues are still inflicted upon Ethiopians today, said internal sources..
It was at this time when Ato Teferi Meles was being criticized about his relations with Gebre Meskel that an individual named Dawit Asegdom was sent to Ethiopia..
In our last week edition, it was mentioned that Ato Dawit Asegdom was chosen by Ato Meles in a pretext of handing over aid, an it was mentioned that his being sent to Addis Ababa, made many Ethiopians furious..
While Ethiopians presided there questioned as to why Shaebiya's spy was sent, Geneva's Ethiopian consulate didn't accept the request..
The statement it reached us stated that Dawit Asegdom has never been a spy..
And if he's considered a spy, then he's spying for Ethiopia, the report from Geneva stated..
On the other hand, Ato Eskinder Desta who claimed to have grownup with Ato Dawit, but who is in Addis Ababa now, denied the allegation that was described in Fiameta and the rumor in Geneva, by saying "far from truth.".
Dawit Asegdom (Dawit Agame) is Tigrean and not Eritrean by birth; he didn't serve Shaebia..
Had he said to favor Weyane (TPLF), it was likely..
I can speak of his anti-Shaebiyan position," he said..
Nonetheless, Ethiopians in Geneva haven't even now, accepted Dawit Asegdom representing them, although he was sent by Teferi Meles.
They ruled Eskendir's denial over..
Dawith Asegdom, who came to Ethiopia, is now paying a visit to the Ethiopian Army in Northern Front.
Our efforts to present the facts to our readers will continue by meeting him and interview him about the allegations he was criticized.  "Spy of shaebia".
There are additional issues, which we uncover in out next week edition, about the relationship Ethiopian consulate diplomats, have with Eritrean agents..
The diplomats Mekdes Tewolde,Berikti Tesfaye, Muse Tesfaye and others are going to be our focus of next week edition..
On the other hand, the issue about aid-money that was to be given to he government and was collected by Ethiopians with their own initiation, is expected to get final decision in their meeting on Monday.
It will come out on our next edition..
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
The Council of Ministers Presented the Next Year's Budget to the Council of Representatives for Approval
The council of EFDR ministers disclosed that if presented a 15 billion 12 million 900 thousand 900 Birr budget for next year to be approved by the council of representatives.
In its disclosure the council issued to ENA, it said that after widely discussing the regular capital budget draft proclamation of the 2002 Federal Government which was presented by the ministry of Finance and Ministry of Economic Development and Cooperation in the 5th urgent meeting it held yesterday, it decided to passed it to the council of representatives with full vote.
The 2002 Regular and Capital Budget preparation is made based on the new budget working procedure ammendment, it disclosed. .
The request budgets and provision of support is based on the country's income capability, the ongoing economic reform program, focusing on poverty reduction, and comparability of executing bodies to implement it. .
The regular and capital budget of the next year is prepared based on the focused direction of the government's general development strategy, and took in to consideration the budget need of each work institutions and the country's financial capability, comparing to the institutions' duties and work responsibilities, it disclosed.
After discussing widely on the draft proclamation, viewing it in detail the budget request presented from these budgetary organizations, and evaluating the 2001 budget execution, taking in to account the federal government's income capability, comparing it with implementation and programs, sent to council of representatives for approval, it disclosed.
The council pointed out that out of the total budget, the money it sent for approval for regular spending was 7 billion 239 million 430 thousand Birr.
And for capita spending it agreed to assign 3 billion 99 million 708 thousand 900 Birr.
Moreover, including Dire Dawa administration, for regions' subsidy it agreed to assign 673 million 842 thousand Birr, it pointed out..
From Addis Zemen June 20, 2001 .
Editorial
Where is the Direction?
EPRDF's press "Abiyotawi Democracy" last week categorized, including Tobia, the free press "gathering of the Defeated and that operate on the support by opposition sides".
In no time more than 10 editors and publishers of newspapers were arrested.
Three weekly newspapers, that is, Ethiop, wenchif and Urji became out of publication.
The solution shouldn't have been additional assault.
Point in at someone saying that he/she works in the free press wouldn't bring about any good.
"who are you?"
a question would follow.
Instead, what's of worth is giving focus on the information and suggestions the free press offered and corrects one's mistakes on time.
Although we took the suggestion as mere gossip of enemies of democracy that can not support itself with tangible evidence, we would still like to make clear one major issue about the publications of Tobia and its publisher, Akpak.
As a member of free press, when Akpak rose to give service to make public, it was confident of the wide and rich experience of its members, as well as truth and quality of the mind.
From the outset, it doesn't hold any grudges against another. .
Based on what the Ethiopian law commands it was establish had by a capital of 15 people, but it is not the property of one or two people.
When Akpak was established as a publisher of press it took as a light of leading principle not forgetting the responsibility it had for the public, not including favoring political organizations in its work, rather focus on public awareness.
As those sides who do not wish the strengthening of democracy and free press claim, there is no part of the public or party the publication of Akpak favors.
They are forums of free ideas.
It would perform its tasks today and in the future sticking to this principle.
Indeed since it holds the ideas of wide country rather than narrow area, unity rather than difference, love rather than hat red and grudges and since it doesn't accept racial politics, the beneficiaries of the present wind may not like it.
If through the conspiracy anti-press and anti-democratic forces it encounters peril, we won't have tears to shed for there are many young Ethiopians who have made their positions clear to make democracy reign, to serve the mistreated people.
Ethiopia usually gives birth after birth to children who would sacrifice for her.
And the fact that she delivers is being openly witnessed.
Among those who suffer from this regime, became victims of attack and professionals, who frequent hardship, the army of the press is the first and the main one.
Free press is the central pillar and mainstay of democracy.
Free press means the enemy of dictatorial regime.
It means exposing and struggling the injustice and power corruptors.
Therefore, the more the free press members are imprisoned and suffered, the better they feel about their performance that they display with great sacrifice.
They feel proud, not ashamed about it.
When ever dictators tossed and turned, the press they established for the purpose of fanning perfidy and releasing poisonous propaganda cried over nothing, it seems to us that the many journalists who are imprisoned would be consoled.
It is known that we are found in a regime where the prisoners are mostly prisoners of conscience, leaders of political organizations and members, as well as journalists who are conscience of the public.
This situation hasn't changed or improved from day to day.
Had it improved, it would have given the regime a better look.
Nonetheless, the current government is exposed be fore the world in its human rights violation, lack of democratic characteristics, and in its suppression of free press.
The present Prime Minister Mr. Meles Zenawi, who was mentioned by name as one of the ten enemies of the free press, doesn't make anyone proud.
It's not patriotism.
We found condemnation, not admiration in history for a leader who brought suffering to his own fellow people.
The number of journalists who became victims of police and central investigation and were put to the routine threatening prison cells as of recent weeks are many.
Journalists whom the court hasn't passed verdict and whose life are in the police stations and prisons are getting numerous.
Although the young writers who previously were imprisoned for a year and above and were released have borne the pain, it would be difficult to expect to share the pain an innocent citizen undergoes in prison in vain.
It is an experience to show that the democracy and justice which was said to live in our country is now being ejected.
As if the drama which was played in the pretext to law was not sufficient, the newspaper of the ruling party, government, so-called press of organizations attempted to spread malicious gossips and back biting calling the free press and journalists by name.
This doesn't allow the fifth row press that "suppresses" the benefit, security and unity of the people to have legality as well as publicity.
We know what these groups who say "We are journalists; we are the ones who present the right news; we are discharging the duties of the press" are practically performing.
The Ethiopian people, too, know it well.
However we don't think the hired ones know themselves.
We don't miss the fact that the malicious gossip they spread mentioning legal organizations and journalists by name has been the mission and duty they were given from their bosses.    .
Their direction is towards destroying the free press through propaganda as well as using force, so fellow people who say that they stand for the people and democracy, should know it in advance.
It is impossible to think of democracy without free press.
It's not possible to prove being a democrat suppressing and weakening the free press.
From Tobia October 30, 1997
It was Assured Again that the Economic Aim of Revolutionary Democracy is Capitalism
It was disclosed that the economic aim of Revolutionary Democracy being capitalism was proved again in the meeting held in Addis Ababa to evaluate the 10 year struggle of EPRDF.
In a statement the spokesperson of the meeting gave yesterday, it was unambiguously stated in the 1995 EPRDF plenary session that Ethiopia is following capitalism or building the capitalist regime, and now, too it has been assured again that the EPRDF's economic aim is building capitalism..
As a result, the economic development strategy of EPRDF makes the regions and farmers central where all development forces participate and the majority of the people. At each level becomes beneficiary and where speedy progress would be registered, the spokesperson pointed out..
To this end, the crucial role is that of the people and the investor while the government focuses on establishing infrastructures, arranging the control and follow-up and building the implementation capacity of the leadership who are engaged in development activities of regions, zones and districts, it was pointed out..
The comparative economic freedom would be assured in this economic path an EPRDF's development path being capitalist, it made the Ethiopian farmer who constitutes 85 percent and the regions central, the spokesperson disclosed. .
And this would enable the wide participation of capitalists of the country, develop government's role and would give special focus on backward areas, which has comparative freedom..
However, the mixed outlook held by members was not made to be amended, so there was a situation where the previous outlook was seen in daily lives, and important discussion was underway with regards to the outlook issue, it disclosed.  .
This evaluation meeting which started on June 19 is discussing on various topics, among which the essence of revolutionary Democracy, problems created in EPRDF and inclinations of sinking as well as the 10 year evaluation of executive body.
Around the first agenda, the historical process of Revolutionary Democracy and the stage EPRDF has reached how was presented in a report and wide discussion was held on it.
In the presented explanation, it was reminded that the main ideology the forces which EPRDF embraced during the time of military struggle followed played crucial role to enable the struggle reach its destination.
This program enabled to Ethiopia throw away the military dictatorial government, and for the first time in our country, it enabled to build a constitutional regime that was directly approved by the people's participation, it was pointed out.
Nevertheless, it called for amendment with the new world and national situation, and this had been completed in the medium and general discussions held in the years before 1995, seen in the evaluation the spokesperson pointed out.
The next meeting will be on the topic the Political Aim of Revolutionary Democracy.
From Addis Zemen June 22, 2001
The Ethiopian United Front Discussed in Amsterda.
The Ethiopian United Front (EUF) General Secretary, Mr. Mersha Yoseph reminded that the task of the current political forces is to put pressure on TPLF government to make it give proper responses to the basic questions of the Ethiopian people..
Mr. Mersha expressed this during his speech at the public meeting Ethiopian United Font (EUF) support committee prepared recently for Ethiopians living in Holland, Amsterdam town.
In addition, speakers who were present and gave explanations on the occasion were Dr. Mamo Muche and Mr. Abrham Yayen..
In this meting Yoseph said that the TPLF government paves a conducive ground not only for the Secession of Eritrea but also for the strengthening of EPLF and the act of aggression it has taken recently on Ethiopia, and he continued that, without taking tangible measures to correct the blunder he did on the country and people, it couldn't take out Ethiopia from the abysmal hole of war it put Ethiopia.
More over he explained that the role of opposition organizations should be focused on, leaving aside the struggle for basic changes, and stop running to be the extension of TPLF government, strengthening their unity, creating a conducive situation where political prisoners are going to be released urgently, the rights to freely organize and operate and express ideas are going to be respected, and where all-embracing national discussion come together to collaboratively solve the main political problems, and to urge TPLF to make changes.
Mr. Mersha Yosef, concluding his speech underscored that unless the TPLF government urgently gives clear and unambiguous responses to these secondary questions, the Ethiopian United Front (EUF) would be obliged to reconsider the unilateral cease-fire measure it was taken for the last six months, for the sake of opening a door for peaceful negotiation.
The second speaker, Dr. Mamo Muche, explained that the aggression is waged against the honor and freedom of Ethiopia, so in order to break EPLF's conceit and end the war victoriously in favor of Ethiopian people, all of us have national obligation to do whatever we can, he expressed his call.
Mr. Abrham Yayeh, on his part explained in detail the relationship EPLF and TPLF had before and after the hold power.
The TPLF government, apart from support, directly struggled for the secession of Eritrea, he recalled.
Mr. Abrham Yayeh said that although the referendum that is to be held in Eritrea would be concluded according to what Eritrean people choose, Unity, Federation or Freedom, EPLF cancelled the referendum it lay before and restricted the options in to slavery of freedom, where TPLF didn't show any opposition, and he pointed that the TPLF leaders didn't show any effort to resolve the border conflict.
Finally, he said the TPLF leaders were rather making their effort to divide Ethiopia for the last seven years, than doing something worthy for the benefit of the nation as a whole.
And cooperating with them without preconditions would bring about dangerous results even if the idea of uniting the nation is presented kind-heartedly, he reminded..
After the three speakers gave responses and suggestions for the many questions raised by the participants of the meeting, the program was concluded at 6 o'clock in the evening.
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
A Holy Father who was given a Name as "Heretic" Condemned the Act
A Holy Father by the name Aba Ketsela Mengistu who has been serving in Ethiopian Orthodox Church at different parishes in Gospel services, and who was called heretic by a tabloid which is named "Sematsedk" condemned it by saying that calling me "heretic" is just a devil's talk..
It is known that hatred that sustained between the two sides of the Orthodox Church has been aggravating, clouds of concern hung in the minds of many church people that this might shake the unified pillar of the Church.
Aba Ketsela who sent the details of accusations charged against many children of the church, not excluding himself, quoting sematsedk newspaper, condemned it, is now living in North America, Canada as Head of Preaching Gospel Department with the Ethiopian Orthodox Church..
I was saddened by what was written about me as heretic in 1998.
I served the church by my skills that are teaching presentation, song, poetry, sacrificial songs..
After I became a monk, I reached from priesthood to elder priest and I never declined form serving the Orthodox Church..
And at the moment in North America (Canada) where I live, I am the Son of the Orthodox church who indulged in preaching gospel and I'm not heretic, and I want to disclose that the disseminated news against me is fruitless, he said..
The news which reached us crossing different continents broadly details Aba Ketsela's grievance against his being called heretic, who said Bishop Merha Kirstos and Bishop Nathnael are my all-time witnesses who taught me the secret of Flesh, the content of the Bible and its interpretations..
"Aba" who has served in preaching the gospel in Miskaye Hazunan Medhanealm monastery and other parishes in Addis Ababa for so many years, and when moved to Canada he was really sad for hearing about his being called heretic and put forward a message reminding the Christian congregation not to be misled by the gossip around.
There are some who claimed that this false allegation of being heretic on many people including Aba Ketsela in not only the problems of the individuals but it is the problem that gradually came to the Orthodox Church..
Most of the people charged in the aforesaid tabloid, were not only suspended from work and salary, but also places like Debre Libanos Monastery too, was disturbed, and changed to land of blood (Akeladam) in August 1998, the insiders are talking about it.
What astounded most was not the aggravation of revengeful enmity between the two sides, but the fact that the church officials didn't want to take any take any decisions..
This problem the religious problem which that is now considered as simple is feared that it may turn out to be difficult, he said.
If those regarded heretic are really found to be so, first like the fore-fathers a congregation would be called and there if they do not confess their sins and return, church would officially declare their sanctions otherwise concerned orthodox bodies say that if church becomes negligent of all these and let people to be sent in exile, applying the principle of "thorn by the thorn" would make it unable to withstand the enemy force within..
This dangerous situation within the Orthodox Church which hasn't been settled for more than half a year now, but is just waiting time to catch fire has saddened those who have true orthodox love.
The religious organization who want these eloquent people with wide knowledge of the church but were violently shoved by church leaders are man, and hence, authorities in the Orthodox Church should have given urgent resolve for such kind of religious controversies..
But as if Orthodox Church is without owner, it's regrettable to see no one whose sympathizer whenever a problem arises.           .
The clergy who controls the two sides hasn't said anything against the so-called heretic or the accusers.
Nor is there any officials statement that comes out of her, she's still soun asleep..
The fight between each other has surpassed the country and continued overseas..
Therefore, Aba Ketsela Mengistu, who lives abroad condemned his defamation from where believes..
This discord between the two orthodox followers unless it gets remedy from now, it is not difficult to predict that the process is going to bring about harm to the church.  .
From Fiameta September 25, 1998
To Make His Love Steady with the Catholics.
The patriarch's Journey to Romania Brought Criticism!
Years have elapsed since he was greeted with storms of oppositions as well as criticisms.
However, the patriarch staggeringly clings to his authority, despite all these criticism and sarcasm, for he has become used to them.
The oppositions as they are, the patriarch's journey to Romania last week has been a corridor talk among the clergy.
Among the criticisms suggested with regards to his journey is the fact that no other religious leader goes to such an annual assembly sponsored by Catholic Church, except being represented; although various religious groups are invited apart from Christians, in this annual conference which is said to be organized for world peace, it was embarrassing for Ethiopian Orthodox church to be represented by its patriarch while others sent their representatives, the report stated.
The clergy who said "To make his love steady with the Catholics", also criticized the message he relayed as he went overseas, and termed it "lacking truth and unexpected form a holy father".
He lied when he said he was called by Romanian Patriarch and President and tried to camouflage the truth, for the annual assembly that has so far been represented only by high priests. .
Sources who knew about this annual preaching and prayer session which is sponsored by Catholic Church, in the name of world peace, and held at different places every year, more than 30 denominations and other religions like Islam would be represented but not by their leaders
These are not the only criticisms showered on the patriarch.
Rather than nominally and symbolically sitting with Ato Simon Mechale and count aid money for the current national problem, some say it would have been much fruitful if he went overseas and collect aid for our follow victims..
Although some who saw him on the national TV receiving aid wondered why he doesn't rather go overseas to collect aid, those who knew the secret that made him lose heart repeatedly stated that he won't ever take his leg abroad, where Ethiopians live, for he doesn't want anymore damaged eggs to be thrown at him.
He was confident with his recent trip to Romania he was fully cognizant of the fact that these aren't as many Ethiopians there..
It has been heard that patriarch was quoted as saying that "the war and famine that befell upon the Tigrean People just after they opposed him", is the rage of his sadness and prayer.
As close sources disclose, many personnel in the clergy were very saddened with this remark, and infact, in one tabloid, he was quoted as saying "on the morrow of their opposition against me, they were bombed..
Because Tigrean people are sensitive to their religion, respectful of their history, and have steadfast faith, it would consider the patriarch's outpouring far from trust and embarrassing..
Aba Paulos, who went to Romania together with his personal, friend Aba Germia, with the church money, would have gone to Tigray during this turbulent time and with an apology could have showed solidarity and expressed sympathy, however, it seems out of revenge, that he hasn't stepped on the soil of Tigray for so many months how, told those groups who felt the suffering of Tigray..
From Fiameta, September 6, 1998
Ethiopia Didn't Receive Egyptian Aid!
The Egyptian Ambassador said, "We don't know the reason"
Various comments were for warded in relation to Egyptian government's material aid to Eritrea..
With regards to this, we asked Egyptian Ambassador to Ethiopia, Marwan Bedir, in an interview he gave us in Embassy..
Thanking him for his cooperation, we presented here part of the interview..
Fiameta: Mr. Ambassador, recently you gave aid to Eritrean government..
But when you wanted to give similar aid to Ethiopia, it was reported that you were given no response..
Which body said we won't receive this aid? What was the reason.
Ambassador Marwan Bedir we don't know why they said they won't receive the aid; as to the body who refreshed the offer, we disclosed in our press statement.
Fiameta Anyway, how was the aid to be conducted?
Ambassador: On our side, we have an interest to cooperatively work with other African countries..
We have 320 experts working in different African countries.  Among these more than half are doctors..
Our request to offer the help and cooperation the kind of doctors Ethiopia need didn't get response..
Last time at the bomb blast in Nairobi we offered similar help..
Our minister of health himself went to Nairobi..
The minister is a surgeon..
For people who need plastic surgery, he took them with his people to Cairo and did the surgery himself..
We cooperate in all sectors with other African countries..
But Ethiopia wasn't willing..
For those who give us positive response, we do the necessary cooperation..
Unless it's exaggerated due to the clash Eritrea has with Ethiopia, what's wrong with one county helping another? For example, Italy and Germany helped millions of dollars to Eritrea and they are still helping..
Nobody mentions this European aid..
We don't know why the Egyptian part is magnified..
Wh doesn't appropriate news apply to Egypt?.
It's very disappointing..
As yet, with our relations to Ethiopia, it's the Addis Ababa University and colleges that give us positive responses..
For the medical aid we provide now, the ministry of foreign affairs and Ministry of Health haven't provided us response..
Fiameta: Instead of putting your request through the ministry of foreign affairs, why don't you directly give for the Relief and Rehabilitation commission who's responsible for this?
Ambassador: Our relation is with ministry of foreign affairs..
We don't want to make things complicated again..
According to our common working practice, our situation and quest should be responded by ministry of foreign affairs..
We have up to now good relations..
The problem is we didn't get quick response..
On our side, we would continue the help we provide for Ethiopia, he responded..
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
Ethio-Eritrean Boarder Demarcation Begins from the East
Ethiopian and Eritrean border demarcation begins from the past, United Nations news source, IRIN, disclosed.
IRIN quoting the discussion held between the two higher bodies in London last week, pointed out that the disclosure of the border demarcation that was said to start from the east was made during the London meeting the independent Ethio-Eritrean border demarcation commission prepared.
IRIN quoting close diplomatic sources to the process also reported the fact that the border demarcation that covers one thousand kilometers begins in the east is within the liking of Ethiopia.
In the London meeting United Nation Mission for Ethio-Eritrea (UNMEE) head and representative of the general secretary, Kofi Anan, Legwala Joseph was present..
In the Ethio-Eritrean of border demarcation that was made official in April last year, it was to be recalled that additional clear explanation was asked on the different areas of western sides including Bademe.
The Ethio-Eritrea border demarcation would be carried out in the coming May, it was to be recalled.
From Addis Zemen February 20, 2003
Artist Jiji Presented a Special concert in Athens to Express Appreciation to Athlete.
A special Music Festival that enabled the gathering of many Ethiopians was conducted in Athens which is hosting the 28th Olympiad competition.
Reuters reported yesterday that in a music festival that was conducted on Saturday night the star artist was the popular singer Ejigayehu Shibabaw (Jiji).
Jiji who appeared in a white traditional dress and beautified with golden jewelries spend the night praising the former and the current Olympic winners.
In music festival conducted at Galazio Night Club in Athens, Major Haile Gebre Selassie as well as athelete Kenenisa Bekele and Sileshi Sehen who astonished the world in the ten thousand metes competition were present.  .
"The special program that took place at Kipseli," and in an area where most Ethiopians live, not less than 300 people were gathered.
In the Saturday's victory-news night, the audience couldn't help but dance standing from their seats being immersed with Jiji, who is born for an art and with her majestic movements and grandiloquent voice.
This music festival night, in which the Saturday's victory-news of the athletes was reflected, left an unforgettable memory for Ethiopians.
It also was a night that witnessed music and sports have international characteristics.  .
It was disclosed that athlete Kenenisa, followed by his country fellow athlete Sileshi, completed the Athens ten thousand meters in 27 minutes 05.10 second, registering a new record..
From Addis Zemen August 27, 2004
New Historical relics were found at around the place where obelisk of Axum Stoo.
The United Nations Education, Science and cultural organization (UNESCO) disclosed that it has discovered new historical sites at around the place where the obelisk of Axum and at other Axum sites where international relics were registered.
In the statement UNESCO disclosed yesterday, the new historical relies were discovered last week by he team of experts which was sent by UNESCO to help fix the obelisk of Axum.
According to Elizzbeth Wangari an expert of UNESCO's Centre for Relics, and Jum William, member of the organization's International Historical Relics, the newly found relics which were discovered at a location the obelisk of Axum previously stood, were different rooms and graves of emperors.
In the area of these new discoveries, there are several graves of emperor, it was proved through the study made by various experts of the team, the statement disclosed.
When Kochiro Matu Sura UNESCO's Director heard the news of the new discovery, he said that the fact that the discovered relics are grave yards become "a great and useful discovery", expressing his admiration.
The phenomenon that was brought about by the trial not only invites researchers to work more, it would make Axum an international centre for relics research, the statement of UNESCO pointed out, and this in turn, would have great contribution to Ethiopian Tourism economic development, it stated.
Foldofo Fatovich, leader of the geological research higher experts' team expressed that especially the graveyard discoveries would be studied deeply at a laboratory institution in one university in Italy.
The following graveyard researches would be done with Italian and Ethiopian governments full recognition and permission, UNSCO disclosed.        .
The expert team that came to Ethiopia to help fix the obelisk of Axum possesses modern hi-tech instruments that look in to the earth's situation easily, including the radar of the earth, and collect information, it was pointed out.
From Addis Zemen April 27, 2005
More than Three Hundred International Observers are Said to be Engaged.
In the May election more than three hundred international observers are said to be engaged, the chairman of the Ethiopian National Electoral Board disclosed.
Mr. Kemal Bedri, the chairman, in the statement he gave to local and international journalists yesterday disclosed that international observers are represented from African Union, European Union, Arab League and Carter Center as well as from embassies of different countries.
Among the ones who asked to observe the election and that have diplomatic missions, American, Japan, China, India and Turkey embassies, the chairman pointed out. .
In this year's election, 319 international observers got permissions up to now; Japan and China embassies have interest to engage additional observers other than the ones whom they assigned earlier, he disclosed.
Regarding local observers, those who have assuredly got permission as yet are three religious organizations, he pointed out..
On the other hand, the board reminded that any decision related to the election process that political parties give in the electoral offices should respect the ethics of election activities which the board releases accordingly..
No candidate could place its poster and its symbol of candidacy out of the regions it competes.
Within a 500 diameter of a polling station it is forbidden to carry out political agitation, the instruction the board released pointed out. .
From Addis Zemen May 3, 2005
"The Failure to Accept the Peace Plans by Shaebia /EPLF/ Despite a Number of Mediation Efforts Seems to Lead the Situation to War."
Aregawi Berh.
The various mediation efforts to peacefully resolve the Ethiopian and Eritrean clashes starting from United States of America and Ruwanda up to OAU, including reknown personalities like Wole Soyinka and General Gebre Hiwot failed.
Therefore, the situation seems to lead to war, said former Weyane /TPLF/ military section member Aregawi Berhe.
The two sides are not fighting over border issues but over other matter, and never have Beademe and all others been Eritrean's, he assured..
The cause of the conflict of EPLF and TPLF is the fact that EPRDF has remained for seven years with out having endorsed the International law, he said.
With regards to fighting efficiency of the two sides, Aregawi Berhe expressed that EPLF is giving training its defeated soldiers with Yemen, while EPRDF did no activity then..
However, within a short time it made a great change, the fight which is going to take place after now is not a gorilla one, but a modern war where the two sides fight from their own barracks, and hence, there won't be a winner, underscored Aregawi Berhe..
On the other hand, the Eritreans could go out forcefully, but unless a lasting remedy is sought, the war continues, warns Aregawi.       .
From Fiameta February 5, 1999
The Green Flood is drying-up – The sole Hero is Facing a Great Challenge against Lucky-Winning Kenyan.
Since the heroic athlete captain Abebe Bikila came out victorious in Rome Olympic, athletics has become the identity card of Ethiopians, but lately weakened and while the Green Flood was on its way to dry-up, the sole hero Haile Gebreselassie is at present facing a great challenge against the lucky-winning Kenyans.
Last Tuesday, Ethiopia's jewel in Germany, Colon city, in a 5,000 meter race, he stood first in 12 minutes 55.4 seconds.
Although Daniel Comen didn't compete in this race four other Kenyans challenged Haile.
Out of these Kenyans, Paul Coch and Tom Niyark come out second and third.
In the suggestion he gave the Reuters' reporter said, "Haile knows exactly what he does in Germany Capital.
He'll attempt to bring back the record he was snatched from his in 5,000 meter race."
Said, it was to be recalled.
The young Comen too didn't hide Haile's great athleticism.
After breaking the record held by Haile in Brussels, Greenpree, "The person who can break my record is going to be only Haile.
And this doesn't worry me.
I am still a growing youth.
I have much time to break additional records."
He said.
In this Greenpree race Haile was snatched his 10,000 meters record.
The one who snatched Haile's 10,000 meters record was Paul Tergat of Kenya.
The victories of Kenyans were not only these.
Apart from registering second place in 5,000 and 10,000 meters by Thomas Itark and Paul Kochi, respectively, the Kenyans have become record holders in men's 800 and 3,000 meters.
While in a race he didn't compete he was snatched two records, in 3000 meters he became victorious.
He stood victorious in this race finishing in 7 minutes 26.2 second.
The Ethiopian jewel and who, at this time is given a name "one for its mother", have given an interview to Tobia newspaper with regards to the snatching of records, which he said "I am in a struggle.
In athletics or any other race you break one record at one time, and it would be snatched from you at another time..
Since the athletics competition is like a process of struggle, it's in this kind of situation that we continue.
As far as I can, I wouldn't sit idly because one record is being snatched from me.
As long as I possibly could, continuing my struggle, I will make effort to bring back the victory," he said.
And as he said, he's in a struggle.
From Tobia, 4th year No. 35 August 28, 199.
Both the Right and Left Came to a Head
The Patriarch took too much to heart (?)
Aba Paulos, who's told to have religious fallacy and disrupt the church's dogma, and spoiled the administration of the clergy, was now heard as saying they won't get in to the clergy as long as they are in opposition with me.
The news source who were close to the patriarch pointed out that the patriarch said that those who publicly defame my reputation and be against me day after day, and my enemies who made me unpopular and hated among people would never tread on around the clergy in my leadership time..
The opposition stands also, even much grave than the patriarch, was not to go along with and work in fellowship with a leader that has a religious fallacy and one who's a reason for embezzlement of the church's money and property, an actor for administrative abuse, and only a nominal leader; we don't want to be blamed for and be accountable by history, and we won't be trapped by someone who's uncomfortable to us.
and up to this time in the Ethiopian orthodox church it has not been heard a patriarch taking photograph with a lady, putting down his cap, Aba Paulos is the first one, said the opposition, publicly condemning the act.
Aba Paulos who is told as being under the influence of fleshy obstinacy, and, as a result, gave deaf ears to his opposition's request, although he speaks that the church in his time is disturbed, it was told that he doesn't want to seek resolve..
With regards to the snapshots he had at different times after he was ordained bishop and put in the tabloids, "Am I the only sinner?
They collect my photographs and put them on the tabloids," he told in a congregation, the sources mentioned. .
The oppositions, however, concluded that such kind of a person can never lead or administer the church.
The sources indicated that the position of both sides have come to the head.
The close sources were heard as saying that the patriarch, Aba Paulos said that instead of trying to negotiate me with oppositions in Ethiopia, it's much better if you do so with my oppositions abroad, (like Aba Melke Tsedek); and revealed that he doesn't want any peace negotiation with the oppositions.
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
While Sudan is "Anti-Human" the others are the good Samaritans?.
A few years ago, it used to be a political capacity (fad) to present American, especially American Imperialism as the world's chief enemy.
The American politicians used to tactfully respond to the criticism directed at them from all directions "Never mind, leave the blame on American Shoulder."
At the time when two superpowers (America and Soviet Union) monopolized the world political forum, there were times when the second and third world people were heard shouting under the influence of them.
Whatever the case, imperialism has never been a friend of he oppressed people.
Instead, its hands are soaked with blood parading with dictators and oppressors being their source of strength for the extermination, suffering and misfortune of people.
Today the world population is found under the shoes of the imperialist sovereign power, having the other sovereign power government (order) that is Soviet Union falling as a result of its internal contradiction.
It's governed by that order's regulations, by that regime's political values.
The measures taken at international level would testify this.
We don't think that the phenomena that would happen in the future do not seem to be any different.
The new African dictators are ousting the former African rulers (those who were termed experienced and wise) through military force.
As it was reported in our last week newspaper, these new rulers who were recruited based on by their distant wariorship and American benefit-keepers, apart from executing their tasks for which they were assigned, started looking other countries' leaders (those who were never than them) as spiritual son and look forward to their friendship.
That's why American government authorities said, "You've passed far beyond the expected limit.
It's too much."
they are saying to them.
At the beginning of last year, President Clinton imposed an economic sanction on Sudan to alienate the Sudanese government from the world population and governments.
What was the reason given?
The first one was the Sudanese government which holds fast to radical Muslim has become threatening to its neighboring counties; the second was it violates human rights; these were the accusations forwarded;
we won't stand against this on the court just because Sudan was charged with this accusation.
May be we condemn together what that government does mostly with regards to corrupting power and violation of human rights.
Yet, what are those "new" adopted children who felt the warmth of American wing doing?
Could they be teachers to the Sudanese government with regards to their respect to human rights?
They fulfill the requirements of one dictatorship over the other.
Hitler himself used to regret for he didn't learn tricks of suppression from Stalin!
In the October 25, 1997 issue of the Washington Post newspaper, fur Americans who knew president Kabila since 1975, and victims of his suppression, protested loudly against their government for giving recognition to the former leader of fighting.
Condemned, too.
They even exposed that their policy has no moral in lulling Kabila whom once was regarded "terrorist dangerous individual".
On the other hand, it played a great role in ousting Mobutu who used to be "fattened dictator" of imperialism for thirty-two years.
Why?
Asking such question seems to be tough.
However, the ending of all dictators who used to be advocates of the sovereign power regimes was not any different, so the answer would be found in that history.
Sudan is accused of human rights violation and heedless of human lives.
What are the ruler of her neighboring countries, Ethiopia and Eritrea, are doing?
This question is not liked, the workers have no right, the journalists were imprisoned, and teachers are massacred in broad-day light, the business people were befallen harm because they appealed, "all are politics.
It's the EHRF's politics", we know before hand that this is what they say.
No American diplomat's eye can see such kind of an act.
For the sake of justice and to be suitable for Judging through conscience, if the anti-human act that is in Sudan, could also be seen in Ethiopia and Eritrea it would have acceptability.
When we say Sudan interfered with Ethiopian and Eritrean issues, the balance should not be inclined unfairly when considering how much TPLF and EPLF interfered in Sudan.
How can the eye which see that was unable to gaze at this one.
From Tobia November 13, 1997
Ethiopian Telecommunication Corporation Disclosed that it's Property that Costs 5 Million Birr was Destroyed.
Due to the blaze and plundering on its west Addis Ababa office on April 18, 2001, Ethiopian Telecommunication Corporation be fell around 50 million Birr loss and couldn't give service for its 23 thousand clients.
In a communiqué it issued yesterday, 43 thousand lines digital stations, 10 line analog station, power giving bill information, files, computers and various tools as well as 10 vehicles, building parts an office materials some all in all, and others partially burned, resulting in up to 50 million Birr loss, Solomon Getachew reported quoting the communiqué.
What has been understood from the communiqué is that 23 thousand customers have fully lost service.
6 thousand customers at Kolfe and Shegole area couldn't make external calls, apart form the internal calls.
The corporation expressed that it needs a lot of work force, money and long time so as to do well again, and this would lag the efforts it started to reach the different parts of the country giving its services, the communiqué disclosed.
Finally, it would do its level best to restart the services that has been disrupted and cognizant of this, it reminded its customers to wait patiently..
From Addis Zemen April 21, 200.
The News that Ethiopian army Controlled "Bakol" was Disclosed to be False.
The news that BBC broadcasted as Ethiopian army who were armed with machine guns penetrated to Somalian land and controlled "Bakol" area the day before yesterday, was false, Ethiopian ministry of Foreign Affair, press chief Directorate disclosed. .
Quoting what it said was Somalian Deputy Minister of Defense, Mohammud Mohammed, in its news report dispatched at 4 O'clock in Arabic language, the radio said Somalia sent troops to the area which was said to be seized, but on the side of Ethiopia no statement was given, it said..
However, the Ethiopian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Chief Directorate of press, tonight disclosed to Ethiopian News Agency that let alone army supported by machine guns we don't have a single defense army in Somalia land..
The chief Directorate pointed out that since more than any other one the Somali people know it well why the Arta group wanted to continuously accuse Ethiopia, the Ethiopian government doesn't give value to this concocted story.
From Addis Zemen June 9, 2001
Message of Fiameta!
Attempting to Look Down on and Bypass People's Complaints is Exposing Oneself to Disgrace!
Be it in religious or worldly administration,one who claims that he administers people has to hear people's complaints, and rather than resolving, dismissing them with contempt would lead one up to dishonor.
It has been years since complaints have been forwarded to the leadership of the synod from the priests, congregation and Ethiopian Orthodox Church, and now that it is the eve of the new year, they are still shouting their complaints..
Those who controlled the leadeship, except looking people in contempt,have no intention of responding to the priests and people's queries.
Their scornful eyes and hardened heart lack vision and understanding and, hence, are blinded; there would have been many muracles during their reign, unless, of course, their hearts were hardened.
Yet, they haven't become lucky to ask the Christian people apology, whom they did wrong.
As a result, just like "Faroah", clinging to their conceited conscience,looking down upon every body, their downfall is inevitable.
Hence, attempting to look down on people's complaints is dishonoring oneself, God will show us himself their ends, of those who look God's people contemptuously, so let's just wait and see His work.
For works beyond our capacity, let's give him the responsibility to do them Himself.
Let's give Him time to work.
When he shows us the completed work, we will be pleased.
He will show us, His people, crossing the sea of suffering while those with hard-heart together with their troops, sink, so let's wait  God's work patiently .
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
The Bidding Farewell of Producers of Fiameta Newspape.
We feel sad to fall short while it's possible to work numerous things.
The producers and editors of Fiameta newspaper, Dawit Kebede and Biruk Kebede, are among the modern Ethiopians who have greatly contributed to the free press.
They worked a lot, made a lot of efforts...but their fruits of labor became suffering in TPLF/EPRDF prisons.
What the editors time and again are saying is "Let's save the next generation sacrificing our lives today..
And this is something expected from a truthful and strong Ethiopian and, hence, this is a saying that makes one proud.
However, nobody wants them to be the only one who should take the sacrifice, and we who work with them at Fiameta news papers wanted to share their pain...so we decided to be with them.
Especially, on the publisher and Editor-in-chief, Mr. Dawit Kebede, measures have been taken starting from being kidnapped by special bodies that TPLF/EPRDF trained up to being imprisoned in an underground cell.
At the moment, more than twelve charges have been filed against him and he's being disputing his case and paid in hundred thousands for bail.
Nevertheless, the decision the judges passed even now on him to stay behind bars at the central police is a witness as to what the final verdict could be on the editor.
The editor of the newspapers Dawit Bekele didn't want to discontinue his job and career even while he's in the midst to this difficult testing period.
Although working with devotion and with clear purpose is basic characteristic of Ethiopians in general, we don't want him to pay unnecessary sacrifice.
That's why we decided that the two siblings, Dawit Kebede and Biruk Kebede, be temporarily withdrawn from this career and we want the friends of Fiameta, in the county and overseas to realize this.
We want to use this opportunity to disclose that our producer and editior-in-chier is a life-long member of the International Press Institute, member of media and Information in the United Nations, ECA, and the executive member and public relations Officer of the Free Press Journalist Association.
From Fiameta December 30, 1999
Bishop Paulos Traveled to Tigray!
One who paves the way is Bishop Kerlo.
Bishop Paulos who has been at logger heads for a long time with Tigrean priests and laity and who hasn't stepped on to the area for years traveled to Tigray at the end of last week.
In order to know whether the people would accept or not the one who traveled first to Tigray was Bishop Kerlos.
Archi bishop Ephrem the head of northern Shoa office of national preaching, Pastor Berhanu Gebre Amanuel, pastor knife Gabriel Altaye, Mr. Wosenseged, Mr. Tekabe berhe and together with others of the surrounding native dwellers facilitated bishop Paulos' travel by going before him, the news that reached us from the clergy pointed out.
Then after through the call of individuals who had gone before him, Bishop Paul went there and he on his part was accompanied by 8 bishops, and reported that a part from this nothing has been known as yet as to the discontinued relationship of Tigray people that lasted over two years and the future relationship of Bishop Paulos.
Efforts are being made to divide the people and the priests, some internal sources pointed out.
It's told that the patriarch has a plan to stay there until November 29, 2000, (the date where the Axum Mary church is celebrated).
Until this news is ready for print, nothing was known as to what happened to the dissension they had.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
Abiye Zergaw and Other Artists went on a Military Mission to Sherer.
It is to be recalled that recently Tilahun Gesses, Mohammud Ahemed and Tamerat Mola went to Northern war front and presented line songs among the military that are used for agitation..
After Tilahun and collegues, Abiye Zergaw and other artists were the ones that talk their steps, the report it reached us explained..
This group which includes may famous vocalists and artists, aboard Ethiopia Airlines on August 18, 1998 landed at Shire Hotel after an hour and half flight, stayed there for some time and moved to the front, it was disclosed..
The surrounding dwellers have given them a very tumultuous welcome when they were moving to Sheraro. .
Except soldiers who were in the barricade at the battle front, many people including the surrounding dwellers were present in the concert..
We were told from the place that on that date Ramid Band presented very warm songs..
In this concert, Manalebish Dibo (Asa Belew), daughter of Birtukan Kubale (Meselu), Berhanu Tezera and Tadele Roba of Lafontain and other vocalists presented their songs..
Among the comedian, Engida Zer Nega, Asres Bekele entertained the people, it was disclosed..
Families of Abiye Zergaw whom are known to be Solomon Alemu, Derebwork Seifu (Fanaye), Serawit Fikre (Abiye Zergaw) and others were in the front..
(We will present the details in the future.    .
From Fiameta August 30, 1998
"Dr. Fisseha has wasted our time and money in vain," a student at Unity College  .
Since Unity College recently disclosed to students in the institution and parents that it increased its education fee by more than 50%, the protest against Dr. Fisseha and the school is aggravating seriously different information pointed out.
From the information Kokeb newspaper tried to gather by talking to the college student and parents, not only did students and their parents condemn the measure Dr. Fisseha take, but also are preparing to have public demonstration recently to disclose their problems to the community.
Especially, a student who came from a certain region leaving his work and wanted to remain unanimous, said with regards to the additional payment, "Dr. Fisseha has wasted our time and money in vain", regretting that he couldn't be either at his work or at school.
The parents whom we talked regarding the situation responded, "We don't have the capability to pay the added amount of money the college' asking now.
However, as we don't want the previously paid school fee for our childern to be wasted, we would be taking measure in the light of the law," they explained.
Our repeated attempt to talk to Dr. Fisseha failed, so we could not understand the cause for the increase of the school fee, by the side of the college.
From Kokeb January 21, 200.
The Charges CUD filed against Prime Minister Meles is ordered to be given judgment after it's cleaned up by the Federation Counci.
The charge coalition for Unity and Democracy filed against Prime Minister of the Federal government, Meles Zenawi, was ordered to be given judgment after it's cleaned up by constitutional clearing up assembly of the Federation council..
The Federal First Instance Court Second civil code court session yesterday gave its judgment stating that the rule prime Minster Meles declared on May 15, 2005 violates the constitution..
Since it violates the privilege proclamation no.3/83 gives to demonstrate, conduct a meeting and organize, it gave the judgment based on the charge CUD field to lift the rule..
The Court of Session viewed the presented appeal with proper laws and found out the case needs constitutional interpretation.          .
Hence, since the body responsible for deciding, after clearing-up, is the constitutional clear-up assembly of the Federation council, the court passed a judgment to send this case to the assembly so that in its power to decide whether the rule Prime Minister declared violated the constitution or not.
From Addis Zemen June 4, 2005
Fiameta Newspaper was accused due to the Two Presidents' Accusations, it was disclosed
1st Accusation – you've dishonored the name of Dr. Negasso Gidad.
2nd Accusation – you've insulted the Acting President of AAPO as rotten egg
The recurrent accusation on Fiameta newspaper is continuing.
It's to be recalled that never ever has been heard or seem of eleven accusations in the press law, and recently due to the accusations of the two presidents, additional charges have been filed against the editor-in-chief of Fiameta newspaper.
This makes the overall charges to rise in to thirteen.
This kind of accusation has never been seen or heard of and the measures that are being taken by the government has made it seem as if it was taken to destroy the existence of the newspaper at all.
Up to now, accusations include dishonoring higher officials (including ministers), regional presidents, the acting first president of AAPO, the nation's president religious leaders and patriarch and police college's name and honor have been character-assassinated, incited the people ... made the people lose rust in the government ... presented news that trouble people's conscience, and other similar charges were filed against the editor of the newspaper.
The editor of the newspaper due to the above-cited accusations were obliged to taste the scum of the earth at different places from the district police station up to Awasa town prisons.
Although the prosecutor said that the editor-in-chief has made the people lose trust in the government or disseminated false news, not even one tangible evidence did it ring, to ratify the charge.
No tangible evidence was seen in the court pertaining to the disseminated news being false, nor to the news as being troubling to people's conscience.
While the edition-in chief requested that this kind of accusation by the prosecutor was not proper and hence should be overruled, it was not successful.
And this kind of working procedure showed clearly before hand what kind of fate the editor-in-chief, may have.
Although due to teh additional two charges it was filed agaist teh editor-in-chief, Fiameta newspaper was decided to be out of publication, the news paper was again decided to continue for unlimited time as a result of the support and encouragement of readers of Fiameta, families of free press and other free press colleagues..
The reporter of this newspaper, after he talked over got a response from the editor-in-chief, Dawit Kebede, "... the objective which we aimed at have more or less reached its targets.
Our dream of instilling in free press with free spirit in the people has to a certain extent met is targets.
We joined the free press to sacrifice our own share.
And we've paid this sacrifice more than enough.
Our brothers and fathers suffered and died for our freedom.
And we, for the sake of our children's freedom, struggled enough.
Our usual effort is to end the imprisonment, the suffering and discomfort in our generation.
There's no need for the coming generation to suffer and die for freedom ... we're dying bit by bit for future freedom and generation ... And we're happy for this has been successful."
He said.
It was disclosed that the editor-in-chief was released on bail of ten thousand Birr and having give his words at the central investigation office for he used a false analogy of the president of the country as having semblance of the Bole Airport yellow taxis, and dishonored the acting president of AAPO, General Nekatibeb, and similar charges..
From Fiameta August 25, 1999
EOPC is To Hold a Meeting in Frankfur.
Ethiopian Opposition Parties Coalition /EOPC is reported to conduct a great meeting in Germany, Frankfurt town from September 14, 2000 onwards.
The participants are expected to reach the place as from today, September 12, 2000 onwards, the coordinating committee of the parties disclosed.
In order to attend this meeting, 7 groups of delegates are reported to go there.
Among these, country coordinator of EOPC, 3 members from Alternative Forces, southern people's coalition and ONC would be represented, the statement of the coordinating committee explained.
On the other hand, EOPC coordinating members from North America and Europe representatives of leaders of organizations and branch offices would participate, it was disclosed.     .
The agenda of the meeting are the current condition of Ethiopia, the aggression of EPLF and the catastrophes it caused, the neglect of TPLF leaders to the call that was presented to them, and about the intrigue they do by mixing with some organizations which claimed to be oppositions, it was disclosed.
On the other hand, General NekaTibeb Bekele who's the first deputy president of AAPO's dictatorial and personal decision to close the organization so that it cannot operate abroad, showed that he has decided to go along with TPLF, and that has deeply saddened it, the statement that was released disclosed.
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
A Rote of Confidence is Expected
The politics is tensioned with a lot of contradictions - Mr. Meles Leadership is also open to question
Other than the immensity of the countries natural and artificial problems, the inability to resolve the country's political problems in a peaceful way, has intensified the confrontation and put the Prime Minister Meles Zenaw's leadership is open to question, internal sources, pointed out.
Before the political condition goes to unexpected destructive direction, there are sides who say that council of people's representative, council of ministers and even better the EPRDF council should give a rote of confidence on Mr. Meles' leadership, and especially within TPLF, different outlooks are being reflected by Mr. Meles' leadership an other members, expressed these sources.
These internal sources said the situation of the country is worrying the incumbent group.
Mr. Meles Zenawi, Tewelde Woldemariam, Alemseged GebreAmlak, Seyoum Mesfin, Dr. Abay Tsehay, Sebhat Nega, Gebru Asrat, Seye Abrha and others included members of TPLF leadership are said to have different stands on timely issues, it's being told.
TPLF higher officials have been making consultation abut the recent pressing issue and if the difference between Mr. Meles and others have become wider and if the discussion is continuing as expected, probably it is suspected to bring about Mr. Meles' substitution.
The Confrontation and disagreement was not only on resolving current problem. .
Although the oldest members of TPLF were given responsibilities to lead the organization's economic institutions, they were displeased to have been excluded from politics.
According to the sides who follow the internal situations these TPLF leaders and cadres and have Eritrean birth who were excluded from politics, whenever they became closer to Meles, they didn't find it comfortable.
Indeed, Meles Zenawi instead of his contemporary Tigrean friends, relies, on Eritreans, many claim that; the reason for the disagreement as the economy too..
The key members of TPLF who didn't like the intervention of Eritreans on Ethiopian issues (Siye, Abay, Tsehaye, Sebhat Nega) were involved in TPLF controlled business organizations by their family names..
In this issue the difference between few TPLF, MLLT leaders and the majority cadres very much widened.
Who's the beneficiary from the organization's huge economic institutions.
This question is being raised;
Many former TPLF cadres are dismissed, displaced, and turned to poverty and in the pretext of racial contribution, TPL fighters were sacked from the army and this annoyed them.
The fire that comes from every direction not only the ordinary soldiers and cadres of TPLF, singed but the act of becoming wealthier by some of them was not liked. .
For this and other reason several Tigrena speakers like siye Abrha, Abay Tsehaye, Gebru Asrat and Sebhat Nega are pressuring to have a different stand point from that of Meles Zenawi;
Meles Zenawi, on his part took various measures gathering Tigrean business people and elders before a few months in order to bring them to an agreement warn and frighten so as to stand together around relations and racial identification.
"In the pretext of our names, we are led to destruction," complained the Tigrean people, who, however, as of recently heard that in the war that's going on in Ogaden, Bale, Sidamo, Kuara, Meteke, Afar and other areas TPLF soldiers were dying, and aggravated their hatred on the regime;
The forces that oppose TPLF from every direction are increasing from time to time.
And this worsens the division within the organization. .
Although the opposition in the city seems to clam down, since the economic problem is getting worse, it appears to boil up within.
News of a bomb blast is heard from around Harar.
The relayed warnings to Sweden embassy from "unknown armed-forces" in the middle of last year conveys similar meaning to Americans, Norwegians, British and Canadians;
Clashes supported by ammunitions around the regions are increasing.
The Amhara region farmers are taking military option measures due to unfair distribution of land government took.
In Gojam and Gondar where the EPRDF army haven't stationed, the newly formed Ethiopian United Front is operating.
Around Asosa, the Benshangul peoples Freedom Movement together with the Ethiopian United Front are said to be fighting against EPRDF troops;
The agreement that was said to have been made with ARDUF hasn't bore fruits.
EPRDF wants to buy time so that the Afar fighters divide amongst themselves and give in.
OLF on its part although, like before, its divisions and weakness continue is still a pain in the neck to the regime, the members who are considered strong and who are closer and obedient to Isayas of Asmara rather than the Oromo people, Lencho Leta, and the negotiation deal he was said to have made with EPRDF hasn't been successful yet.
Nevertheless, OLF's military activity is widely heard to be prevalent.
The statement the leader of the organization has given recently proves that they've decided to push on the war.
There's instability in southern areas.
The report of theft supported by ammunition shows the political problem.
The aggravation of the problem could be seen from the reporter newspaper which is said to be supported by EPRDF.
In the February 25 edition of this paper, To whom is the war for?
The report under this title after reminding those forces who rose with armed-struggle to prepare themselves for negotiation, it criticizes, government's lack of need to negotiate.
And this is expected to be the voice of TPLF leaders who wanted to resolve the country's problem through peaceful mans and negotiation;
While EPRDF gained little for its support to American policy (which means a support from Washington), it develops enmity from areas of anti-American.
The clash Meles Zenawi created with Sudan (as long as he becomes dependent on America the clash doesn't stop) it exposed him to his decisive enemies who wanted to attack using Sudan as a military base. .
The EPRDF effort to soften Sudan becomes futile because armed fighters are found in the country and it's impossible to stop them.
Sudan on her part, has great support form Iran, Libya, Iraque and other Arab countries who could be headache to Meles;
In Ethiopia the thunder of revolt is always underground.
Those who put their ears at the right place would listen. .
But those who placed their ears in the palace and around American embassy would only hear the propaganda of the government.
The danger is, however, hanging over.
Since Mobutu's ouster through Washington's support, Musevini, Kagami, Isayas and Meles, help would put general pressure on Sudan, it could be believed that this would give time to breathe.
Due to this the Sudanese government may not hate to have good relation with the EPRDF.
The present Sudanese ambassador for the United Nations and former president Nemere's security adviser, Mr. Faz Irwa in his short stay in Addis recently stated that here's no problem with Khartoum and EPRDF.
The truth, however, doesn't seem so.
The hope is narrow that Meles betray his supporters (American and Isayas) would attach himself to Sudan.
But if the softning of Sudanese relations suit him to buy time, it's not possible to say that he wouldn't do it.
Sudanese oppositions, too, find it easy to have greater bond with Isayas who openly rose to fight Sudan.
Up to now what pleases Meles and EPRDF was the inability of Ethiopian Opposition forces to unite..
There's no strong opposition has been a catch phrase for Meles as well as other EPRDF authorities.
The basis for this has been the inability to integrate among Afar Revolutionary Democratic Front (ARDUF), Ethiopian United Front (EUF), Oromo Liberation Front (OLF), All Amhara People Organization (AAPO) and others.
The group led by colonel Goshu, Medhin, has been around by disseminating self-incriminating pamphlets.  .
Although here in Ethiopian the Peace and Democratic Alternative Forces Council wanted to work in an integrated from, AAPO is not with it.
Its activities are also not seen actively;
But now the situating is beige charged.
The Ethiopian United Front (EUF) which was established by six political parties including EDFI, seem to charge the political direction.
EUF which say "The peaceful door has been closed upon me" has started armed struggle and it sad that it succeeded in this direction.
The other issue that seemed to have given respite to Meles was the appearance of Tigrean speaking people being gathered around TPLF.
UP to now although most Tigrenal speakers didn't like its move, they were not seen opposing the government.
TTE and TAND which are established by Aregawi Berhe are making great effort to come out in the country among the Tigrean speakers..
The Tigrean speakers in the city appeared to stand aloof from the struggle either from fear or else from agreement.
But these days the opposition struggle is showing a sign of including Tigrena speakers; Indeed, Mr. Meles hasn't missed American Support.
We remember Hilary Clinton appreciating Isayas, dancing from a very short distance in a Asmara city where many political prisoners were put behind bars.
American companies have given Meles awards for his good governance.
Since Mr. Meles was afraid of confronting Ethiopian opposition, he sent his deputy and received the medal..
America attempts to expand and strengthen the region she called as the horn of Africa that stretches from Asmara up to Kinshasa, the region she uses to be of her benefit.
What she did on Zaire she wanted to do on Beshir's government.
There were signs that America wanted to remove Araph Moi;
But the political situation in Ethiopia seemed complicated.
Does the super power blind and biased support prevent one whose own people go against it?
If we take shah of Iran as an example (leaving alone Emperor Haile Selassie) Meles could have gotten good lesson.
It's still not late.
Rater than pushing the country to unexpected destructive clash it would save from many dangers to listen to the constructive and peaceful notions forwarded by the leadership of TPLF as well as from external oppositions and the people.
In a democratic regime vote of confidence between a header and follower creates assurance and it's to be supported.
From Tobia September 25, 1997
Ethiopian National Bank Announced that it has printed the new Birr note..
550 stations would give service of Birr note exchange
Solomon Teumelesa.
The Ethiopian National Bank disclosed that it has printed a new Birr note that would put in to use in the future and it has made enough preparation to start the work..
The governor of the bank Mr. Dubale Jale in his press statement yesterday disclosed that the printing of the new Birr note was distributed to the selected major areas in order to start exchange service..
He also made if official that the prepared money were 1, 5, 10, 50 and 100 Birr notes.
He also reminded that the old Birr notes has to be exchanged within 50 days form the day the money exchange is to be announced in the media sometime in the future..
He also explained that 21 days were allotted for the exchange of 50 and 100 Birr while 50 days were given for 1, 5 and 10 Birr notes..
The reason why various days were allotted to the Birr notes is that the 50 and 100 Birr notes are believed mostly to be found around cities, so these notes could be exchanged swiftly..
Mr.Dubale told that since the 1, 5 and 10 Birr notes are widely used by the country people, and they may find media difficulties, additional days were allotted..
Mr.Dubale pointed out that in order to make the exchange of Birr notes, 20 major stations were set up that coordinate branch office banks and temporary stations, and these stations are found in Addis Ababa, mekele, Dessie, Woldia, Gondar, Bahir Dar, Debre Markos, Debreberhan, Nazareth, Awassa, Shahemene, Asela, wolayta, Sodo, Hageremariam, Nekemte, Gimbi, Meth, Jima, Diredawa and Harar cities..
In addition where there are no brances of banks, three hundred temporary stations that give money exchange services are set up, Mr. Doubale explained..
250 government and private banks give the exchange services and in general 550 exchange stations are to be established, it was disclosed..
In order to do his work, two thousand workers were assigned and enough work instructions are setup, the necessary materials and tools for the exchange of Birr have already been prepared, he explained..
Both new and old Birr notes would be functional side by side starting form the date the bank officially discloses the exchange of the money until the last date, so till that last day, it would be illegal to disqualify the old Birr note, he underscored..
In order to avoid such and related problems, preparations have been underway to give appropriate awareness for the community, Mr. Dubale explained.
Different posters have been prepared to make people aware of the new Birr notes, it's reported.
The public created enough cooperation with regional police and armies of the defense force in order to protect trouble some and those who are engaged in looting activities.
Since the new Birr notes are made cautiously, it would be difficult to forge replication, said Mr. Dubale, And added that they are made in such a way that the public could identify and put in to use. .
Related to this he pointed out that the cents that are in use at the moment won't be changed..
It is to be recalled that the Birr notes which are in use at present were produced some 20 years ago.
From Addis Zemen October 9, 1997
Seven hundred Ethiopians are Agonizing Behind Bars in Eritrea
Ethiopians found in Asmara and other Eritreans towns are tortured, it was disclosed..
Some of them died there in the prison due to lack of medical treatment and food.
Ethiopians residing in Eritrea are at the moment found in excruciating misery and some of them are thrown to places that are humanly difficult to live.
Among the places Ethiopians thrown is cherhe, a location found with ina short distance from Asmara used for damping garbage; presently, the Ethiopians are being thrown there..
It was found out that among the Ethiopians who are thrown in cherhe, some are found in a very difficult situation.
The sources that disclosed that the in human act inflicted upon Ethiopians residing in Asmara is increasing from time to time; rape has also become rife..
Besides, Ethiopians who are made to stay behind bars are many, particularly, in Asmara where prisons are divided from one to six stages, more than 700 Ethiopians are found arrested, it was found out.
Those Eritreans, too, who oppose and criticize the movement of EPLF government are tormenting in the elsewhere prisons.    .
From Fiameta October 21, 1998
Head of United Nations Development Office is to visit Ethiopi.
Head of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) is to visit Ethiopia next month.
The aim of the head mark Maloch's Brawen visit is to meet with officials of the African Union and discuss ways as to how the union gets support.
In addition, the head he would have consultation on how the agenda of New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD) would be implemented.
It is to be recalled that out of the 3.5 million dollar United Nations Development Program (UNDP) promised to give to New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD), it agreed to give close to 2 million dollar this month.
The aid is meant to change the African standard of living, to develop good governance as well as widen international trade, especially to the implementation of educational and health programs that are given primary focus, it was disclosed..
From Addis Zemen February 21, 200.
Money Award was Given to coaches and Athletes who Participated in Athens Olympi.
More than One million Birr was given as motivation to athletes and coaches who participated and got successful results for Ethiopia.
The motivation award was prepared by EFDRE government, the athletes and coaches yesterday received their prizes from President Girma Wolde Ghiorgis being Present in the national palace.
Dr. Wolde Meskel Kostre who is a coach for the 10 thousand and 5 thousand distant and who highly contributed for achieving successful results was given 100 thousand Birr and certificate.
Assistant coaches, captain Tolosa Kotu and Mr. Kasa Alemayehu; Dr. Yelma Berta and Captain Zellalem Desta, marathon coaches, Inspector Tezazu Wubshet and Lieutenant Hussien Shob of middle distance race coaches as well as Box Coach Mr. Neridyo, each got a 60 thousand award.
Athletes who got gold medals were awarded 75 thousand Birr each, athletes who earned silver 50 thousand and those with bonze medals, got 30 thousand Birr, and those with diplomas were awarded 10 thousend each.
The athletes were given certificates, apart from money award.
The rest of the athletes were given 5 thousand each as participants.
Hence, in this regard, athlete Kenenisa Bekela and Meseret Defar got 75 thousand each, Sileshi Sehen, Ejigayehu Dibaba and Kenenisa Bekele, 50 Birr each, athlete Tirunesh Dibaba and Derartu Tulu, each received 30 thousand Birr.
Athletes who brought diploma major Haile Gebreselassie, Worknesh Kidane, Gebre Egziabeher Gebremariam, Degene Berhanu and Elfnesh Alemu were awarded 10 thousand each.
Apart from money award, those, who in their Olympic participation in other and international championship registered good results and were mentors for younger athletes, for major Haile Gebreselassie and Major Derartu Tulu, were given special award that have the photo of Abebe Bikila.
Those who took care of athletes in Athens, Dr. Ayalew Tilahun, 10 thousand, Mrs. Tsehay Tadesse 5 thousand as well as Dr. Dawit Tamirat, got certificate.
Certificate award was given to Ethiopian Olympic Committee members and to clubs which produced athletes.
From Addis Zemen September 3, 2004
There's Nothing that Forbids us from Going to the War!
Seyoum Mesfi.
Ethiopian Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr. Seyoum Mesfin gave an interview to voice of America On June 1, 1991 condemning EPLF's belligerence. .
When answering as to what kind of follow-up is done on Eritrean in Ethiopia, "Among them it's not to say that there aren't some who follow Eritrean government's stand and policy..
It's not right to see all Eritreans who are in Ethiopia this perspective; apart from those sides who have blind outlook and those who are mislead to take wrong measures these people are dangerous to the country's security and lasting peace; it doesn't consider them as risky.
We are expected to make them work and benefit themselves and Ethiopia just like any foreigners.   .
With regards to the started efforts of negotiation by various sides, "I want to make it clear that if there is any picture of negotiation going on between Ethiopia and Eritrea, this is not the right understanding and pictures..
There's no negotiation underway between the two governments..
There's a clear proclamation stated by the council of Ministers and MPs that answers as to what would the conditions Ethiopian government consider to get in to negotiation..
This is the fact that Eritrean troops should leave the areas that it occupied by force crossing the Ethiopian border..
Not only leaving the area, but also Ethiopian government must rebuild the former administration in the area..
After that questions that could be raised or contentious issues about that area or another could be solved, through bilateral negotiation process, or if that's not possible, through a third party, this is what we believe..
In order to facilitate this process, the present IGAD chairman, President Hassen Guled of Djibouti, is doing his level best..
In addition, OAU's Secretary Dr. Salim is putting his own effort..
Above all, United States and Rwandan governments together they are putting effort to curb the situation before it's turning into an all-out war.  .
If we are forced to a situation where we should protect our sovereignty, that kind of war is self protective, and a war of keeping sovereignty and this is our right and we know that no one would forbid us..
Therefore, we are not that no one would forbid us..
There's nothing that forbid us from going to the war..
But to make peace reign, resolve peacefully it requires patience and for-sightedness..
Both Ethiopian and Eritrean people clearly know the cause of the war..
So, we are not in a hurry to engage ourselves in war..
On the Ethiopian side we know that support is being offered to friendly governments who go to and from the two cities making efforts..
I wish they succeed..
As I said before, however, in order to resolve the situation peacefully, both for bilateral mutual peaceful negotiation and with the inclusion of a third party, the Eritrean government, without any condition, should take out its troops from the areas it occupied forcefully denouncing our sovereignty."  .
He responded with regards to the prevalent severe clash..
From Fiameta June 3, 1998
Editorial
Have They Missed it Now or Were They not Having It Even Before.
According to the regular columnist expression in last week's Tobia magazine, and taking cognizance of the general situation, the tribal politics that has started in this country in the new order is heading towards having different forms and contents.
The disseminators of this regiment most often use these tantalizing and seemingly good, soft words and phrases, "nation, nationality, to enable people learn in their own language, to make them judged by their own language, to develop and preserve their culture, to administer themselves..
Basically, it's appropriate to respect people's rights..
Who would be defected if one speaks with its own language, if one becomes proud of one's culture and history, if one administers oneself?
What is saddening, however, is the diffusion of hatred among people under the cover of this beautiful idea; in the confusion, rather than the people, as was propagated, the beneficiaries are few.
When the true picture and the right cover of our present working procedure is unfolded, the plan of division it has for this people has become clear..
The plot to unbind the unity of these people who live side by side, whose fate is interwoven and people who work together for the development of its country, didn't take long time and effort to be uncovered..
So, after we have reached here, it seems that a new round campaign is opened..
Even at the outset, the philosophy of regional establishment, which was the promotion ladder for tribal politics, was feared that it would lead to racism..
The free press families who stood for unity were fighting this tendency..
As it has been indicated in the Tobia magazine, it is being considered as political ideology and trying to push it forward by certain members of the ruling party.
Although this is not the outlook and belief of most of the Tigrina-speaking people, its risk would be great if the flood increases..
Its risk would be for the whole people; especially for those few who use the name of that "nationality and nation" We said the language; identity, religion and history of any people should be respected an honored..
As long as they help for the development of all the people, the special identities of any people should be seen, even, like holy characteristics..
Before the tribe agitation of government and party cadres subsides, practical activities broaden their scope from tribalism to racism.
It seems that there's a tendency of clinging to a certain language, certain tribe and religion..
We see the speaker of one language from a small community leading and controlling all the activities of the communities.
What is very saddening is those who claimed that they've learnt modern education and said they would fight for people's right have been found cooperative to this process today.
The short question people ask "Why?" this is it.
This question should be asked by all of us and in turn we should defend it..
On our side, we say let's limit the racial hierarchy, tribal politics and the advancing tendency for its dangerous..
This direction would clash people with people, invites destruction and it is dangerous tendency for the peace of this county..
When we see this racist and tribal air blowing from those areas who claim to live up with the honored press work, our heart bloods.  .
The ethics of the profession worldwide legislative decree highly forbids dividing people in tribe and religion in the work of the press.
When we see these worldwide prohibitions are violated by employed whippier snapper "writers" who claimed yesterday that they stood for the entire working community, without differentiating race and tribe, become sorrowful..
Have the missed the ethics of being principled or were they not having it even before?
We say.
We would be forced to express repeatedly that the solution for it is clam political and peaceful campaign.
Because the result of defending racist stand with racism, the politics of arrogance with another arrogant and provocative politics would be destruction;
And still today their followers are singing that same song, they're tuning it up.
In our belief racial politics and racism, where ever it comes from, should be condemned.
In fact multi-national peoples' parties and opposition forces should withstand this tendency.
Otherwise, the result is dangerous.
From Tobia September 18, 1997
Ethiopia and Russia would sign military Agreement
Prime Minister of Russia, victor Chernomyrdin ordered his defense minister to produce a document of agreement with regards to the military cooperation with Ethiopia, a (flying letter) named "Indian Ocean News Letter" disclosed, in its second week edition of October.
It disclosed in its No. 782 edition.
According to the newspaper, the agreement document would include the military cooperation between the two countries, the way Ethiopian defense forces could train in Russian military training centers and would decide the military aid Russia could give to Ethiopia.
Besides, the content of agreement is thought to be that Russian military experts would come to Ethiopia and repair Mig 21, 23 and 24 fighter planes and other ammunitions.
Regarding the agreement, inside sources say that in order to make this agreement practical, Russian Defense Force would open one office in Ethiopia.
Ethiopia would pay in foreign currency for the services the Russian military experts render, according to the newspaper.
From Tobia October 23, 1997
Jijiga town was for a day under the control of Soldiers who were given the Sack
In Somali national administrative region, at Jijiga and Gode towns as well as Oromia region, around Borena Zone, in a tension created recently, there was a causality on one individual while a property, its estimation was not clearly known, was damaged, it was possible to know from associate reporters of the newspaper and donor organizations.
According to the reports that reached us the pressing situations were created since last Tuesday, and in some places the problem hasn't been resolved, it was said.
The report that covered the situations which occurred in these places divided them in to three.
Last Tuesday January 22, 2002 not only was Jijiga town troubled but also the town was put under the hands of the rebels who have been giving service in the EPRDF army but who later were sacked from their jobs and due to the forceful measures they took, the reports reached from eye witnesses and donor organizations disclosed.
According to the information, in an influence form the World Bank, Soldiers who were made to get the sack with an allocated money to rehabilitate them, about 250 soldiers have been raising questions claiming "that money which was allocated to rehabilitate us was embezzled by authorities; we're in great trouble".
Since the soldiers couldn't get responses to their requests, they snatched guns from the police force of Jijiga town and fired on all whom they encountered, injuring many people, I was said.
From the evidence we have up to now, three people's lives passed way.
After the soldiers put under control the town for a day, they were paid the money they had asked in a negotiation made, so the rebellion was able to calm down, our sources disclosed.
In the mean time, the misunderstandings created among the executives of Somali Regional Administration Council have worsened and, hence, the regional officials were called to Addis Ababa to negotiates in the presence of Mr. Hassen Shifa and Prime Minister Meles, sources from the Prime Minister Office proved.
According to the information we got from Jijiga, officials of the Somali Region Administration were divided in to two, one of which was said to be led by Ambassador Mohammed Derir.
Under this group, Mr. Abdi Ali Shega, Head of the region's Finance sector, Mr. Aden bile, Deputy President of the Region, Mr. Abdi Raho, and Head of the social sector.
The other group was led by the present president of the region Mr. Abdulreshid Dulane, close sources to the issue disclosed.
Although the cause of the misunderstanding of the regional officials was not known, observers say that power struggle and fight for benefits may have been the reason.
From Tomar January 29, 2002
Sudan is not Ready to Accept American-led Negotiation Effort
Sudanese first deputy president Osman Mohammed Taha in an interview he gave to Saudi Arabia Journalists last Monday said that in order to negotiate with Sudanese opposition forces Via U.S America.
She's not ready, he disclosed.
In relation to this the first deputy president said that Sudan has no plans to negotiate with the opposition forces in Saudi Arabia.
However, Osman Taha, who's at present paying a visit to Saudi Arabia, didn't pall with out mentioning that Sudan would be willing to negotiate with the rebels in one of the Arab Countries after she made proper preparation.
"Up to now Sudan hasn't put forward any question to negotiate with the rebels through Saudi Arabia," said Mohammed Osman Taha, its non-government organizations that took up this issue and dealt with the government of Saudi Arabia."
He explained to the journalists.
The Sudan first deputy president gave this statement after it was mentioned in a Saudi newspaper that Mohammed Osman Taha comes to Saudi to negotiate with the rebels.
One day after a Saudi Arabian newspaper, the Pana News media disclosed.
In a statement he gave to one Saudi Newspaper, the Saudi Defense Minister Prince Sultan said one Sudanese party asked Saudi Arabia to prepare the peace negotiation and his country doesn't have any reason not to cooperate for such peaceful issue, also pana reported.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
The Case of Professor Mesfin WoldeMariam and others was Postponed for Some Other time due to Missing Judges
The Federal Higher court fourth Criminal tribunal that was to see the criminal charges filed against Professor Mesfin WoldeMariam and Dr. Berhanu Nega yesterday was postponed for another day for the middle judge was sick.
The tribunal which was to pass order on the bail request of the accused and to receive the appeal against the charges filed, postponed the appointment to June 6, 2001.
Since the tribunal was not complete, the office disclosed that it could not pass order on the bail request and receive a writer appeal against the charge filed.
The accused reported to the Judges who gave them the appointment date that they couldn't meet their lawyers, and the lawyers explained that it's not possible to pass orders with an incomplete tribunal, but they asked them as to why they couldn't meet their lawyers.
As Dr. Berhanu explained at this time, he believes the lawyers were not allowed to see them because they might be busy.
The accused lawyers on their part explained that they go to the Central Investigation up to three times a day and even if they tried to speak to their clients, the gatekeepers, speaking to their bosses on the telephone, repeatedly told them to come later and they were not allowed then.
The lawyers who gave appointment in the office told the accused and their lawyers to present their appeals when the tribunal is complete and ready to seen the case.
From Addis Zemen June 2, 2001
His Majesty's Funeral Has Become Controversial!
An Ascetic terrorizes claiming that if the corpse of Emperor Haileselassie I doesn't rest in honor, Ethiopia won't be peaceful!!
After being killed on August 29, 1974, the corps was found in a well that was dug next to the toilet of Mengistu Hailemariam, has not been officially buried with absolution and funeral ceremony, which has become the main topic of discussion recently.
After the corpse was found through digging, it is to be recalled that as to whether it was really his, his ex-personal doctor, professor Asrat Woldeyes certified.
After a year EPFDF came to power during the transition government individuals from the clergy, patriots' Association, and families were chosen and allowed to get in to the palace to find His majesty's corpse were given responsibilities and authority from investigating various documents up to having dug the places where he was said to be buried, and finally got the corpse.
In order to carry out the funeral ceremony after the corpse was found, the Ethiopian Patriots Association and the then MOA Anbessa Organization entered in to dispute that led the delay of the funeral.
Again after the dispute was made to calm down and at the time the preparation for the funeral ceremony was about to be carried out, people's revolt came about.
The question was "His majesty's funeral should not be carried out just like any ordinary individual".
The other question the opposition raised seven years before was "Let government declare a one-day mourning and carry out the funeral ceremony..."
His majesty was not only a father of Ethiopia but also for Africa, so government would give focus and he would be buried with the participation of the public.
Since there were ideas like these, the issue was asked to pass or to the people instead of just the MOA Anbessa and the Patriots' Association.
Based on this, with a seal of Patriots' Association and the signature of the chairman this question was put forward to the transitional government but couldn't get urgent response.
The preparation for the funeral ceremony was made to discontinue and based on the consent of the crown-prince in England and the people the funeral ceremony was decided to be carried out at another time.
The elderly people that were chosen to negotiate MOA Anbessa and the patriots' associations then formed a committee and started their activities, but they were not able to continue up to the end.
However, since 1995, ascetics who claimed to have seen a vision came to Addis Ababa told, "If His majesty's corpse don not rest in honor, a very great turmoil would be created" and terrorized the families of the king as well as the public, the committee that constituted elders started again its activities to carry out the ceremony in 1995.
Nevertheless, since this elderly committee who were formed to carry out the funeral ceremony needed to be legal body it has continued its effort to be a legal body and to be given full authority to carry out the funeral ceremony from 1995-1999 and it's to recalled that last years it got a government permission...The Haileselase I Memorial Organization.
Since the organization got this permission, it has met various obstacles to carry out the funeral ceremony.
Issues starting from whether to make the funeral ceremony on a holiday, to calling popular personality's form abroad to Ethiopia have become contentious.
Actually the situation was just like what the ascetic said that the country seemed to stay in drought and war until his majesty's corpse came to rest in honor.
As Fiameta newspapers was following the matter closely it falls upon it a responsibility to present to the public the ongoing disputes with regards to the funeral ceremony.
Among the disputes raised recently is found that there was a dispatch on the internet and in some tabloids that claimed the king's family living abroad didn't accept the legal body formed by the name Haileselassie I Memorial Organization and the fact that the funeral ceremony was to be carried out together with TPLF individuals, which saddened the organization.
In the statement the organization released last week, disclosed that the king's family didn't say that and the news was far from truth.
Some sources said that it's Lord Mengesha's line of the king family who exaggerate this.
There are still others who claim that this was just defamation of an ordinary nature.
Anyway, the controversy continued.
The other which seems ordinary, but whenever the funeral ceremony is mentioned creates a dispute is how the corpse is transported how the procession make its way.
They all seem to agree on one point.
The corpse would be taken out from the St. Mary church where it had been put temporarily and move by St. Gabriel church making its was by ministry of Foreign Affairs and passing by the Jubilee Palace, the corpse heads to Masquel Square where it rests for a while.
At masquel Square in the presence of invited guests and the public a ceremony of delivery speech for the occasion would be carried out.
It's the procession after this that became disputable.
One of the sides say that after the masquel square, the corpse would go to Laghar then through Churchil Road make its way to St. George church; then by piazza to Arat Kilo, Holy Trinity Cathedral, while the other group from Masquel Square, through Laghar straight to Mexico Avenue and would make its way to Tekle Haimanot Church, Passing the General Habte Ghiorgis bridge would reach to St. George church, then via Afincho Ber by the side of the University take rest at miskiyazunal church.
This seemingly ordinary, but disputable issue has not been resolved as yet.
However, there's a point which all agree.
The reason they have for the corpse to come at Miskiyazunal church which is found next to Teferi Makonnen School, was that "the miskiyazunal Ark of the Tabernacle was in exile together with the king His majesty, and came back afterwards and a church was built to it, and up to 1974 it was administered from his majesty' personal savings".
Therefore, it's after the corpse reposed here that it should go down wards to Holy Trinity Cathedral, they say.
The other and the main contentious issue was as to when the funeral ceremony would be carried out? This is the question.
According to the internal sources, the funeral ceremony was planned to be carried on the coming may 5, 2000 for its Freedom Day and there won't be any work.
But since this would be most regrettable and shameful act, it's already been criticized.
May 5 is Independent day.
It was a holy the day the Italians went out fully from Ethiopia and it was a day when His majesty came back to Addis Ababa.
To bury His majesty on such a great independent day would not only be sorrowful, it would also be interpreted differently among others.
Changing Independent day by a Funeral day is like committing crime on a generation.
Therefore, by any standard, making may 5 a funeral day would be an unforgivable mistake.
The Haileselassie I memorial organization is by now preparing a letter to the prime Minster in order to carry out the funeral ceremony on this date.
The other problem of May 5 is that the time where EPRDF and other oppositions would make fierce struggle for the upcoming election.
In addition, there's a worry that time government and private Medias would be focusing on the election and the funeral ceremony could be underestimated.
Apart from this, dates chosen for the funeral ceremony are July 24, His majesty's birthday, August 29 the date on which he was killed by the Derge regime, October 31 his day of coronation, all of which were unaccepted for one reason or another.
And so the dispute continues.
But the people have some decisive questions.
Why does the HaileSelasse I organization need to carryout the funeral ceremony along with other holidays?  Why can't the funeral ceremony be held on a separate day?  Why couldn't it be on any ordinary Saturday and Sunday when people are free?  These are the questions raised.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
The money that was Embezzled from Lideta church is said to be Exposed.
The money of the St. Mary, Lideta church which fund in district 22, village 04 have been embezzled though different internal methods but now is said to be exposed.
The church has a good monthly income, about one hundred thousand Birr net income may be gotten per month, but in the audit (control) that was done in due time, there were times where ever ten thousand Birr was not put in to the account of the church, the news that reached us from the place assured.
A serious foul play was being committed in the sanctuary and those who gave been in responsible position in the church and served her for 6 years have no efficiency or experience what so ever and were assigned there based on scratch-my-back, I-will-scratch-yours benefits, but thanks be God after the new admin came to the fore and a new forum of preaching was elected work as well as legal finance accounting had started.
The previous preaching forum which was said to cripple the church in collaboration with office chiefs who stood for their private benefits, and had spent their valuable work time in vain for 6 years, which was but of the written regulation of the church, and condemned it the news.
Especially, the secretary, and the so-called controllers who were assigned to the post have become major actors for the embezzlement of the church as well as for the overall problems of the sanctuary; they have become great obstacles and found to create problems on the preaching forum and the admin who rose to work devotedly with spiritual initiation and for the development of the church, the report explained.
The news also explained that it is very shameful to say that only ten thousand Birr was gotten from a church as huge as Lideta, and it was a proof that ensured that the church has been exposed for embezzlement.
The fact that money collected in the alms boxes used to go to individual's pockets and regarding this when information was given to the officials of the clergy it used to be given deaf ears, the news implicated, apart from the cash money embezzlement, it was reported that one marriage certificate was sold to individuals by a lot of thousand, Birr.
There are still some church workers who aren't confident on themselves and live dependently on others, that spend their time accusing the straight forward church workers condemning the preaching forum, conspiring with Addis Ababa National preaching and the clergy members disclosed the news.
From Fiameta July 28, 1999
Athlete Meseret Defar was Appointed Good will Ambassador
Athlete Meseret Defar who earned gold medal in a 5 thousand meter race in the Athens Olympiad was appointed good will ambassador for office of United Nations Fund for population.
As it was disclosed in a special program that the organization prepared at Sheraton Hotel, yesterday night, the effort, strength and victory athlete Meseret Defar displayed in Athens has made her to be elected a candidate and then appointed for another responsibility.
As it was indicated in the program, the fact that athlete Meseret Defar is appointed in the organization a good will ambassador, would help Ethiopian Women withstand all the economic, social, political, cultural and religious influences they encounter.
Rep of office of the United Nations Fund for Population, Dr. Monike Reakotomalala, spoke that the fact that Meseret accepted the responsibility given to her would enable her to teach and agitate the community that brought her to this great level so as to get rid of the poverty, HIV/AIDS, early marriage, harmful practices traditions and to her related problems which stood in the way of it; in the effort to starting from formation of policy to facilitating situations for women to lead better lives, she would be playing her own role.
Dr. Rakatomala who spoke that he saw many developing countries their leaders of whom have great visions, and people who work day in day out to improve their lives, said poverty, war and violations of different sorts above all greatly hurt females and children; in order to solve these situations and enable the respect of female equality rights finding athletes like Meseret would help a lot, he pointed out.
The international recognition and happiness that Meseret attained through her effort is not only hers, but it's all ours, he praised.
Athlete Meseret on her part said that she's concerned about her Ethiopian fellow people being victimized by HIV/AIDS and poverty, and promised to properly discharge the duties the United Nations Fund for population bestowed up on her.
She thanked her families, friends and sport associates who stood beside her in her victory in Athens Olympiad.
From Addis Zemen, September 8, 2004
The Fury of Debre Nazareth St. Joseph Priests is still Hot!
The Fury of the Addis Ababa Debre Nazareth St. Joseph Church Priests against those who falsely wrote on their church administrator, Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Wolde Hawariat Demissie, is still hot.
The article which reached our office from the association of priests in the sanctuary, under the title "when the act of character Assassinators is Exposed", condemning the article written against the administrator and stating that it was far from the truth, explained point by point in response to the previous article; the side (individual) who wrote against the administrator was not a child of the church but anti-scholars and betrayer, according to the core of the message; one who was extremely angry about the development activity of church and angry at the fruits of assiduous workers; and obsessed with envy, it said.
1.The administrator Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Wolde Hawriat, since he has been assigned at this church has been contributing a wide service (teaching) of the gospel to the laity, living fatherly advice to priests and workers of the sanctuary and regarding the administrative process, apart from treating people squally, he has never showed partiality or displayed racism.
In fact, on the contrary, he fights against racism, believes in ore church, and the writer wrote against him claiming he showed partiality, being led by Satan, otherwise the administrator is far from such racial division, and hence, we oppose the writer.
2.The Writer claimed that he has had a servent desire to hire his people from Gondar, but we        saw that the writer exposed himself in saying so.
He has a feeling of hatred against this race and came to realize that Satan has controlled him; so we feel sorry for the writer; we advise him to take corrective measures.
Melake Tsion Aba Hawariat has never said "Employ some one" from Gondar, although he was from Gondar.
Unless to show your fake identity, and prepared to disturb the peace our church has, all church people are the children of God, and rising to say "you are Peter's, you're Apolos" shows that you are obsessed with demonic spirit, the association of priest condemned it."
Because of this fake article against the administrator and your provocative aim the peace of the church won't be disturbed.
The article written in response
3.You said that he forbids the preaching forum from working, he doesn't have administrative           skill.
Unless you want to magnify your perfidy, MelakeTsion Aba WoldeHawariat Demisie is among the great son of the church who is known for his administrative skills, church profession as well as spiritual fatherhood.
Since he came to our sanctuary, peace and stability regions.
Let alone to mention his name falsely, his presence is not even known.
If you really knew this father closely and came to understand his professional efficiency you wouldn't have written such hocus-pocus on our administrator, the article said.
4.You said, "The development activity that was planned to be practical in the future was closed       due to your inefficiency", but this proved to show your act of defamation, otherwise St.              Yoseph church is a place where development activities are visibly being underway, more than       any other times.
Due to the laity Christian and this great administrator's activities the construction of St. Michael Kano Church is nearing its completion.
In coordination with the development committee, he is registering a work that makes one proud.
The development activities are being conducted efficiently, giving deaf ears to the crooked and detractors.
But as to your perfidy, we still feel sorry for you.
5.As to your claim that he has weakened the preaching of the gospel and Sunday school, it's now, more than any other time that these two are strengthened and widened.
You wouldn't have spread such kind of perfidy had you to been infected by falsehood and back biting.
Our administrator has even now excel any other one and is always diligent.
As to your claim that the car of the church has become a vehicle for transporting private onions and potatoes, Aba WoldeHawariat let alone as much onion and potatoes to be loaded on a vehicle, he doesn't have something to be filled with a plastic beg.
Because he lives alone and lives in the premise of the sanctuary.
You've said those usual words full of perfidy that in order to be elected on July 13, 1999 he has pent a lot of money and force.
Basically, our church elects bishops not on the basis money they spent or sort of run for election, but according to the church principles and regulations.
You should have known that speaking of such ill things, as being elected due to the money one spent in church, is desecration of a holy church.
In fact, Vicar MelakeTsion Aba W/Hawaryat Demssie should deserve to be a bishop, considering his professional contribution to the church and his being a son of the church since childhood in the desert and frost.
If you are the resident of our church you would perhaps know that it was not only a wish of the many priests of the sanctuary and the laity that he would have been chosen a bishop in the last election, but it was a firm belief of them.
But if you just said this merely on the basis of envy, we feel sorry for you.
Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Hawariat Demissie is not as you described him, but known by the Holy Synod, assiduous, diligent and strong father.
Therefore, our accusation is why the condemnation of the admin was on your article written on August 27, 1999.
And we wonder you mention our admin's name in relation to falsehood.
It has been proud that the admin has been a teacher of the new translation and many other teachings of the church.
It was to be recalled that pertaining to the priests' stand in the priests' meeting, two of our reporters were present and disclosed work by word, their entire discussion last week.
Due to lack of space we couldn't present all in all the article of association of priests.
From Fiameta September 8, 1999
Patriarch Condemned, Parish Administrator Ousted From St. Urael Church
On Sunday, November 1, 1998, the parish administrator, in the presence of the surrounding community of congregation, requested the priests, "What is a ban?
What kind fo person is to be anathematized?"
and he further remarked, remarked "It has been so long since we have been anathematized, and unless we are given sdutions, we will take a stand." Based on their request, the preaching congregation and believers' committee discussed upon, Christian communities were called for a meeting on the 6th of November, according to close sources.
In this general assembly, where all priests and the surrounding believers widely discussed issues raised on the previous meeting, that is, of being anathematized, they were told that since ordination is given to clergyman, not only patriarchs,but also all who are ordained priests can minister anathematization; one does not necessarily should be a high priest for such a ministry; the community of believers reasoned why they were anathematized by chief Ayalew Tamiru. The congregation agreed that unless the conflict between chief Ayalew and the Patriarch as well as the controversy in the church are resolved and the sanctions, are lifted, the patriarch's name should not be called in Ureal Church, the report stated.
This decision made by priests and congregation indicate that the church would not restrict itself in not summoning patriarch's name, but would go as far as defecting itself form the leadership of the patriarch, provided that the problem is not to be solved through dialogue.  Copies of the decisions of the joint meeting of priests and congregation were disseminated to the patriarch, concerned bodies including the media, participants disclosed to our office.
This decision shows the united stand of the congregation and that of clergymen.
Especially, the parish administrator, Melak Hiwot Wolde Senbet, who stood for the truth, may soon be fired from his position, as many already expressed their concern.
The latest report we received indicate that the parish administrator vicar Melake Hiwot Wolde Senbet, who in a joint meeting with congregation, decided to remain in his stand, is now ousted from his position, with a letter which was said to be written by the office of the patriarch.
Nevertheless, the congregation are still expressing their objection to accept the new vicar appointee, and further expressed their opposition by saying vicar Melake would not leave them.
From Fiameta November 12, 1997
Whether the Coming Election Would be Free and Democratic Created Controversy Among People
It has been a year and half since the war on Ethio-Eritrean border dispute was without resolve, but broad coverage is given at the moment in the government media to describe about the coming may election.
While some sides ask up to when would the Ethiopian border is forcefully occupied by the contemptuous EPLF, others expressed their worry that the war is not something that can be concluded in such a short time.
Some military observers said that it was during the first war that wrong had been done on the side of Ethiopia, detailing that as soon as victory was achieved at Bademe Front, instead of discontinuing the war, should have gone forward and releasing the other places or occupying strategic places inside their territory, for the EPLF forces were weakened and highly shocked.
The main reason they gave for this was that the international community wouldn't, like now, have mocked at Ethiopia if strategic areas were occupied then, and in the peaceful negotiation it would have enforced Eritrea to urgently leave Ethiopian land, expressed with regret.
These groups are reminding that even now the limitless time given to the enemy would allow it to be organized and strengthened so that making it hard for the Ethiopian defense force against the enemy force and it may call for heavy sacrifice.
On the other hand, the government is presenting a lot of programs through its medias and these have become talking points for the people.
The public expresses that it needs the national election, more than any other time, to be more free and fair.
However, it has great doubts whether the election process in this year's election would be democratic.
Just like the previous election, they worry that most positions would be taken in different ways, by a one-clan-party members, they disclosed.
In this election, people want better people's representatives to be elected; they don't want to see one-clan or party monopolizing all higher positions.
For this they want as many better individuals and parties who feel their fellow people's concern, and this is being clearly told.
From Fiameta November 24, 1999
A Day in the Parliament
It is to be recalled that in our last week edition we presented the report prime minister submitted on January 29, 2002 to the council of representative, and the question major Admassu Melaku raised and the suggestions he gave based on this report.
Next to Major Admasu it was Dr. Beyene Petros, chairman of Optional Forces and Southern people's Union who came up with suggestion and questions.
Dr. Beyene roughly went through the 32 pages of the report and criticized it.
The expressed that as his faith on the regime (has left with) little hope, he even see no use calling it with its name.
He mentioned that the report was general and didn't deal with details so it was difficult to understand the extent of work done; and with regards to what is being done in the country at the moment, Kr. Beyene said,
what is being done is a party which struggled for many years overcame the previous regime; designing a lot of strategies to remain in power, out of which recruiting members from each nation nationalities who could serve his purpose, organizing them in to parties, protecting its power from getting out of its hands; this is what we see being done.
To this end, it conducts what are called elections allocating millions of Birr for the sake of consumption by the international donors; I am forced to call this election by its proper name, elections are mostly wanted to be conducted not because they are free and democratic, but as they say for the sake of giving vote of confidence or to see the support the incumbent party has for the election, but it is not a free competition held among different political parties, so we have reached at a stage to call the present government by its proper name" continuing his speech, Dr. Beyene Petros criticized, "the next move would be building the capacity of the members of the council...which was presented by prime Minister Meles Zenawi's report which he said was an observation made out of the council's aim and role and this saying seemed to put the council members in a lower status than the executive body; and if this idea had come out of the House Speaker or the secretariat of the council it would have been proper, he disclosed.
With regards to the judiciary order, Dr. Beyene Petros said trainings given to lawyers and prosecutor generals should be given in line with international standards in the country's colleges and universities, and continued "This means we repeatedly met with the so-called lowyers who graduatied even now and then in a fast process from civil service college, but who are really illiterate to law.
This has been criticized by many lawyers so the mistakes need to be amended; we are not saying they shouldn't be trained in the institution, we're suggesting that let's take sufficient time, enough evaluation and then they could be trained," they said.
Dr. Beyene also raised the issue of salary increment and reminded that this should have uniformity and it ought to include those who serve in the development organizations, "what's planned for these people? He asked.
Dr. Beyene mentioned that it's not appropriate to categorize the private press and opposition parties together, and the report presented regarding the opposition wasn't a balanced judgment, he said.
Beyene Petros, who reminded that so as to make the election process democratic, opposition parties were injured, bleed, and sacrificed their members, continued by saying "when we look back the repeated election, as they didn't fulfill free and fair election criteria, it bleeds our heart," he said.
The so-called Electoral Board which was an institution established by government has transferred to a institution that was formed to have people attacked by the name of election," he said.
Therefore, around this, study and evaluation has to be carried out and radicals structural change should come, he reminded.
In a situation where this doesn't happen, oppositions ought not to be driven like fattened oxen ready to be slaughtered; Dr. Beyene also wondered why is the issue about demarcation of the border is not disclosed to the public?  He put forward this question; he also expressed his sorrow for seeing the AIDS problem that is very pressing health situation of the country was not included in the report.
Dr. Beyene raised in his question regarding the presence of considerable disparity in the army; favoritism and lack of discipline.
In the afternoon the whole time was held by EPRDF leadership; at first Adisu Legesse, chairman of Amhara Nationals Democratic Front, followed by his deputy and minister of Information, Bereket simon forwarded suggestion and responded to questions; next was Dr. Kasu Ilala, chairman of SEPRDF and minister of Infrastructure mentioned that he made a two-hour discussion with Dr. Beyene so as to make the election in the south democratic, and testified that the election was defect less and purely democratic.
As to the complaint regarding the said uneven distribution of fertilizers for farmers who are members and supporters of opposition parties, the deputy Prime Minister Adisu Legesse stated that what is being told with regards to fertilizers was false as the supply was more than the demand; the one who denied about what was said to have happened at Feres Bet was Bereket Simon.
With regards to assigning of judges, explanation was also given by Berket Simon, especially among the lawyers that work at a Federal level, he said only less than 2% of them graduated form Civil Service College, and hence, the suggestions given on these judges would be against their humanity, he complained.
With regards to the question raised about the sovereignty, it was Seyoum Mesfin, minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of TPLF, who gave explanation.
The Prime Minster gave responses on general issues and for warded the conclusion.
We will start seeing from the minister of foreign affairs:-
Mr. Seyoum Mesfin's explanation focused on the Court of Session held in the Haig-Netherlands that dealt with border dispute; the defenses presented on the side of Ethiopian were the border agreement documents made between Ethiopia and Italy in 1900, 1902 and in 1908; and he also explained that it took the charter that was approved in Cairo in 1964; that the lawyers employed on the part of Ethiopian to conduct the border dispute came from a company that has European and American branches; that this company is said to be one of the top ten; and added that it is the first in Europe.
Mr. Seyoum explained that the lawyers who were employed from this company won the Hanish controversy case, standing for Yemen and now they took the litigation for Ethiopia.
It was possible to understand from Mr. Seyoum's explanation that these international lawyers presented Ethiopian document and had a speech dispute for 15 days and concluded their task in December.
Mr. Mesfin pointed out that if the decision could be made soon it would be official in February, otherwise it may take an additional month or two.
With regards to the process of litigation Mr. Seyoum elucidated that it was conducted openly and nothing is being carried out secretly; in order to express the defending points of Ethiopia and the details Eritrea presented, the working procedure restricts and it's forbidden.
Until the decision becomes official the details should be kept with in the litigants; that doing to the contrary to this for the consumption of propaganda and media-wrestling would put pressure on the judges' consciences and, therefore, such kind of procedure is forbidden, and that this is not something that started with this case but this was so even in the previous working procedure.
The process of arbitration judicature, rule of procedure is only this, he underscored.
With regards to the litigation conducted by the foreign professionals, they gave explanation to government officials, regional authorities, but because of the above-mentioned reasons it was not possible to disseminate the news in the mass media.
As to evident information, more than 5 thousand documents from universities, different government institutions were presented to the law court; besides historians contributed their share, it was possible to understand from the minister of Information.
Evidences were gathered from Europe and American libraries and research centers, he explained.
That government spent a lot of money to enable the process complete successfully; that it sacrificed a lot, and employed more than one thousand people, he pointed out.
In general he believed that the litigation process has been completed successfully.
In order to bring back the healthy relationship that used to be prevalent between Ethiopia an Eritrea and with regards to the Algiers agreement and normalization, Mr. Seyum told that foreign forces were making strong pressure to create this situation; and this was also being tr ied by religious leaders and civil institutions, he reminded.
Following he said, There's no enmity between the people of the two countries; the relationship between the people of the two countries surpasses the bondage of ordinary neighborhood," he pointed out, and since the 1998 aggression EPLF conducted was not connected with the people, we don't categorize the people as enemies as a result of the aggression, he said.
Although there were Eritreans who were deceived by the regime, we don't have problems with the people, he emphasized.
He was quoted as saying that so as to have healthy relations in the future with the regime, the ball is in the Eritrean court.
It's the regime's behavior which created the problem; it needs the neighborhood of Ethiopia as long as it gets benefits; unless it changes this attitude, its aggression interest curbed, what's the guarantee?"  He asked and underlined that the issue of healthy relations "normalization" comes by taking this in to consideration.
As to the economic situation, Ethiopia needs a port, and in order to use this port in a secured way we need to have options of ports.
Government is doing its best to get a neighboring port that is secured and ruled by international law, not a port which is opened when leaders are happy and closed when they are displeased," he said.
Apart form this effort to return Asab by opposition group is an undercover wish for war, he condemned.
The opposition forces in the country together reminded in the "memorandum" they sent to the United Nations condemning the Algiers agreement that unless the Ethiopian people's right over Asab port gets response, they said it would create a problem.
While Mr. Mesfin condemned this calling it war-seeking he strengthened the idea, "Ethiopian people have become sick and tired of the war that he was in for 30 yeas pertaining to this issue."
As a result, its development and peace have been interrupted,he said.
Mr. Seyoum passed without mentioning the war that costs the lives of hundreds of thousands civilians, after Eritrea seceded and Ethiopian people lost its port ownership.
The song and slogan that says unless Asab is ours there's no peace; the nation would be in turmoil, has no acceptance now," said with obstinacy.
This kind of thinking would countervail the aim of the battle conducted against Eritrea recently, he said.
Let alone in kilometers, we don't have an intention of taking an arms length of other nation's territory; it is impossible to forcefully put on one's interest on another, he said.
The argument that says the treaty made between Menelik and Italy doesn't have acceptance now is an argument that holds no water.
Unless the two sides agree, it's not possible to nullify the treaty, therefore, its imperative to accept this treaty and implement Mr. Mesfin explained.
The option other than this would put the country and her people in to war, he warned with stubbornness.
Oppositions and intellectuals talk of the reasons why Italy's treaty would not be acceptable.
The disputable idea they present is the treaty was signed between two nations whose forces are not balanced, between Emperor menelik and the Italian government, as well since the Italian government conducted aggression in 1928 violating the treaty, they claim that the treaty is nullified.
This is what Mr. Mesfin calls as an argument "that holds no water".
Among the elites that hold on to this idea is found Dr. Yakob Hailemariam who was following the Rwandan genocide case on an international level as a prosecutor.
Following Seyoum Mesfin, it was Prime Minister Meles Zenawi who forwarded his suggestions and responded to some of the questions that were raised.
That day, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, during the morning session just after he finished presenting his report, he was taking notes while Major Admassu Melaku made his suggestions and questions.
At times he spent time burying his head on the table "feeling bored".
When Dr. Beyene Petros forwarded his suggestions and questions, Meles was seen taking notes, but went out leaving the hall before he finished his question and suggestions.
How could he give responses for the suggestions and question he didn't hear from Dr. Beyene? What could his response be?  These were what goes in the minds of many, but the Prime Minister left the forum fully for his associates.
The aforementioned Mr. Adisu Legesse, Mr. Bereket Simon, Dr. Kasu Illala, Mr. Seyoum Mesfin took a long time and gave explanations; finally the prime Minister saying that he wanted to touch upon issues which were not treated, suggested explanations, and at times, forwarded warning-like notions; The oppositions Dr. Beyene Petros and Major Admasu Melaku were allowed together less than an hour to express their ideas and raise questions, and even this was said to be too much, and EPRDF members who filled the council and newly appointed diplomats who sat on the balcony were murmuring.
In the morning while Prime Minister Presented his report form more than an hour, and in the afternoon, when EPRDF leadership, in turn, took generally 3 hours, by themselves, up to 6 o'clock, nobody murmured.
The discussion came to an end without giving chances for oppositions to put forward their ideas on suggestions of EPRDF.
Many believe that it would have been fascinating and useful, if the discussion was held between the prime minister, or to support him, with the addition of the minister of foreign affairs, Seyoum Mesfin, and the two opposition party members, for the latter would get a chance to respond to the responses given by the former, without the inclusion of other EPRDF members.
If individuals from EPRDF became furious with only two opposition individuals, there are many who ask what would have been the case if peaceful and fair election was conducted and other leaders of opposition forces joined the council.
Let's return to the responses prime minister gave:-
Prime Minister Meles used the chance he was given and forwarded suggestions as soon as his followers finished their part; he gave responses.
"Just to touch upon issues which were not treated," was what he said as Meles Zenawi started, "we had a hope that targeted a hope that oppositions may put forward details on particular items; they may even show us detailed policy options, and this hope of ours was there because at the beginning of the year they said they take time and study and would present their optional policy.
But now they said we don't have to present our optional policy; they said our task is to oppose," and continuing his speech, Meles Zenawi said "If they don't present their optional policy and identify the points that differentiate them from EPRDF, and cooperate with what we agree, what can be done if they said our task is just to oppose," he asked.
Observers believe that Dr. Beyene and others would have come up with wide and tangible defending notions had they been given additional opportunity to defend themselves.
Observers say that if all oppositions hold power of the country, they would take up the leadership based on their programs.
When they receive power they produce detailed policy of implementation; the other side which didn't get hold of power would struggle by pinpointing this or that policy of implementation has problems with this regard; they say they have been proved practically, and failed and through such kind of debate they would struggle to amend them, which is their task.
The questions mostly raised by the members of the council were not criticizing policy options, but as they were pinpointing defects with regards to implementation, the issue shouldn't be related to presenting policy options, these observers criticized.
Regarding increment of salary, Prime Minister Meles criticized the claim "why shouldn't there be increment for pensioners; why shouldn't there be for patriots; why shouldn't there be increment for development organization workers; why shouldn't we give subsidies to all, doesn't go with finance and administration law".
Would they defeat EPRDF and control the financial institutions or?  Do they want to say it would be what should be then," he asked.
Regarding the claim the opposition raised that said it would increase the number of thieves to distribute authority down to the district and village level, he said "This is a philosophy as the saying goes of one who when he's in power should corrupt for he would regret it if he doesn't when he's in power should corrupt for he would regret it if he doesn't when he leaves office.
In our belief, authority is a tool that would change nature and social relationship, so we don't relate an issue of authority with theft; yet, we don't believe theft can't occur in the midst, they said.
With regards to the issue around defense forces Dr. Beyene raised, the question of disciplinary problem on the side of oppositions.
Earlier they didn't have friendly outlook on the defense force, but now they started being concerned; it is good," and then he first explained about the importance of the contingency force.
As the case of contingency force is not now to our country but there is in their nations, too, so we would make a study taking the experience of many countries, looking into several options; it could be countries; we'll study and make it ready in a year's time; when issues related to the law are raised, the concerned body would lead," he said.
With regards to the army's wearing problem, putting their ranks under their jackets, it's become difficult to identify the corporal from the General; the General from the major;  This is a good question; although it is not right to wear field jacket over the shirt that has the rank, the decisive actor to win in the battle field is not that, but it's good if their clothing style is rectified; it harms no one.
Efforts are made to rectify this.
But this is not crucial for preparedness of a combat; let alone wearing rank under the field jacket, EPRDF defeated Dergue without having something to wear inside the field jacket; there are difficulties over benefits; Regerding what's being assumed-the army's moral's down, well, it is difficult to give responses to questions that are raised with assumption; but the moral of the army's not down; it efficiently accomplished its duties; it will accomplish in the future, too," he enumerated.
With regards to the reduction of the army, to the question as to why we reduced to number of our soldiers while EPlF hasn't done so, "EPLF reduction or not reducing is not related to our condition; we have studied the sufficient number of soldiers to protect ourselves and reduced those who have less influence" he sail.
As to the question raised in relation to national reconciliation, "since the struggle is a struggle for democracy, there's no one that would intervene and say leave this or leave that; reconciliation means all parties along with what they agree, and continue struggling with what they don't.
National reconciliation is not being without principles.
National reconciliation is treating differences in outlook in a civilized way; Does reconciliation mean being legal and illegal and go along by mixing the two? Situation like being legal and illegal were observed; the Algiers agreement which this council approved was presented to the General Secretary UN as if it were not accepted by Ethiopian people.
Although the act of writing doesn't bring basic change, this is mistake.
It is illegal.
If the call presented to us to work with those who are in armed struggle is based on a feeling of let's operate legally as well as illegally, it is absolutely incorrect" he reminded.
How could apposing what the council approves peacefully and struggling this be illegal?  There may be observers who ask this; Observers argue that let alone the Algiers agreement, it's a right to peacefully struggle to ask for amendment of the constitution itself, while respecting the constitution.
Since the question the opposition raised states that the decision that passed at the time Ethiopian didn't get an outlet port would endanger, we don't understand why this makes people who claim to be representatives of Ethiopia angry, why don't they clearly tell us to whom they are arguing" observers are highly criticizing it.
Prime Minister Meles also gave responses to questions raised vis-à-vis corruption; is the corruption campaign on those who are dismissed from EPRDF and bank officials?
To this question, he responded, "we know this is being widely said; if we focused first on the political leadership, we then move to the next crucial stage; this doesn't mean we will carry and go with the corrupter at the district level" started Meles Zenawi, "in stead of raising a question is there no corruptor?
Let's have tangible evidence that shows there's a corrupter; simply asking is there no person involved in corruption?
With out having evidence it seems to deviate the anti-corruption struggle; it seems to impede the struggle against corruption," and continued, "it reminds one the story of the thief who was found in the midst of a market place, who called of a market place, who called another a thief and the customers were unable to identify him so that all saw one another suspiciously," It's repeatedly reported that there are among TPLF that could be mentioned by name, as well as from ANDF who refused to pay the money they borrowed from the bank, who even violated the court of law's order are still in power.
Were have you been when there was a lot of corruption going on for 10 years?
Won't the prime minister be accountable for this?
Doesn't the board have responsibility?
With regards to these questions Prime Minster started his responses, by mentioning the organization "Transparency International" and the testimony it gave about Ethiopia that she's better than any other African countries regarding corruption, "This is not, however, something we should be proud of," continued Meles Zenawi formerly, we used to sack people after evaluating them, from their work but the law has been an impediment; in the struggle we made for four tears that anti-corruption institution has been established, and the anti-corruption struggle has been in order.
Even now, we don't believe that we can wipe away corruption once and for all, but to control it, he said.
If the Prime Minister leaves his power just because corruption occurred in the country there won't be any prime minister in Ethiopia suggesting that it's not proper to ask him to leave power due to this; well the negligence not to follow up the corruption in the commercial bank to such an extent may put one politically accountable, confessing his guilt to a certain extent; but this doesn't mean a collaboration in the corruption, he said.
We have even given in our brother who bled in the struggle, trying to demonstrate his decisiveness with regards to corruption.
The 1 billion Birr that was said to go to Eritrean is a fictional story; the money didn't go from have through an order it has gone due to the trade transactions banks have with another banks," said Meles Zenawi and continued that the issue of this money hasn't been resolved.
When Eritrea changed the money she used to have to Nekfa, she wanted the Birrs that were in her bank to be exchanged by dollars; and we were not willing to exchange the money by dollars, so this issue was not resolved.
Hence, they should that this 1 billion Birr could be compensated.
It's to be understood that asking for a return of the 1 billion Birr also would bring about a problem," he reminded.
As to the question which says that he lives hiding from the people; while you're not willing to talk oppositions here, but you talk oppositions who live abroad, "I thank the AAPO representative for your advise; since there's no time it would be difficult to give suggestions," he concluded.
With regards to issue pertaining to TPLF companies taking more that 1 billion Birr from the bank with out any guarantee; not paying back the money, the prime minister of any of the other EPRDF leadership passed with out giving response.
Who have made these companies of the leadership take the money without guarantee?
Won't the individual who ordered the money to be given to these companies be accountable?
Since these organizations haven't paid off their debts as well as the interests, does the bank, just like any other business organizations, gave the right to sell their properties?
And all other basic and burning questions were not answered.
Observers say that this silence is a proof that shows TPLF organizations controlled the economy of the country by the money that was taken from the bank without any guarantee.
From Ethiop February 6, 2002
Meles is Studying to Reshuffle his Cabinet
In order to revive his government from the political loss it had recently, Prime Minister Meles Planned to reshuffle his cabinet of Ministers, it was heard.
According to the insiders, the reshuffling many include reassigning certain people to a lower rank and give them positions of state ministers and others would be sent away from the county as diplomats.
It was also told that there would be several ministers who would keep continuing as ministers.
The sources told, "The government of Meles is studying to reshuffle his second Federal government".
As an example, they mentioned the study that was done by Dr. Kassu Ilala, Minister of Infrastructure.
According to the sources, there's a plan to assign Dr. Kassu in the place of Mr. Bisrat Nigatu, Ethiopian Airlines General Manager.
Based on the structure of the new cabinet ministers, the ministry of Infrastructure is responsible for ten organizations under it;
they are Ethiopian Roads Authority, Civil Aviation Authority, Road Transport Authority, Office of Road Repair, National Gas Depo Administration, Ethiopian Postal Service organization, Ethiopian Telecommunication Agency, Ethiopian Electric Agency, and Ethiopian Electric and Light Power Authority, Ethiopian Telecommunication Corporation.
Dr. Kasu would be ejected from this position and be assigned in place of Mr. Besrat and would take the post of the former state minister of city Development Ministry, Mr. Haile Asegde, the sources disclosed.
But there's no word as to who Meles would assign after Mr. Bisrat was ejected from this national airline that's at the moment must try to make a lot of efforts to compete with other airlines.
It's not clearly known as to why it was necessary for Prime Minister Meles government to reshuffle the new cabinet which was not even 4 months since its formation.
But some political observers say that it's to receive political gain, although from the outset assigning people who are not capable and then, all of a sudden, reassigning capable ones wouldn't change as long as the key positions are held by TPLF members, the observers disclosed.
On the other hand, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Seyoum Mesfin, ordered ambassadors who have been assigned and working in different countries to come to Addis Ababa and are now under evaluation by Ethiopian Map work organization.
In this ambassador's evaluation which started on Wednesday, January 23, 2002 and was said to stay for 15 days, the number of ambassadors who were present were only 30, which made it a talking-point.
It doesn't seem healthy for Mr. Seyoum to call all ambassadors who have been disseminated all over the world, being active for the last 10 years, yet, to have only 30 of them coming back to discuss about the future foreign diplomatic strategies.
According to the disclosure of the newspaper's source, those who realized there would be reshuffling of ambassadors, remained in the county where they were assigned, asking for political refugee.
However, it declined to give, names for the moment of those ambassadors who stayed there.
Yet, promised to reveal their identity to the newspaper after some investigation has been made.
The 30 ambassadors' evaluation that's going on at the hall of Ethiopian Map works organization, is led by Mr. Seyoum Mesfin as a chairman, Mr. Girma Biru, Mr. Sufyan Ahmed, and Commissioner Yousuf Abdulahi were participants, it was reported.
It was to be recalled that one high level diplomat has deserted recently.
From Medina January 29, 2002
The Second Segment of the Axum Obelisk Arrived
The Second segment of the Axum Obelisk arrived in Axum town yesterday morning after a lot of years as a result of high diplomatic relationship and cooperation of Ethiopian and Italian government.
The member of the committee of or the Return of the Axum Obelisk, Mr. Fisseha Zebelo disclosed that the part which reached Axum town yesterday is the base of the obelisk.
The Weight of the segment which is the base of the obelisk is 58.9 ton while the length is 7.1 meters.
The Italian Ambassador for Ethiopia, Guido Latela, expressed on the occasion said that the fact that Axum obelisk returned home after 68 years in Rome would enable to grow the economic and social cooperation apart form strengthening the relationship of the two counties.
The third segment and the top most part of the obelisk is scheduled to arrive have next Monday, the ambassador disclosed.
When the second segment of the obelisk arrived in Axum, the members of the National committee for the Return of the Axum obelisk and area officials welcomed it.
When the first segment of the obelisk arrived in Axum last Tuesday more than 50 thousand residents, higher government officials and guests were present.
From Addis Zemen April 23, 2005
China is said to Construct a Railway for Eritrea
The Chinese Ambassador for Eritrea Mr. Chen Chan Fuh is said to have a talk on the ways china would engage in business construction and infrastructure.
The ways China could engage especially in Communication transport, agriculture and medicine in Eritrea would be create, the Eritrean officials disclosed.
An 11-member team led by Wang Kanshuh who came from china, Anan district, have consultation with ministry of communication and Transport, and health ministry, and started discussing ways to create better relations in the two sectors, voice of Germany reported.
The team discussed ways in which China could construct a rail way, as well as in the health sector, they discussed ways in which Eritreans could be sent to China for medical education.
In Particular, there was a special focus on Chinese traditional medicine, acupuncture, the report of the German radio disclosed.
In the mean time, Eritrea's plan to have relations with China at this time was not only for this, said military observers, that Eritrea would make special effort to get Chinese-made ammunitions, they hoped.
From Fiameta September 15, 1999
Edmund Pope tasted freedom today for the first time in more than eight months.
Pope is the American businessman who was convicted last week on spying charges and sentenced to 20 years in a Russian prison.
He denied any wrongdoing.
Russian President Vladimir Putin pardoned him for health reasons.
Pope was flown to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, Germany.
He will spend the next several days at the medical center there before he returns home with his wife Sherry.
Pope was in remission from a rare form of bone cancer when he was arrested in Russia.
Doctors will examine him for signs that the cancer may have come back while he awaiting trial in a Russian jail.
A spokeswoman said that Pope was suffering from malnutrition and high blood pressure.
2Slick pointed me to a article at In Iraq For 365.
This is a great blog and I encourage you all to read it regularly.
On Sunday he wrote of two Iraqi soldiers who didn't see us as conquerors but as allies when the Mosul bombing occurred.
The suicide bomb sprayed bb-like fragments throughout the Marez dining facility.
One piece of shrapnel sliced through the femoral artery of a U.S. soldier and his only chance for survival was in the hands of these two Iraqis.
Recalling the medical classes they'd received from the special forces, the Iraqis reacted calmly, fastening a belt above the wound, creating a tourniquet, which stopped the gushing stream of red.
They moved the soldier to a MEDVAC vehicle via two-man litter carry.
After they hoisted the soldier in the truck, the two Iraqis -- one an officer, the other an NCO -- ran back to the facility and began treating the other wounded without regard for their safety.
When the dust settled and the mess tent had been evacuated, everybody who could talk was questioned about their health.
When the medics came to the two Iraqis, the ING soldiers only wanted to know how everybody else was.
When asked why did they do it, they simply stated, "this was our duty; we are a team, and we take care of each other."
Even the Americans.
No matter what the MSM tries to tell you, there are Iraqi's who will help the allies, who will fight alongside them and put their lives at risk to make sure Democracy succeeds in their country.
This brings to mind a speech Prime Minister Tony Blair gave recently while visiting Iraq.
When I meet the people working alongside the United Nations--Iraqis in fear of their life every day, because they are trying to bring freedom and democracy to their people--when I see their courage and their determination and know that they speak for the vast majority of people in Iraq who want that democracy and freedom, then I know that we are doing the right thing.
And I will also say this to you: There are people dying in Iraq, but the reason people are dying is because of the terrorism and the intimidation and the people who are deliberately killing anyone trying to make this country better.
Now what should our response be as an international community?
Our response should be to stand alongside the democrats--the people who've got the courage to see this thing through--and help them see it through.
I've got no doubt at all that that is the right thing for us to do.
Sometimes when I see some of the reporting of what's happening in Iraq in the rest of the world, I just feel that people should understand how precious what has been created here is.
And those people from that electoral commission that I described as the heroes of the new Iraq--every day ... a lot of them aren't living in the Green Zone, they've got to travel in from outside.
They do not know at any point in time whether they're going to be subject to brutality or intimidation, even death, and yet they carry on doing it.
Now what a magnificent example of the human spirit--that's the side we should be on.
A Russian scientist has told a Moscow City court that the information an American businessman allegedly tried to purchase about a Russian torpedo is commonly available and not a state secret.
The scientist, an expert on the torpedo and a defense witness at the trial of businessman Edmond Pope said he had often used the torpedo information for his research and had spoken openly about it.
A defense lawyer said the testimony would help his client.
In 1998, the United States voted against the creation of the World's first permanent International War Crimes Court.
President Clinton still has a chance to sign the treaty creating the Court before a final deadline this Sunday.
Advocates are pressing him to do just that, but Conservatives in Congress and Pentagon officials don't want the US to join the treaty.
The World's Jeb Sharp explains why.
Jesse Helms, the Conservative and powerful Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear the Rome's statuette would be dead on arrival if it were brought to Congress for ratification.
But proponents of the permanent International Criminal Court would still like to see President Clinton at least sign the treaty before the New Year's eve deadline.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Clinton's signature would be an important symbolic gesture.
What he will accomplish is making a clear statement that the United States not only in the former Yugoslavia, not only in Rwanda, not only in Cambodia, not only in Sierra Leone, where the administration has supported efforts at justice, but worldwide the United States supports the rule of law and supports holding those accused of genocide to account under the highest standards of due process.
But the opposition here in the United States is intense.
It comes mainly from the Pentagon where US military officials fear the Court will leave Americans vulnerable to politically motivated prosecutions.
Negotiators have tried to include safeguards in the treaty to address those fears, but stop short of exempting US personnel from prosecution.
John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute shares the Pentagon's objections.
I think there is every prospect such a court and its prosecutor would be highly politicized and the principal target of a court like this might well turn out to be the United States or Israel or other countries like that.
Bolton says that almost happened at the War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague, when Chief Prosecutor Carla Delponte briefly contemplated an investigation of NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia in 1999.
But proponents of the court say it's healthy for the United States and its allies to come under the same scrutiny as other countries.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Delponte's handling of the NATO case was exemplary.
Carla Delponte was acting as any responsible prosecutor must when she receives credible allegations of wrongdoing.
She looked into those allegations and then after an appropriate investigation she dismissed them.
Richard Dicker says President Clinton should keep the promise he made to the Rwandan people in 1998 when he told survivors of the genocide there the United States would support the International Court.
But John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute says a Clinton signature in the face of stiff domestic opposition would be meaningless.
I think it's a symbolic act that doesn't achieve much, but I don't think anybody internationally should think that whatever President Clinton does will have the slightest impact on the next administration.
Despite American objections, the International Criminal Court enjoys wide support worldwide and among major US allies.
131 countries have signed the treaty, 7 today and 25 have ratified it.
60 nations in all must ratify the treaty for the International Criminal Court to come into existence.
That's expected to happen, with or without US support, in 2002.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
The skeleton of a second baby has been found at a rural Wisconsin home where a 22-year-old woman's dead infant was discovered in a blue plastic container June 8, officials said Monday.
Kristin Scott, the mother, told police she gave birth secretly to both babies at her parents' home in Byrds Creek, Richland County, one of unknown sex in April 2001 and the other, a fullterm girl, January 14.
Police arrested her in Abilene, Texas, Saturday where she had moved with a friend June 2.
She is being held on 50,000 dollars bail on a charge of first-degree reckless homicide and hiding a corpse in the death of the infant born in January.
Scott told police she did not tend to the baby, and it died after 30 minutes.
She said the baby had to die, according to the criminal complaint.
The woman's parents, William and Nancy Scott, found the decomposing body of the first baby in her closet after they went looking for the source of a foul odor in their house.
Scott told investigators she had moved that body around before she moved to Texas, sometimes in the closet at the Byrds Creek house, in the trunk of her car and in the closet of her apartment in Richland Center, the complaint said.
The sheriff released no other details about the second baby.
A retired navy officer facing life in prison over a failed effort to protect Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, told a court Thursday he felt remorse for his part in the 1999 plot.
I have a guilty conscience, Andonis Naxakis said during his two-hour testimony.
Naxakis is one of 13 people on trial for bringing the fugitive guerrilla leader to Greece.
Ocalan was moved by the government to its embassy compound in Kenya, where he was captured by Turkish commandos.
The retired Greek officer said he had been trying to get Ocalan to The Netherlands, home to a large Kurdish community.
He claimed he had been manipulated by the government.
I believe I was unwittingly used as bait for its disgraceful plan ... an organized move by the government to hand Ocalan over to Turkey,'' he said.
Naxakis and two of Ocalan's Kurdish associates are being tried on criminal charges of endangering national security.
Ocalan, being tried in absentia, was indicted for entering the country illegally, a misdemeanor.
Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, is serving a life sentence in Turkey for leading a 15-year insurgency against the country that left 37,000 people dead.
He is being tried in Greece in absentia.
Chris Matthews, that idiot talking head over at MSNBC, said yesterday about the terrorists we fought in Fallujah "a rival, I mean they're not bad guys especially, just people who just disagree with us".
this just amazes me, the complete idiocy of this waste of human sperm.
These are the same terrorists blowing up families, chopping off heads of civilians, and the complete disregard for any human life and they just disagree with us?
Tell that to the family of Margaret Hassan, the school teacher who was brutally tortured and then slaughtered by these same guys, they ain't so bad are they Chris Matthews?
This women who was known for her 30 years of work in Iraq, distributing medicine, food and supplies to Iraqis suffering under the sanctions of the 1990s.
British officials say they believe Hassan was a blindfolded woman seen being shot in the head by a hooded militant on a video obtained but not aired by the Arab television station Al-Jazeera.
She would be the first foreign woman to die in the wave of kidnappings in Iraq.
No group has claimed responsibility.
On Sunday, Marines found the mutilated body of what they believe was a Western woman on a street in Fallujah during the U.S. assault on the insurgent stronghold.
The body, clothed in what appeared to be a purple, velour dress, was wrapped in a blanket, with a blood-soaked black cloth nearby.
As of Tuesday night, the U.S. command said the body had not been identified.
These are the reasons that none of these mothereffers should ever see the light of day.
they need to be all lined up and shot.
Torturing this poor women for what?
WHAT?
And we should treat them as enemy soldiers under the Geneva Convention.
Last I remember the convention applies to countries that signed the document and the two countries must have standing armies with uniforms.
the Iraqi military is at our side, the terrorists are not.
Since when are terrorists soldiers?
They are lower then dogs.
Finally there is this written by a student of Mrs. Hassan She was my English teacher.
In the memory of my teacher and a fellow aid worker colleague Mrs. M. Hassan.
Mrs. Hassan was my English teacher in The British Council in Baghdad in Al-Wazirya district, I remember her years ago with her Irish accent telling me it's not Important how many words I must learn but the pronunciation of the words I already knew must be perfected.
Mrs. Hassan speak s perfect Arabic and she has a heart of gold, she's been killed by (men in pajamas), turn Iraq upside down and find them.
The Marines will find them, and when they do they shall die.
Apparently Yuganskneftegaz, which was sold to an independent buyer who turned out to be an apparatus of the state (yes, the same state that 1) forced Yukos to do the auction, and 2) ran the auction, not that 3) this is suspicious or anything), and which was then being bought with foreign assistance, is not being bought with foreign assistance.
As of this morning, at least.
Anyway, it looks like they're denying Chinese involvement to avoid a lawsuit , which is funny -- you'd think they might know someone in the Russian judiciary who could help them out.
Kurdish militiamen and U.S. special operations troops linked up with more than 1,000 U.S. Army paratroopers Thursday to secure the area around a strategic air strip, as the first large coalition ground force in northern Iraq began opening another front against Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade , including elite Army Rangers, jumped out of low-flying C-17 transport planes under cover of darkness Wednesday and secured a snow-dusted airfield, which will be used to bring in supplies and support personnel.
The airdrop -- one of the biggest paratroop drops in decades -- was a dramatic entry for ground troops into a region where only small groups of U.S. special forces have been operating.
Coalition airstrikes have been hitting Iraqi military forces and other strategic targets in the north.
This tightens the noose against Saddam's forces battling coalition forces to the south,'' Brig. Gen. James Parker, commander of U.S. forces in the north.
And it may also serve as a warning to Turkish forces.''
Giving cover for the deployment, U.S. warplanes struck Iraqi ground troops and bunkers in northern Iraq.
Three waves of combat planes from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt hit ``ground troops, command and control bunkers, artillery positions and ... a surface to air missile battery,'' said Lt. John Oliveira, the ship's public affair officer.
Around dawn Thursday, strikes resumed, with a massive explosion just outside the Kurdish zone close to the village of Kalak.
Warplanes pounded forward Iraqi positions in the hills overlooking Chamchamal, 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of the key oil city of Kirkuk.
Later Thursday, Kurdish troops in Chamchamal advanced their positions between government-controlled and rebel-controlled areas, taking over a Iraqi check point on their front with no fighting at this point, witnesses said.
Early Thursday, Kurdish fighters closed off a highway and roads near the airstrip where troops were said to be arriving, outside the town of Bashur, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) northeast of the Kurd-controlled city of Irbil and 30 miles (50 kilometers) south of the Turkish border.
From the highway, dusted from a recent snow, a flashing light from the airstrip's control tower was visible in the distance, and three helicopters could be seen landing, flying with nearly all their lights extinguished.
Future airlifts into the area will include supplies and support personnel for the 173rd's fighters, defense officials said.
The airfield's 6,700-foot (2,042-meter) runway is long enough to land C-17s and other U.S. military cargo planes.
Lt. Col. Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the U.S. Army's Southern European Task Force, refused to say whether the paratroopers deployed directly from Italy into Iraq or had taken a different route.
The matter immediately sparked controversy in Italy, where there is a strong anti-war movement.
The country's parliament voted this month to allow U.S.-led coalition forces to use Italian air space and military bases -- but not for directs attacks on Iraq.
Pentagon officials have said for weeks they would have U.S. forces in northern Iraq to open another front against Saddam's forces.
The vast majority of the coalition ground troops in Iraq are moving toward Baghdad from the south after entering from Kuwait.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the Army's 4th Infantry Division invade Iraq from the north, but Turkey balked at allowing up to 62,000 U.S. troops on its soil to prepare for that option.
The use of the 173rd shows the military has shifted to a smaller, lighter force.
Military officials say they would have liked to have secured key oil fields around the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk -- and perhaps the cities themselves -- by now.
Though no hostilities were expected during the deployment, the 173rd decided to parachute in rather then ferry troops in by plane so that a significant combat force could mass almost immediately to protect itself, officers said, according to a U.S. reporter traveling with the 173rd.
Kirkuk is key.
The Iraqi's want it, the Kurds want it, the Turks want it and various other ethnic groups also want it,'' Maj. Mike Hastings said.
What this drop means is that we can secure it until we are relieved by other forces.''
Besides Mosul and Kirkuk, another key target in northern Iraq is Tikrit, Saddam's hometown and the tribal center for most of his inner circle.
Most of the Adnan Division of the Republican Guard relocated from the Mosul area to the Tikrit area shortly before the war began.
Another key mission for the 173rd could be to keep order in northern Iraq, which is controlled by two semi-autonomous Kurdish factions but also includes several splinter groups and a base for the al-Qaida-linked Ansar al-Islam.
Turkey has said it may send more troops into northern Iraq to prevent refugees from moving north, while U.S. officials have said they advised Turkey against sending large additional forces into northern Iraq.
Russia's Presidential Clemency Commission is advising president Vladimir Putin to release convicted American spy Edmund Pope on humanitarian grounds.
A top Putin aide says Pope could be home by Christmas.
However, according to Russian law, Putin cannot issue a pardon any earlier than December.
Pope was convicted of espionage Wednesday in Moscow and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He suffers from a rare form of bone cancer and has asked Putin to let him return to the U.S. to receive medical care.
The summit is coinciding with more unrest in several areas of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Hundreds of stone-throwing Palestinians stormed the Israeli-controlled section of Hebron, breaking a curfew imposed since the outbreak of the unrest last month.
Witnesses said Israeli soldiers fired live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, wounding at least seven people.
Thousands of Palestinian demonstrators marched in the area to protest against a renewal of contacts with Israel.
The Navy now says it will cost about $240 million to get the "USS Cole" up and running again.
Officials originally estimated it would cost $150 million to repair the gaping hole in the ship's midsection.
But a Naval official says that does not include the cost of replacing equipment and weapons damaged in the attack carried out by suicide bombers in Yemen.
The ship is scheduled to arrive in Mississippi in about ten days.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the Middle East Thursday, demonstrating against military strikes on Iraq and calling on Muslims to wage jihad against the United States and its allies.
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority issued fierce denunciations of the US-led attacks, while the Egyptian government daily Al-Ahram warned it marked "the beginning an era of US colonisation that will benefit only Israel".
Protests against the action aimed at toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein were held in cities across Libya, Egypt and Lebanon, as well as in Amman, Damascus and the Gaza Strip.
However, there were no reports of protests against the war from the Gulf states, many of whom are host to US military personnel.
Saudi Arabia, however, expressed its "deep concern" and regret over the start of US military operations.
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal spoke of the "kingdom's hope for a quick halt in military action and for the return to peaceful efforts", the state SPA news agency reported.
In Riyadh's first reaction to the start of the against, he also called for Iraq's "unity, internal security and territorial integrity" to be preserved and rejected military occupation.
Lebanese President Emile Lahoud, meanwhile, was more forthright, strongly denouncing Washington's "aggression" and warning that it could have repercussions beyond the borders of the pariah state.
We have warned against the marginalisation of the United Nations and we see this aggression today plunging the world into a tunnel where one cannot see the end," he said in a statement.
For these reasons, we judge that it is necessary that the forces of peace and those who believe in right and justice take the necessary and rapid steps to halt this dangerous slide into war against Iraq which will result in heavy human and material losses."
The Palestinian Authority also condemned Thursday's early morning missile strikes on Iraq, and warned Israel not to exploit the conflict.
We Palestinians are against the war and we totally condemn this war in the Middle East.
A solution must be found to this problem through diplomatic means, with the international community," local authorities minister Saeb Erakat said.
We are warning Israel not to exploit this war against Iraq to carry out more attacks against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and destroy the Palestinian Authority and the peace process," he said.
The radical Palestinian movement Islamic Jihad warned that the war against Iraq is a war against the whole region", while Hamas issued a chilling warning against those taking part in the war against Iraq.
The aggression by the vile Americans and the war against Iraq signifies a war against all Arabs and Muslims around the world," said Hamas senior official Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi.
The war shows the impotence of all Arab states.
We call on all Arab states to act immediately to defend Iraq and counter the US war," he said.
I don't think America will win this war, as our jihad (holy war) and our resistance will teach the Americans and British a lesson they will never forget," he said.
State radio in Syria accused the United States and its allies of wanting to get their "hands on Iraq's oil and wealth and impose their hegemony on the world".
In the Egyptian capital, 10 demonstrators and at least four policeman were injured in clashes after several thousand demonstrators took to the streets near the US and British embassies.
Riot police intervened after the protestors, who included hundreds of students from the American University in Cairo, rallied on the city's central Tahrir Square, close to both the university campus and the US embassy.
More than 1,000 people also gathered at Cairo's Al-Azhar Islamic University, where they burned an American flag and demanded the expulsion of the ambassadors of the United States, Britain, Spain and Israel.
Demonstrations also took place in the northern Egyptian cities of Alexandria, Tanta and Kafr el-Sheikh.
In Amman, three protestors were hospitalised after some 500 Jordanian lawyers staged a sit-in at the main court house after being forcibly blocked by riot police from marching towards the Iraqi embassy to show their solidarity.
In Lebanon, hundreds of students gathered on the campuses of the Arab University of Beirut and the American University of Beirut calling for the assassination of US President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
South of the capital in Sidon, some 1,500 schoolboys denounced "the Bush assassin" and the "silence of the Arab leaders who sold out Iraq".
It's now been almost two months since the worst terror attack on a U.S. Navy ship, the destroyer "Cole," and tonight, sources tell NBC News that an American Muslim militant, a prime suspect in planning the attack, is now in custody in Jordan.
His name is Jaed Hijazi, and NBC News has learned he's got direct high-level ties to the terrorist Osama bin Laden.
He's reportedly told U.S. investigators of additional plans, to attack U.S. military aircraft in the Persian Gulf and Middle East.
A U.S.-sponsored forum that brought Iraqi opposition leaders together to shape the country's postwar government began Tuesday with a U.S. promise not to rule Iraq and concluded with an agreement to meet again in 10 days.
Meeting in the biblical birthplace of the prophet Abraham, delegates from Iraq's many factions discussed the role of religion in the future government and ways to rebuild the country.
But some Shiite Muslim groups boycotted the meeting and thousands protested nearby.
A 13-point statement released after the meeting stressed the need to work toward a democratic Iraq built on the rule of law and equality.
It also called for dissolving Saddam's Baath Party but left open the question of separating church from the state.
Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner, who will head the U.S.-led interim administration in Iraq, opened the conference under a golden-colored tent in the shadows of the 4,000-year-old ziggurat at Ur, a terraced temple platform of the ancient Sumerians.
What better birthday can a man have than to begin it not only where civilization began but where a free Iraq and a democratic Iraq will begin today?'' said Garner, who turned 65 Tuesday and wore a twin American and Iraqi flag pin on his blue shirt.
White House envoy Zalmay Khalilzad told delegates that the United States has ``no interest, absolutely no interest, in ruling Iraq.''
We want you to establish your own democratic system based on Iraqi traditions and values,'' Khalilzad said.
I urge you to take this opportunity to cooperate with each other.''
Participants included Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites from inside the country and others who spent years in exile.
U.S. officials invited the groups, which picked their own representatives.
Many Iraqis boycotted the meeting in opposition to U.S. plans to install Garner atop an interim administration.
Thousands of Shiites -- who constitute Iraq's most populous religious group but were repressed under Saddam Hussein -- demonstrated in nearby Nasiriyah, chanting ``No to America and no to Saddam!''
Iraq needs an Iraqi interim government.
Anything other than this tramples the rights of the Iraqi people and will be a return to the era of colonization,'' said Abdul Aziz Hakim, a leader of the largest Iraqi Shiite group, the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
U.S. officials hope more Iraqis join the process and stressed that this was just the first of many such meetings in Iraq.
The meeting concluded with the delegates voting by show of hands to meet again in 10 days.
A national conference is planned to select the interim administration, perhaps within weeks, a senior U.S. official said on condition of anonymity.
The interim administration could begin handing power back to Iraqi officials within three to six months, but forming a government will take longer, said Maj. Gen. Tim Cross, the top British member of Garner's team.
One has to go through the process of building from the bottom up, allowing the leadership to establish itself, and then the election process to go through and so forth,'' Cross said.
That full electoral process may well take longer.''
Garner's Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance is charged with coordinating humanitarian assistance, rebuilding infrastructure shattered by years of war and U.N. sanctions, and gradually handing back power to Iraqis leading a democratically elected government.
Tuesday's meeting was the first step toward that goal after the ouster of Saddam.
Sheik Ayad Jamal Al Din, a Shiite religious leader from Nasiriyah, urged the delegates to craft a secular government, according to a pool report.
But Nassar Hussein Musawi, a schoolteacher, disagreed: ``Those who would like to separate religion from the state are simply dreaming,'' he said.
Iraqi exile Hatem Mukhliss quoted President John F. Kennedy's exhortation, ``Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,'' and called on Iraqis to write a constitution, establish a legal system and consider what role the army should play.
He asked coalition representatives to address problems of security, electricity and water in Iraq and help rebuild destroyed and looted hospitals.
Saddam reduced the country to such a state that it was necessary for people to sell off personal possessions,'' Mukhliss said.
Now it's time to take our country back.''
There are already tensions between the United States and some Iraqi factions.
Kurdish groups appear unwilling to compromise on their demand to expand the border of their autonomous area to include the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and Kurdish parts of the city of Mosul.
That could pose a problem for the United States, because Turkey worries that Kurdish control of Kirkuk could lead to aspirations for independence and in turn encourage separatist Kurds in Turkey.
Iraqi opposition leaders fear the United States is trying to force Ahmed Chalabi, head of the London-based umbrella Iraqi National Congress, on them as leader of a new Iraqi administration.
Chalabi was the first top Iraqi opposition leader to be airlifted by the U.S. military into southern Iraq as the fighting wound down, and he and other top members of his group plan to meet soon in Baghdad.
U.S. officials said Chalabi was brought in because he offered forces to the coalition.
Neither Chalabi nor many other leaders of anti-Saddam groups attended Tuesday's meeting, but they sent delegates.
Iraqis protesting the conference said it did not represent their interests.
The protesters held banners written in English and Arabic saying the ``Hawza,'' or the Shiite religious seminary in Najaf, represents them.
Even some of those at the meeting said they did not want Garner leading the interim administration.
We will press for any Iraqi civilian administration regardless of what the Americans say.
An administration by Garner is not acceptable,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an Iraqi physician and opposition activist.
He said American officials have outlined what Garner's administration would look like: Each ministry would be headed by an American, either military or civilian.
Each minister would have two American deputies and eight American advisers, plus four Iraqi advisers from inside the country and four Iraqi exiles.
Associated Press writer Patrick McDowell in Kuwait City contributed to this report.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri, the first Iraqi official to concede defeat in the U.S.-led war, met privately with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but refused to talk about rumors that he was planning to leave New York.
I am sorry, he said.
No Answer.
No comment at all.
This is my last word to you,'' he told hordes of journalists who chased him Thursday at his New York residence and U.N. headquarters seeking comment on his talks with the secretary-general, his future and the war.
Asked who should govern Iraq, Al-Douri said: ``I have nothing to do with that.''
Annan also declined to comment on Thursday's meeting with Al-Douri.
With the fall of Baghdad Wednesday, Al-Douri declared ``the game is over'' and expressed hope that the Iraqi people will now be able to live in peace.
He said he had not been in touch with Baghdad.
Beside meeting with Annan, Al-Douri spent several hours during the late morning and afternoon meeting with ambassadors and diplomats in the Delegate's Lounge.
I wished him good luck but I don't know what he said to the secretary-general and what will be his next steps,'' said Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, who talked with Al-Douri before his own meeting with Annan.
In an interview with The Associated Press Wednesday night, Al-Douri said he will continue to work at the United Nations and had no intention of defecting.
Defecting from who?'' he asked.
I think the government has already defected.
There is no more Iraqi government to be defected from.
Annan said early Thursday before meeting Al-Douri that in talks with the envoy Monday, ``he didn't ask for an asylum or protection ... (and) he didn't ask me for help with his status.''
``We did talk about what happens, depending on the evolution of things on the ground,'' Annan said.
The ambassador had vehemently defended his country for months as the United States and its allies sought U.N. backing for war on Iraq.
Privately, many U.N. diplomats see him as a respectable colleague.
I sympathize with his need to create a new life for himself, said Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.
Al-Douri taught international law at Baghdad University for over 30 years before becoming a diplomat in 1999, first at the United Nations in Geneva and since early 2001 at U.N. headquarters in New York.
He said in the AP interview he would love to return to teaching but for now he plans to remain at the United Nations.
Things will be crystalized one day,he said.
What I worried about is that things are settled in the country so in the future the Iraqi people will live in peace without sanctions, without wars, without suffering.
This is my message.
Separately, lawyers who claim that Iraq helped plan the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people asked a judge at a federal court in New York to force Al-Douri to testify in the case and hold the envoy in contempt, saying they worry that he would flee the country.
But U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Al-Douri still has diplomatic immunity as Iraq's ambassador.
Under U.N. rules, a new Iraqi government would have to ask to represent the country, which the General Assembly would then consider.
He is still Iraq's ambassador at the United Nations,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said in Washington.
Legally, that is the way it works at the U.N.''
Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, which represent 14 survivors and victims' relatives who have filed a $1.5 billion federal lawsuit against Iraq in Washington, said his organization had served a subpoena on Al-Douri twice, on March 26 and March 28, but said he has not responded.
U.S. District Judge John S. Martin did not immediately rule but scheduled a hearing for next week.
The April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building was the deadliest terrorist strike on American soil at the time.
The suit claims Iraqi officials provided money and training to convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh and conspirator Terry Nichols.
McVeigh was executed in 2001, and Nichols is serving a life sentence.
In Moscow, today there was a dramatic plot twist in a real life courtroom drama.
A lawyer for US spy suspect, Edmond Pope said that the main prosecution witness has retracted his testimony.
According to Pope's attorney the witness said he provided the evidence under pressure from the Russian Secret Service.
Ever since Pope was arrested 7 months ago, the American businessmen has denied charges that he was gathering secret information on a new high-speed Russian torpedo.
The World's Nenad Sebek is following the trial in Moscow.
Nenad, go back and tell us just how we got here.
Who is Edwin Pope and why is he on trial in Russia.
Well, Edwin Pope is a retired American intelligence officer and that's sort of speaks against him when it comes to the Russian public and certainly the Russian court.
He has claimed that he is now just an innocent businessman, who was dealing with the Russian businesses orbit in the Defense Industry.
He has, however, claimed that he is only dealing with the de-classified military material and that when it comes to these torpedoes that we are talking about, that he was buying an underwater propulsion system, which is 10-years old.
What the Russian prosecution is claiming is that Pope was actually after ultramodern secret high-speed Russian torpedoes.
Okay, so tell us what happened in the trial this morning and bring in this professor from one of Moscow's elite universities who is a key witness.
The big news of today was that Pope's attorney distributed to journalists this morning a letter, which he says was written by Anatoly Babkin, who is a Professor at Moscow's Bauman Technical Institute, who until now was considered to be the main witness for the prosecution.
He says that he gave that evidence under pressure having had a grave heart condition proceeding a heart attack.
Professor Babkin says that he never actually met Edwin Pope face to face, nor has he given him any kind of sensitive information, therefore, his former testimony is to be considered as not corresponding to reality says this letter by Professor Babkin.
However, the court today again, this is what we were told by Pope's lawyer, has decided not to accept this change in testimony.
The court said that Professor Babkin had ample opportunities to appear in the court.
What is not clear at this moment is that whether it will allow a personal appearance by Professor Babkin, in which he could sort of say what he said in this letter.
Then I would assume that the Professor is still ailing.
I mean, is he able to take the stand, is there any indication that he will be asked to.
No he is not able to take the stand at the moment.
He is recuperating after a heart attack, but Pope's lawyer has said that court session could actually take place in the apartment of Professor Babkin.
We still have to wait and see whether the court will accept that.
So how important is this evidence.
I mean how pivotal a figure is he.
Is he providing evidence of no one else can.
Well.
From what we have heard so far, this is supposed to be like a key witness, a very important witness, but then the first reaction came from the FSB, the Federal Security Bureau, which is the former KGB, they are the ones who are prosecuting Pope.
Their spokesman said today that their evidence is far from being based only on Babkin's testimony.
He said that FSB has evidence given by other witnesses and experts, as well as, written documents and videos.
This is not, what would know as a standards of American style trial certainly, first of all of the proceedings are conducted entirely in secret.
What is the defense attorney for Edmond Pope saying about the conduct in the trial.
Well.
He is very unhappy with the main judge.
Pope is not being tried by Jury.
He has been tried by panel of judges headed by judge Nina Barkova and what we have heard from the defense attorney Pavel Astakhov is that she has rejected almost every single one of over 40 objections and suggestions that he has so far submitted during the case.
He is very unhappy with the way she has been conducting the whole case and also with the fact that she has denied Edmund Pope the proper medical attention that he has asked for.
And what has like that it happened should Edmond Pope get convicted.
Would he actually serve time.
Well.
Most of the people I have spoken here believe that that would not be the case, that since the case is already being brought to court that he is most likely to get convicted, but will then afterwards be pardoned either by the president or the parliament, and then sent back home for reasons of ill health, but most people here do expect a conviction at the end of this trial.
It was Nenad Sebek in Moscow talking to us about the espionage trial in Moscow of American Edmond Pope.
Thank you very much Nenad.
You are welcome Lisa.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair arrives in Russia today for talks with Vladimir Putin on security, foreign policy, and economic issues.
They are also expected to discuss a new Russian proposal for deep cuts in US and Russian long-range missiles.
VOA's Larry James in Moscow.
The highlight of the one-day visit will be three hours of talks on Tuesday, during which Mr. Blair and Mr. Putin will focus on a wide range of issues including Russia's latest call for cutting the number of strategic nuclear warheads to below 1500.
President Clinton has said such a deal is possible, but that it will be first necessary to convince Moscow of the merits of America's proposed Missile Defense System.
The US wants to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty so it can develop such a system.
Russia believes such a move could spark a new arms race and has threatened to tear up existing weapons agreements and stop disarmament talks if the United States goes ahead.
On Sunday Mr. Putin called on the Russian parliament to quickly ratify the amended Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.
That treaty requires Russia to make further non-nuclear weapons reductions in some areas of the country including breakaway Chechnya.
President Putin acknowledged that Russia is still violating its commitment in Chechnya, but he said it is only a temporary situation which has the ultimate aim of cutting armaments in the region.
He also thanked the 29 other signatories to the treaty for their understanding.
He said Russia is fully behind the agreement that, he said, is an efficient instrument of ensuring security in Europe for years to come.
The original treaty was signed in 1990 and led to the destruction of thousands of heavy weapons by NATO and the former Warsaw Pact.
Tony Blair became the first western leader to come to Russia to meet the new President last March even before Mr. Putin was elected.
The Russian leader returned the favor by making London one of his first foreign destinations after taking office.
The two have already met four times this year.
Analysts here in Moscow believe Britain can play a useful role as a bridge to both Europe and the United States.
Trade is also expected to figure significantly in the talks.
Britain ranks as the third largest investor after the United States and Germany with just slightly more than $1 billion invested in Russia.
Larry James, VOA News, Moscow.
Missouri residents remembered Governor Mel Carnahan today.
He died Monday night in a plane crash while campaigning for the Senate.
Thousands attended a ceremony at the Missouri State capital.
President and Mrs. Clinton were among the mourners.
Apparently Carly made a lot of journalistic enemies during her six hears at HP.
Not only was the catalyst for her fall from grace a Fortune article by Carol Loomis (who as far as I know is immortal -- she's been writing for Fortune since 1954), but the anti-Carly brigades are out in full force at Salon.com.
This is getting a little harsh; she might have messed up at HP (I refuse to call it by the new name, for now), but she wasn't actively trying to destroy a great company and wreck the shareholders.
It just, well, happened.
So, right, Carly was a bad manager, and she eventually got what she deserved, but she isn't evil incarnate.
Five of the U.S. sailors killed in the attack on the destroyer "USS Cole" are now home.
A military transport plane brought the flag-draped caskets from Germany where they were taken yesterday.
An honor guard removed them to a hangar at Dover Air Force base for a short memorial service for close family members.
They requested privacy for today's proceedings.
The bodies of two other sailors recovered from the ship are in Bahrain and will be returned later.
A note from a doomed sailor raises new questions about Russian efforts to save the crew of the submarine "Kursk..
The note was found in the pocket of a sailor whose body was recovered yesterday.
It was written after explosions sent the "Kursk" to the bottom of the sea.
It confirms 23 sailors survived.
For days, teams tried without success to open the escape hatch.
It was pried open by divers from Norway who found no one left alive.
Relatives have complained some sailors might have been rescued had Russia sought help immediately.
The widow of the sailor who wrote the note wept today as she was interviewed on Russian television.
I came here after I heard the official announcement on TV.
I love him very much.
I want to see him and I want to read his letter.
While the cause of the "Kursk" disaster remains unknown, Russian officials say the sub may have collided with a World War II mine or there may have been an internal malfunction.
A woman whose husband was killed in last month's crash of a Singapore Airlines plane has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the carrier.
Investigators say the Boeing 747 hit a barrier and a crane on the runway and exploded during takeoff.
82 people were killed.
The lawsuit filed in Federal court says negligence and reckless misconduct contributed to the crash.
A spokesman for Singapore Airlines declined to comment.
Thanks to Captain Ed for bringing this up.
Apparently James Baker, former Secretary of State and current envoy for the Bush Administration, has asked the Isreali government to release a scumbag terrorist to promote "peace".
There is now ... in an Israeli prison a man named Marwan Barghouti, who is one of the young guard of Palestinians, and if the Palestinians are going to make this work against the really hard-line elements, the Islamists and some of the people of Hamas, they're going to have to have a coalition of the young guard and the old guard.
Gotta say that this shocked me, I've always thought Mr. Baker was a upstanding guy but this is just plain good old fashioned bullcrap.
Here are some of the fine achievements of the terrorist Marwan Barghouti Marwan Barghouti (born June 6, 1958) is a Palestinian leader from the West Bank and a leader of the Fatah movement that forms the backbone of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
On June 6, 2004, he was sentenced to five life sentences for five murders of Israeli civilians and 40 years imprisonment for attempted murders in terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians.
Barghouti was one of the major leaders of the First Intifada in 1987, leading Palestinians in a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of the West Bank.
During the uprising, he was arrested by Israel and deported to Jordan, where he stayed for seven years until he was permitted to return under the terms of the Oslo Accords in 1994.
In 1996, he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council, in which he advocated peace with Israel, sometimes coming in conflict with Yasser Arafat.
The formal position occupied by Barghouti was the General Secretary of Fatah in the West Bank.
By the summer of 2000, Barghouti and Arafat had grown increasingly at odds with each other, with Barghouti accusing Arafat's administration of corruption and his security services of human rights violations, and Arafat was planning to fire him shortly.
However, as the Second Intifada began, Barghouti became increasingly popular as a leader of the Fatah Tanzim militia.
This was perhaps due to the transformation of Tanzim into an organization more resembling militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, responsible for dozens of civilian deaths in drive-by shootings.
Under Barghouti, the Tanzim has also carried out suicide bombings in Israel under the name al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.
What is he thinking?
Release a known terrorist to run the PLO and that will bring about peace, give me a effin break.
</DOC>The following a grim story out of Russia tonight where there's proof some of the sailors on board that Russian nuclear submarine the Kursk initially survived the explosion that sank the sub, only to be trapped later.
One of the sailors wrote a letter during those terrible final hours.
Today, 10 weeks after a mysterious accident sent the Kursk to the bottom of the Barents sea, a grisly discovery.
In the pocket of one of the crew, a handwritten note, dying words of a sailor trapped alive in the sunken sub.
He is this lieutenant captain, seen here three years ago aboard the Kursk.
His last words tell a chilling tail -- tale of a desperate but future ill attempt to escape.
It now appears 23 survived -- survived the initial explosion.
The 23 frantically scrambled to the rear of the sub.
They find the escape hatch flooded and seal themselves in compartment nine.
Realizing he will die, he begins to write.
He addressed the letter to his wife, Olga.
He is my dear, dear beloved.
I want to see him again, read his letter.
The chilling account raises new questions and criticisms of the Russian navy, which waited several days before attempting to launch any rescue missio.
But navy officials here at the Pentagon say any rescue attempt would have failed, that there really was no hope for the 23 survivors.
It's believed they would have frozen to death in hours, long before they ran out of air.
That may be little consolation for the families.
NBC News correspondent Jim Miklaszweski, the pentagon.
Program note here.
Coming up tonight at 10:00 p.m. eastern, a closer look at the Kursk and similar disasters that have taken place at sea.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasia said Tuesday that the U.S. government won't be involved in choosing subcontractors for American companies named to help rebuild Iraq.
``The way it works is that there have been an initial set of contracts let to US companies, since it's U.S. money.
Those companies can subcontract to any company they want,'' Elizabeth Jones said.
She made the statements after a meeting with the speaker of the Portuguese parliament, Joao Mota Amaral.
``The U.S. government has done what it is going to do: it has opened up the process to international companies.
We can't direct commerce,'' Jones said.
``Once it's a commercial proposition, then international bidding processes come into effect.''
Jones met with Defense Minister Paulo Portas on Tuesday and will meet Foreign Minister Antonio Martins da Cruz before leaving Portugal Wednesday.
About 50 Portuguese companies - mostly in the construction sector -- are applying for subcontracts to help rebuild Iraq, Portuguese media reported.
Many are hoping to reap benefits from Portuguese government support of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein.
Also, Portugal hosted a last ditch pre-war summit in the Azores islands for leaders of the United States, Britain and Spain.
Thousands of fresh US troops headed for Iraq Thursday as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and US President George W. Bush discussed the effort to oust Saddam Hussein, which some senior US military officials warn could last months.
About 1,000 soldiers from the US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into an airfield in a Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq, establishing a base through which to bring in more troops and tanks, Pentagon officials said.
And some 12,000 soldiers from the US Army's 4th Infantry Division, which was supposed to have gone into northern Iraq through Turkey, began flying out of Fort Hood, Texas, Thursday to the region, a military fort spokeswoman told AFP.
The soldiers are to meet up with ships transporting their equipment, which is arriving in Kuwait from the Mediterranean, where it had been idling for weeks on navy ships awaiting Turkey's decision.
The war in Iraq could last months and require considerable US military reinforcements to assure a victory, the Washington Post reported Thursday, quoting senior US military officials.
Sandstorms, dangerously long supply lines and a recalcitrant enemy "has led to abroad reassessment by some top generals of US military expectations and timelines," the Post reports.
"Tell me how this ends," one senior officer asked the Post.
Most US army commanders believe it is critical to pause the breakneck advance towards Baghdad to secure the supply lines and make sure weapons are operable and troops resupplied after days of powerful sandstorms and damage inflicted by Iraqi attacks, the Post reports.
The Post also quoted Central Intelligence Agency and Pentagon intelligence analysts complaining that Bush officials largely ignored their warning that Iraqi irregular forces would use guerrilla tactics and offer significant resistance.
Publicly US officials have insisted that the war is going according to plan, and the most advanced US forces are currently some 100 kilometers (60 miles) outside of Baghdad.
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed worries that there were insufficient forces in the Gulf region if the battle for Baghdad goes wrong.
After briefing US senators on the war, Rumsfeld told reporters that the number of forces "has been increasing and it will continue to do so until it is finished."
Meanwhile Blair arrived in Washington late Wednesday for two days of talks with Bush at the Camp David presidential retreat.
Talks were to focus on how to run a post-Saddam Iraq, with Washington resisting a large United Nations role.
Blair faces an uphill battle to win Bush over to giving the UN oversight of a post-Saddam administration, as Washington officials are still angry at Germany, Russia, and especially France, over the failure to secure UN Security Council approval for military action.
Blair and Bush were to hold a joint press conference at 1600 GMT Thursday.
Britain has deployed some 45,000 troops to fight with the more than 250,000 US soldiers lined up against Iraqi troops.
Bush gave a new, stronger warning that the war could become drawn out.
"As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime," Bush told cheering military personnel Wednesday at the Florida headquarters of Central Command, which is running the campaign.
"We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you -- and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq -- there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near," he said.
At the last minute, Bush withdrew a phrase in his speech saying the campaign was "ahead of schedule."
A senior administration official said the president had decided to be cautious.
Bush pointedly paid tribute to the 48-nation "coalition of the willing" -- particularly Britain -- that is publicly backing the campaign.
Separately, US Secretary of State Colin Powell emphasized US determination to pursue the military campaign despite the diplomatic pressure Washington faces at the United Nations.
"We are interested in concluding this conflict, not having a pause right now or stopping right now, but concluding this as quickly as possible so we can get on with the rebuilding of Iraq and putting in place a better system of governance," Powell said in an interview with the Al-Jazeera Arab television network.
Powell, the most moderate member of the Bush cabinet, said he fully agreed with the president's policy on Iraq and had no plans to leave.
"Personally, I'm very much in sync with the president and he values my services," he said in an interview with National Public Radio.
Meanwhile the Wall Street Journal reported that several British and US oil companies have quietly advised US and British forces on how oil fields operate so they could safeguard the fields in Iraq.
The companies, including Britain's BP PLC and the Texas-based Boots and Coots International Well Control Inc., were not paid for their consultations, but allied military engineers said their advice was critical.
The damaged "USS Cole" comes home today.
It's due to arrive in Pascagoula, Mississippi, this morning.
The destroyer was christened there five years ago.
Repairs are expected to cost about $240 million.
Yemeni and U.S. authorities are still investigating the October bombing.
17 sailors were killed.
Yemen's Prime Minister says at least three Yemenis will go on trial next month in connection with the attack.
They're suspected of belonging to an international terrorist network.
Hardly a day passes without news photos of the police dragging limp protesters from some building or thoroughfare in one of our cities.
Of recent note are the activities of the pro- and anti-abortionists, anti-nuclear activists, animal rights protesters, college students concerned about racism, anti-apartheid groups, various self-styled "environmentalists" and those dissatisfied with the pace of the war against AIDS.
Maybe he didn't start it, but Mohandas Gandhi certainly provided a recognizable beginning to non-violent civil disobedience as we know it today.
The Mahatma, or "great souled one," instigated several campaigns of passive resistance against the British government in India.
Unfortunately, according to Webster's Biographical Dictionary, "His policies went beyond his control and resulted . . . in riots and disturbances" and later a renewed campaign of civil disobedience "resulted in rioting and a second imprisonment..
I am not a proponent of everything Gandhi did, but some of his law breaking was justified because India was then under occupation by a foreign power, and Indians were not able to participate fully in decisions that vitally affected them.
It is difficult, however, to justify civil disobedience, non-violent or not, where citizens have full recourse to the ballot box to effect change.
Where truly representative governments are safeguarded by constitutional protections of human rights and an independent judiciary to construe those rights, there is no excuse for breaking the law because some individual or group disagrees with it.
There may be a few cases where the law breaking is well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of others that it is difficult to criticize it.
The case of Rosa Parks, the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes to mind as an illustration.
But most cases of non-violent civil disobedience are not nearly so benign.
The public has a tendency to equate lawful demonstrations with non-violent civil disobedience.
It is true that both are non-violent, but there is a fundamental difference between them.
Lawful demonstrations, such as peaceful picketing and other assemblages that do not disturb the peace or cause a public nuisance or interfere with the rights of others, are rights guaranteed by any truly free system of government.
Civil disobedience, violent or non-violent, is intentional law breaking.
The subject of this discussion is non-violent civil disobedience; but, before we get on with that, let me make just a few tangential remarks about lawful demonstrations.
They are useful to call public attention to grievances, but they have little value in educating anyone about the issues in dispute.
The delight of television in dramatic confrontation encourages overuse of slogans chanted through bullhorns, militant gestures, accusatory signs and other emotionally inspired tactics.
Civilized discourse and an environment where compromise can begin are lost in a hostile posture abetted by superficial media interviews.
At best, demonstrations are overused and boringly uninformative; at worst, they can become the stimuli that lead to law breaking.
Demonstrations are particularly apt to degenerate into criminal conduct when they leave the site of the grievance and become mobile.
Petty criminals and street people looking for excitement attach themselves like remora to the fringes of the crowd and use the protest as an excuse for rock throwing, auto trashing, arson, window breaking, looting, pocket picking and general hooliganism.
Soon the whole purpose of the demonstration is lost in mob mania.
There are better ways to promote a cause.
Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to justify.
Some find no harm in the misdemeanors of trespass, minor property destruction, blocking traffic and the like.
They say these are small prices to pay for galvanizing action for the all-important cause.
The crimes may appear small, but the prices can be huge.
Here are two cases to illustrate.
Assume a neighborhood demonstration to protest speeding on a certain road or a careless accident involving a police car.
The protesters lie down in the street, blocking traffic, and will not move until the authorities carry them away.
Assume that someone caught in the jam has a heart attack.
There is no way to get an ambulance in quickly to move him to a hospital.
He dies.
The demonstration was non-violent and involved only a simple misdemeanor, but its impact on that individual was violent and terminal.
Assume that a TV network is airing a celebrity interview program with a live audience.
The politician appearing is highly controversial and has recently generated a good deal of rancor amid certain groups.
In a planned protest against his appearance, several members of the studio audience chain themselves in front of the TV cameras in such a way that the program cannot continue.
The network must refund money to the advertisers and loses considerable revenue and prestige.
The demonstrators have been non-violent, but the result of their trespasses has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their dispute.
It might be alleged that TV has done more than its share to popularize and promote non-violent civil disobedience, so the second situation hypothesized above would be simply a case of "chickens coming home to roost..
Or maybe the TV network would lose nothing.
Geraldo or Phil would probably pull up another camera and interview the chained protesters.
Let us look for a moment at another type of non-violent civil disobedience that only harms other people indirectly, yet does irreparable damage to the nation as a whole.
I am referring to those young men who chose to disobey their country's call to arms during the Vietnam war and fled to Canada or some other sanctuary to avoid combat.
Their cowardly acts of civil disobedience, which they tried to hide under the cloak of outrage at a war they characterized as "immoral," weakened the national fabric and threw additional burdens on those who served honorably in that conflict.
Even more at fault are those leaders in and out of government who urged and supported their defections, thereby giving great help and comfort to the enemy propagandists.
It is amazing that the ensuing mass executions in Vietnam and Cambodia do not weight more heavily on minds so morally fine-tuned.
Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought and died in Vietnam.
Under the guise of "healing the wounds of the nation," President Carter pardoned thousands of draft evaders, thus giving dignity to their allegations of the war's "immorality..
The precedent having been set, who can complain if future generations called upon to defend the U.S. yield to the temptation to avoid the danger of combat by simply declaring the war immoral and hiding until it is over.
Finally, I think it important to point out the extraordinarily high visibility of non-violent civil disobedience in these days of intensive media coverage.
Give television a chance to cover live any breaking of the law, and no second invitation will be required.
This brings into question the motives of those who lead civil disobedience demonstrations.
Do they want the spotlight for themselves or for their cause.
Here is a good rule of thumb: If the movement produced the leader, the chance that he is sincere is much greater than if the leader produced the movement.
In either case, ask yourself whether you have become better informed on the issues under protest by watching the act of civil disobedience.
If you have not, it is probable that a thorough airing of the dispute by calm and rational debate would have been the better course.
Mr. Agnew was vice president of the U.S. from 1969 until he resigned in 1973.
From the Associated Press : A baby girl who had been cut out of her mother's womb was found after a frantic search, and authorities arrested the woman they say strangled the mother and stole the child.
The baby was in good condition Saturday.
Lisa M. Montgomery, 36, of Melvern, Kan., was arrested later Friday and charged with kidnapping resulting in death.
Bobbie Jo Stinnett, 23, was found Thursday in a pool of blood inside her small white home in Skidmore, a town in northwest Missouri.
Stinnett, who was eight months pregnant, had earlier been talking with her mother on the phone, and hung up saying a woman she had chatted with online had just arrived at her door, authorities said.
U.S. Attorney Todd Graves said Montgomery contacted Stinnett through an online message board, and authorities zeroed in on her using computer forensics.
Montgomery was seeking to buy a dog from Stinnett, who raised rat terriers, he said.
According to the criminal complaint, Montgomery traveled about 40 miles to Topeka, Kan., on Thursday to go shopping.
Her husband received a call from her saying she had gone into labor and given birth.
The next day, authorities say, Montgomery confessed that she strangled Stinnett from behind, cut her open, removed the baby and cut her umbilical cord.
I don't understand how we can call this fetus-thing that was ripped from a mother's womb a "child" or "girl" in a society that sanctions partial-birth abortion.
If you can't charge someone for killing a fetus via abortion during the eighth month, then surely you can't make a big deal about a woman who kidnapped a fetus that survived the knifing.
On a less-sarcastic note, I pray for the family of the 23-year-old woman.
No one should have to die because some crazy nut wanted a child and decided to kill for it.
If there's any good news in this story, it's that Victoria Jo will live on and carry her mother's memory.
Question for the pro-choicers: Being that it isn't yet the ninth month, can we still charge the killer with kidnapping?
The United States and Britain are preparing a resolution that would give the United Nations a role in humanitarian relief but not peacekeeping in Iraq, a senior official in U.S. President George W. Bush's administration said Friday.
Separately, the United States has decided to divide the military and humanitarian relief mission in Iraq into three parts under American, British and Polish command, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Six European countries have agreed to contribute troops to the British and Polish sectors to create an international stability force, the official said.
The draft resolution would limit the U.N. role to helping with refugees and displaced people, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance, the official said.
The United States and Britain agree on all but a few of the fine details of the resolution, the official said, though there is no timetable on when it would be introduced.
U.N. officials are already in Iraq providing humanitarian relief.
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan said this week that the body has no interest in policing a postwar Iraq, although it could contribute to the political resuscitation of the country.
``Take the question of security.
I don't think the U.N. would want to take on that,'' Annan said.
``There has been a suggestion that the U.N. wanted to take over the whole Iraq and run it, which was also not the case.''
What the United Nations could contribute beyond humanitarian assistance was ``political facilitation,'' Annan said.
The proposed draft resolution would probably face resistance from other U.N. Security Council members who have favored a U.N.-convened conference of the kind that helped establish Afghanistan's post-Taliban government.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld discussed the resolution with Prime Minister Tony Blair and Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon on Friday as Rumsfeld returned from a tour of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf region.
Rumsfeld said afterward he hoped the U.N. would play a role but did not publicly discuss the draft resolution outlining that role.
Hoon, who joined Rumsfeld in a news conference at Heathrow airport, also did not mention the draft resolution.
``We are right to be optimistic about the way forward'' in Iraq, Hoon said.
International stability forces will be sent to Iraq as soon as possible, the U.S. official said, though it was unclear when that would be.
Those troops will work to restore and maintain order and supervise humanitarian projects such as the restoration of water and electricity and delivery of food and medical aid.
The six nations contributing troops are Italy, Spain, Ukraine, Denmark, the Netherlands and Bulgaria, the official said.
Representatives of those countries will meet with British officials May 7 and Polish officials May 22 to determine what forces each country will contribute and whether they will be put under British or Polish command.
The U.S. part of the stability force will be comprised of American troops.
While that portion is likely to consist of a military division -- about 20,000 -- the troop strength of the other two sectors has yet to be determined, the official said.
The international stabilization force would be under the U.S. war commander, Gen. Tommy Franks.
At least initially, the coalition stability forces will augment rather than replace the 135,000 American troops inside Iraq, the official said.
The stability forces will focus on providing security and humanitarian relief while other U.S. troops focus on rooting out leftover members of Saddam Hussein's government and other armed elements in Iraq.
Rumsfeld said, however, that the more troops other countries contribute to the stability effort, the fewer U.S. troops will be needed inside Iraq.
Planning for both the U.N. resolution and the international security force left out France, Germany and Russia, three U.S. allies that vehemently opposed the war in Iraq.
Some of the NATO members who agreed to send troops may want NATO authorization for that action, the official said.
Requests for such authorization will be routed through the alliance's defense planning committee, which does not include France, the official said.
The outlines for the international stability force were decided at a conference Hoon hosted Wednesday with representatives from 16 countries, mostly NATO members.
Other countries including the Philippines, South Korea, Qatar and Australia agreed to send other help such as field hospitals, engineers, explosive ordnance disposal teams or nuclear, biological and chemical weapons experts.
The U.S., British and Polish sectors will be drawn to take into account ethnic, religious, tribal and political factions within Iraq, the official said.
For example, although ethnic Kurds are the majority in large parts of northern Iraq, there are also large numbers of Kurds within Baghdad.
Some Arab countries also want to play a role in the stability operation in Iraq but are reluctant to send troops because of political, religious and ethnic considerations, the official said.
Countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council have offered to donate money for the effort.
Rumsfeld also met Friday with King Abdullah of Jordan, an American ally in the Middle East.
Defense officials say Jordan provided key help in the Iraq war, acting as a staging area for U.S. special operations raids into western Iraq to prevent missiles from being fired at Jordan or Israel.
Rumsfeld did not say what the two discussed.
Ousted Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is heading to exile in Saudi Arabia.
He left Pakistan yesterday, after being pardoned by the president.
Sharif had been in jail since his ouster in a military coup last year.
He was convicted of kidnapping and corruption.
Saudi Arabia offered to accept Sharif and more than a dozen members of his family on humanitarian grounds.
US President George W. Bush told Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien by telephone Monday that he looked forward to seeing him at the upcoming summit of major industrialized nations and Russia, the White House said Tuesday.
The two leaders discussed the upcoming G-8 meeting, US-Canada (relations) and other international issues of concern," Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said days before the June 1-3 summit, to be held in France.
Both said they look forward to seeing each other in Evian.
They also touched on Afghanistan, the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the global economy," said Fleischer.
Amid a chill in relations over the war in Iraq, which Canada opposed, Bush indefinitely postponed a visit to Canada, instead choosing to host Australian Prime Minster John Howard, who endorsed that military campaign.
On Monday, Chretien told reporters that he and Bush, who had not spoken since late February, discussed a wide range of issues, including Iraq, the upcoming summit of the Group of Eight industrial powers and aid to Africa.
We've always been on good terms.
We just disagree on one item, the Canadian leader said.
When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City.
He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with.
In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates.
For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures.
The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: the U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life.
The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along, says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama.
He has mastered the art of survival.
In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement.
If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends.
Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
He is cornered, says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega.
The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option..
His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation.
The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born.
It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school.
In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say.
He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges, recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend.
Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service.
The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co.'s banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader.
Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly.
"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation.
He started building the files that helped him gain power.
A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses.
This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control.
"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez.
Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people..
During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office.
"People started wondering if something was wrong with him," Mr. Miranda recalls.
But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers..
Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's so-called G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans.
Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977.
Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans..
Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination.
The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S.
Everybody was afraid of him, Mr. Ingersoll says.
Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials.
"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner.
For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says.
In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you..
Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration.
The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself.
At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June.
The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama.
Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read.
Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with re-indicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms.
In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told.
After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed.
Unfortunately, Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control.
The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death.
I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now, Mr. Sanford says.
If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him..
In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA.
Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges.
But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says.
An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation.
"Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video..
Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment.
As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C.
Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate.
In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces..
"North," the document went on, referring to Oliver North, has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal..
Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image.
The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him.
Lawyers in Miami this time working virtually without impediment prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him.
Now, neither side the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death.
In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power.
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends.
For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger he says.
I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong.
Will winter storms affect the weather where you are.
Let's check the "Headline News" extended forecast.
Another round of winter weather is expected today as another major winter storm will be spreading from the southern plains through the Ohio River valley and eventually into the Northeast.
Cities like Springfield, Missouri, back towards St. Louis and Indianapolis and Columbus will pick up the heaviest snowfall.
Over six inches is expected by tomorrow morning, and then moving in towards the northeast, where we expect even some ice in some of the suburbs to the northwestern areas of New York City.
Here's a look at the forecast weather map -- slow pressure is moving in towards the Ohio River valley and eventually into the northeast by late tomorrow.
It's moving rather quickly, too, so the precipitation will be ending through the Midwest as high pressure builds in tomorrow.
Look for the snow to continue into New England tomorrow.
Friday, rain into the southeast.
There will be some showers in the Northwest.
Temperature-wise, it remains cold over the northern tier.
It begins to warm up over parts of the south.
A wet day on Saturday over much of the East and Southeast.
There'll be some snows, though, back into the Midwest.
Forecast highs are still on the cold side.
And as we check out Sunday's weather, snow through the great lakes and rain into the Northeast with forecast highs mainly in the over the northeastern U.S.
I'm meteorologist Dave Hennen.
For more weather information, login to cnn.com.
The interim government declared a state of emergency in Iraq excluding the Kurdish region for 60 days, according to the National Security Law introduced last August which states that emergency laws can be declared in the country for a period no more than 60 days provided a serious threat against Iraqi national security is recognised by the interim government.
Obviously, this is a necessary step that should have been taken at least two months ago.
Suicide bombings and guerrilla attacks carried out by insurgents and foreign terrorists based around Baghdad have escalated to alarming levels particularly during Ramadan.
Deputy governor of Diyala along with several council members from Ba'quba were ambushed and killed in Latifiya south of Baghdad, an area which has supposedly been 'cleared' from insurgents a couple of weeks ago.
Four suicide attacks in Samarra, also a recently 'liberated' area, against National Guard units and the governorate building.
Zarqawi's group claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Three police stations in Haditha, a small town west of Ramadi, were assaulted by groups of insurgents.
Some 30 policemen were captured, tied up and executed in cold blood against the walls following a confrontation which lasted two hours.
Zarqawi's group, again, claiming responsibility.
A full-scale military operation against Fallujah, which is apparently underway already, seems to be the government's 'final solution'.
I'm not optimistic to the outcome, especially when significant civilian casualties are unavoidable.
Note, that I'm not suggesting a peaceful or political solution would work either in these areas.
Insurgents west of Baghdad have quite obstinately made it clear that nothing but full control of the country, or at least the Anbar governorate, will satisfy them.
They have refused to participate in the political process, they have repeatedly announced their intentions to boycott the elections and to disrupt them in other areas, and they do not recognise the government or any other authority in the country beside themselves.
The demands of the Fallujah negotiants from the government weeks ago were obscene and they clearly reflect the overt sectarianism and regionalism of the armed groups in the area.
The demands were not released to the Iraqi public at the time for unkown reasons but they have leaked out days ago.
Here are just a few of them:
A clear timetable for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces.
(fair enough).
Immediate withdrawal of US and Iraqi security forces from the Anbar governorate and the handover of security responsibilities to former army officers from Anbar.
The appointment of ministers from the Anbar governorate to the ministries of Interior, Defense, Oil and Finance.
The removal of certain officials (most of them from Shi'ite Islamic parties such as Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari) from governmental positions.
The complete return of Ba'athists, army officers, Republican Guards, Mukhabarat, intelligence and security personnel to their former positions.
The removal of Shi'ite Edhan (call for prayers) from official television and radio programs.
Incomes of Shi'ite sacred shrines should be returned under the control of the Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.
These last two demands have been allegedly added by Sheikh Harith Al-Dhari (head of the Association of Muslim Scholars) and are said to have been a major reason behind the failure of negotiations with the government.
Iraqis here in the south were shocked to hear of these demands and sectarian tensions are on the rise.
It scares me to see the reaction of people around me whenever Fallujah is mentioned.
The director of a primary health care clinic was remarking the other day that "Fallujah should be burnt upon its residents and then razed to the ground.
They are the sons of Mu'awiya, may Allah curse them all.
Sidenote: Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan was the governor of Syria during the 7th century and he fought Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (Muhammed's son-in-law) over the Caliphate after the assassination of Caliph Othman.
He became the first Ummayid Caliph and two decades later, under the Caliphate of his son Yazid, Imam Hussein bin Ali (grandson of Muhammed) was killed by his armies at present day Karbala.
Someone hushed the director and pointed out to him that I'm Sunni.
He was a bit embarrassed and tried to explain that he was referring to Wahhabis and foreign fighters.
It was a bit uncomfortable and I could feel that people were giving me furtive glances.
Refugees have been pouring out of Fallujah over the last few days into Baghdad and the surrounding areas.
The military operation will undoubtly aggravate the humanitarian situation inside the city since there are definitely thousands of families with no place to go.
Refugees in Baghdad have confirmed the rumours that the 'Mujahideen' are forcing men from 15-50 years old to stay and that they were threatened with execution if they refuse to carry arms in defense of the town.
Majlis Shura Al-Mujahideen (The Mujahideen Advisory Council) are in control of Fallujah and they have distributed a statement inviting Arab and foreign (including American) media reporters to enter the town and cover the battles.
The statement carried the insignia of Zarqawi's group Qa'idat Al-Jihad.
Everyone is closely watching what the next few days will bring, hoping the violence doesn't spread to the streets of Baghdad or other areas.
I'm still holed up in Basrah but I'll try to be on the road as soon as possible.
A provincial chief from India’s main opposition congress party has told an election rally that India is suffering nature’s "curse" because both the president and prime minister and bachelors, a report said Saturday.
The Times of India newspaper quoted Digvijay Singh, chief minister of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, as saying that Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and President Abdul Kalam had off ended the Hindu rain God Varuna by remaining bachelors..
The country is being ruled by a bachelor president and an unmarried prime minister..
This according to the Hindu shastras (books) is very inauspicious and that is the reason there is a widespread heat wave and drought, "said Singh.
Not just Prime Minister Vajpayee but president Kalam’s bachelor status is making the country dry, arid and infertile,he added..
The general secretary of Vajpayee’s ruling Bharatiya Janata party, pramod Mahajan, retorted that Singh’s statement was "beneath contempt." 
India’s has been reeling under a heat wave since mid-may which has killed 1,403 people..
The country’s western desert state of Rajasthan is also bracing for its fifth straight year of drought.
Libyan leader Colonel Gadaffi can be prosecuted in France over the bombing of a French airliner in which a 170 people were killed.
That's the ruling of a court in Paris.
It rejected an appeal that as a serving head of state Gadaffi should be immune from prosecution.
The lawyer representing the victims' families Francoise Rudetski is hailing the decision as a victory.
The victory today is that any people who committed an act of terrorism should know that he can be pursued and could be arrested and there is no immunity for anyone, any leaders in the world.
Relatives of those killed after an explosion on board the plane over Niger in 1989, brought the case against the Libyan leader.
Six Libyans including Colonel Gadaffi's brother-in-law have already been tried in their absence.
It is a peaceful time in this part of western India.
The summer crop is harvested, winter sowing has yet to begin.
Farmers in loose turbans and fancy earrings spend their afternoons laughing and gossiping at the markets.
One could imagine such a lull in the lives of the Arabs before the quadrupling of oil prices.
For just as the Arabs were in the 1960s, the farmers of Sidhpur are on the brink of global power and fame.
The Arabs had merely oil.
These farmers may have a grip on the world's very heart.
Or, at least, its heart disease.
That is because Sidhpur has a near-monopoly on the world's supply of flea seed, also known as flea wort or, in Western parlance, psyllium: a tiny, tasteless, obscure seed that, according to early research, may reduce cholesterol levels in the blood.
Ever since the link to cholesterol was disclosed, Americans have begun scarfing up psyllium in their breakfast cereals.
If further research proves the seed's benefits, this dusty farm district could become the epicenter of a health-food fad to rival all fads since cod-liver oil.
"This seed's not grown anywhere else in India, or anywhere else in the world," says T.V. Krishnamurthy, a vice president of Procter & Gamble India Ltd., a major psyllium buyer and promoter.
The proper climatic conditions don't exist in many places in the world.
Arvind Patel, a processor and exporter of the seed, raves: "If psyllium takes the place of oat bran, it will be huge..
Whether psyllium makes Sidhpur's fortune depends on cholesterol-fearing Americans, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and, of course, the outcome of further research.
Only one thing is certain here: Pysllium is likely to remain solely an export item from Sidhpur for a long time.
Local farmers say it is as good a cash crop as mustard or fenugreek, a legume.
But they have no desire to eat a bowl of psyllium each morning, and, perhaps, little need: lean, frugal vegetarians, the farmers are innocents in the clogged, treacherous world of cholesterol.
Psyllium is an annual herb, Plantago ovata, that has been used for centuries by folk doctors here, mainly as a laxative and anti-diarrheal.
As such, the soluble fiber has an almost fanatic following in northern India.
"I can assure you," attests a 25-year-old lawyer in New Delhi, with a meaningfully raised eyebrow, from personal experience, it works.
A prominent businessman in Bombay gives a similar testimonial: I have been taking it daily since 1961.
Folk doctors also prescribe it for kidney, bladder and urethra problems, duodenal ulcers and hemorrhoids.
Some apply it to gouty joints.
The plant has a hairy stem that produces flowers and diminutive seeds.
It is the seed's colorlessness and size 1,000 of them weigh only 1.5 grams, or about as much as two paper clips -- that explain the historical allusions to fleas.
The translucent husk of the seed is removed, sifted and crushed; the seed itself is fed to animals.
Some 90% of the crop, which was worth $26 million last year, is exported.
For decades, psyllium husk has been the main ingredient in such laxatives as Procter & Gamble Co.'s Metamucil, the top-selling brand in the U.S., and Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Fiberall.
But some time ago, researchers discovered that soluble fibers also lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Cincinnati-based P&G took an interest; it ordered two studies on psyllium and cholesterol.
One of the studies, done at the University of Minnesota, tested 75 people with raised cholesterol levels.
After 16 weeks, the group that took three daily teaspoons of Metamucil saw a significant dip in their general cholesterol levels, and an even larger reduction in levels of low-density lipoproteins, the so-called bad cholesterol.
In late 1987, P&G asked the FDA for approval to market Metamucil as the first non-prescription, cholesterol-lowering product in the U.S.
In April, the psyllium bandwagon got more crowded.
General Mills Inc., the food giant, launched a breakfast cereal called Benefit, containing psyllium, oat, wheat and beet bran; the words, "reduce cholesterol" were prominently displayed on its package.
In September, Kellogg Co. launched a competing psyllium-fortified cereal called Heartwise.
Suddenly, on television, in advertisements and on their cereal boxes, Americans were inundated with news about the obscure seed.
The flood of claims and counter-claims worried consumers and actually hurt sales of the new cereals.
This month, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that Americans might someday, in various forms, ingest too much psyllium.
Currently, there is a lull in the psyllium war.
The FDA has asked Kellogg and General Mills to show research that their cereals are safe.
It also ordered P&G to produce more studies to buttress its claims that Metamucil can lower cholesterol.
But the agency hasn't yanked psyllium off store shelves.
If the FDA approves the new uses of psyllium, other companies are expected to rush to market with psyllium products.
"It's going to be a sensational thing," says Mr. Krishnamurthy of P&G in Bombay.
Says psyllium exporter Mr. Patel: I just got back yesterday from the U.S.
In the newspapers, on the radio and TV, psyllium is everywhere..
But the news of the boom has yet to trickle down to the farmers.
They only know of one use for the crop, as a laxative, and with psyllium prices currently languishing in the wake of a bumper crop, they think of the seed as a marginal crop, something to grow between summer wheat crops.
"Psyllium's not a good crop," complains Sooraji Jath, a 26-year-old farmer from the village of Lakshmipura.
You get a rain at the wrong time and the crop is ruined.
Even at the Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export Promotion Council, the government agency that promotes the seed, the psyllium boom is distant thunder.
The staff brags about psyllium's hefty contribution to American regularity, without quite grasping the implications of the research on cholesterol.
The council's annual report has psyllium on its last page, lumped with such unglamorous export items as sarsaparilla and "Nux vomica," a plant that induces vomiting.
In one way, the psyllium middlemen the buyers and exporters are glad to keep news of the boom to themselves.
They want psyllium prices low for their purchases next year.
But there's a catch.
Sidhpur and adjacent districts are the only places in the world where psyllium is grown in large quantities.
This is partly due to the particular demands of the crop.
Psyllium needs sandy soil, dew during the first few weeks, and then total dryness when its seeds are maturing.
Small crops are grown in Pakistan, France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Brazil, but their quality can't compare to that of Indian psyllium.
Big buyers like Procter & Gamble say there are other spots on the globe, and in India, where the seed could be grown.
"It's not a crop that can't be doubled or tripled," says Mr. Krishnamurthy.
But no one has made a serious effort to transplant the crop.
In Sidhpur, it is almost time to sow this year's crop.
Many farmers, too removed to glean psyllium's new sparkle in the West, have decided to plant mustard, fennel, cumin, fenugreek or castor-oil seeds.
Mr. Jath is thinking of passing up psyllium altogether this year in favor of a crop with a future such as cumin or fennel.
Maybe I'll plant castor-oil seeds.
His brother, Parkhaji, whose head is swathed in a gorgeous crimson turban, nods vigorous assent.
So when next year's psyllium crop is harvested in March, it may be smaller than the 16,000 metric tons of the past few years -- right at the crest of the psyllium boom.
And the world could experience its first psyllium shortage.
Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Wednesday stressed Qatar's role in the Middle East peace process during talks with his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani in Paris.
Shalom told a joint press conference that the tiny Gulf state's strong relationship with the recently appointed Palestinian prime minister, Mahmud Abbas, could be a boost for peace.
We discussed the Middle East peace process.
Over an hour of talks, we asserted the will of both parties (Israel and the Arab world) to do everything to return to the negotiating table," Shalom said.
Qatar is a very important country on this issue.
I know the special relationship that the Qatari foreign minister has with Abu Mazen," he said, using Abbas's alternative name.
The meeting was Shalom's first encounter with an Arab counterpart since he took office as Israel's foreign minister on February 27.
Qatar has economic links with Israel without maintaining diplomatic relations, in the face of criticism from other Arab countries.
Afterwards Shalom was to fly on to London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw.
The Voice of America presents differing points of view on a wide variety of issues.
Next, an editorial expressing the policies of the United States government.
For nearly 20 years, the world has faced the challenge posed by AIDS.
Since 1988, the first day of December has been designated by the United Nations as World AIDS Day.
This is the time to disseminate information and faster cooperation in the battle against AIDS, the number one cause of infectious disease in the world.
The picture of the epidemic is bleak.
According to a new UN study, in the past year over five million people have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Since the beginning of the epidemic, about 22 million people have died of the disease.
While infections among adults are decreasing, infections among children are increasing.
Many of these cases are in sub-Saharan Africa where infected mothers are transmitting the virus to their babies during delivery.
Africa accounts for more than four-fifths of the world's AIDS-related deaths.
In some African countries, one out of four adults is infected with HIV.
But Eastern Europe has seen the biggest explosion of new infections.
In Russia, the rate of infection has more than doubled this year to 300,000.
South and Southeast Asia are other high-risk areas with five and three quarter million adults and children now living with HIV or AIDS.
In too many places, discussion of AIDS is taboo and the disease is shrouded in mystery and misinformation.
But as the grim statistics make clear, it is critical that the governments and citizens of those nations most affected by AIDS, do their part to recognize the scope of the epidemic and act decisively to confront it.
As President Bill Clinton said, we must work together to break the silence, to fight the stigmatization and protect the rights of those living with HIV and AIDS, and to help those infected find the care and treatment they need.
We must pledge to stay the course in our crusade until the world is finally freed from the shadow of this devastating epidemic.
US Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to nine Middle Eastern Gulf states for meetings with regional leaders.
Mr. Cohen will depart next Tuesday to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Israel, Jordan and Egypt.
The Pentagon says, the Secretary will consult with defense officials in those countries and also visit US troops in the area.
US forces in the Gulf have been on high alert, since last month's apparent terrorist bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors.
An explosion struck the Cole, as it refueled in the Yemeni port of Aden.
Australia will keep open its embassy in Saudi Arabia despite decisions by the United States, Britain and Germany to close their diplomatic outposts in the country amid growing terror fears.
On the eve of a visit to the Saudi capital, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said security at the Australian embassy appeared to be sufficient.
We have quite a substantial security presence at the Australian embassy in Riyadh and the ambassador thinks that that security presence is sufficient,'' Downer told the Australian Broadcasting Corp.
Australia is one of Washington's staunchest allies.
Canberra sent troops to fight in the war on terror in Afghanistan and alongside U.S. and British forces in Iraq.
New Zealand also has no immediate plans to close its Saudi embassy.
On Tuesday, Saudi security officials said three suspected al-Qaida militants were arrested in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, in sweeps following the near-simultaneous suicide attacks on three residential compounds on the outskirts of Riyadh on May 12.
The bombings killed 34 people -- including nine attackers, eight Americans and two Britons -- and wounded nearly 200 others.
Earlier this week, Saudi and U.S. officials said they had new intelligence pointing to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group possibly launching fresh attacks in the United States or against American interests overseas.
I can't for the life of me figure out why anyone would invest in the airline industry.
Please, someone tell me a group companies facing more serious problems than the legacy airline carriers (Delta, US Airways, Continental, American, Northwestern, United).
High fuel costs, insane pension obligations, and a highly paid, specialized workforce.
To this list of woes, we add a whole slew of competitors with much lower cost structures.
I admit I've already taken advantage of the lower fares announced last week to book a business trip but these next few years are not going to be pretty for some of these companies.
Unfortunately, the pain is not limited to these companies.
Pittsburgh, one of US Airway's hubs, built up its airport complete with a sprawling retail complex in the terminal.
Now US Airways has reduced flights out of Pittsburgh by 28% since January of 2004 and is in real danger of folding completely.
These shiny new airports are usually financed by long-term bonds that still have to paid off.
but not by the airlines.
This is an industry looking for a sustainable strategy.
Southwest and JetBlue were the only major airlines to earn a profit in 2004 but who knows what will be happening in another five years.
So I will thankfully accept the low fares, bemoan the loss of food on flights, and watch these companies parade in and out of bankruptcy.
BusinessWeek Online has some other commentary about the fare cuts here and about US Airway's woes here.
Some 2,500 mainly university students formed a human chain in Japanese characters spelling out "No War" in Osaka on Sunday to protest against the ongoing US-led military campaign in Iraq.
"We cannot forgive this war," Miyako Fuji, 20, one of the rally's organisers told Jiji news agency.
I want to join together the feelings of each of us as individuals who oppose the war.
Protesters, who exceeded the 2,000 expected to show up at the park at Osaka Castle in the city's downtown neighbourhood, carried placards that read "Stop war" and "Love and Peace" while forming the human chain after 3:00 pm (0600 GMT), Jiji said.
The protest follows a string of others involving tens of thousands of peace activists across Japan since January.
According to a poll by Kyodo news agency released Saturday, 78 of 100 people surveyed opposed the military action in Iraq.
A separate poll of 1,846 adults by the leading Yomiuri newspaper published Tuesday showed 64 percent felt Japan had "no choice" but to back the United States, with only 12 percent saying Japan had "every reason" to back the war.
More than 100 FBI agents and explosives experts are expected in Yemen by the end of the weekend to investigate the suspected terrorist attack.
A team of special Naval engineers will work on recovering the bodies of ten sailors listed as missing and presumed dead.
Officials suspect a suicide bombing caused the blast, which tore a 40 foot hole in the hull of the destroyer.
Pentagon sources say an early examination finds 400 to 500 pounds of explosives may have been used.
There are no confirmed suspects yet, but officials say several Middle East groups are expected to be investigated.
But the sense of urgency for this meeting matches the rage felt by both Israelis and Palestinians after yesterday's violence.
Today Israel buried one of its two soldiers beaten to death bay a mob of Palestinians yesterday.
Today in Jerusalem, Israeli security forces barred Palestinians under the age of 45 from praying at the al-Aqsa mosque.
Young Palestinians prayed outside and some young men were asked and beaten by Israeli police which may help make clear why arranging a summit is so difficult.
And why the political leaders will have such a hard time keeping the streets -- getting the streets calm.
ABC's Gillian Findlay reports tonight from Palestinian Gaza.
On the streets of Gaza today, talk of summits and peace was the last thing many Palestinians wanted to hear.
Only a day after Israeli missiles destroyed two police boats here, one of them very close to Mr. Arafat's own office.
Today, Israel released footage of yesterday's other attacks shot from inside a helicopter gun ship.
These missiles landed in the city of Ramallah.
With Israeli gun boats continuing to control the coast today, Gaza police were taking no chances.
Abandoning their stations for the city's main square.
What Israel did yesterday has turned anger here to fury.
It is war, Palestinians say, and Mr. Arafat has no business talking peace.
You want a war.
Yes.
Why.
I hope.
Why.
Because no peace.
After all this, no peace.
At another rally in Georgia today, Islamic leaders called openly for terror attacks on Israel.
Extremist groups have a lot of support these days and a lot of power.
This afternoon, a crowd of angry Muslims set fire to a hotel and to homes of people who they say sold alcohol.
Palestinian police did little to stop them.
Even if Mr. Arafat goes to a summit, and even if he signs an agreement, there is no guarantee any more that his people will listen.
Gillian Findlay, ABC News, Gaza.
The bodies of 2 more American sailors were recovered today from the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden.
US officials are on the scene and continuing their investigations into the explosion that killed 17 crewmembers on board the Cole last Thursday.
Today there are reports that police in Aden questioned the landlord of an apartment where bomb-making equipment was found and whose occupants may have carried out the suicide attack against the warship.
Also today at the Cole's homeport in Norfolk, Virginia, President Clinton led a memorial service for those who died aboard the Cole.
The service began with the playing of the national anthem.
The President asked all Americans to take a moment to thank the men and women of the military.
Today we honor our finest young people, fallen soldiers who rose to freedom's challenge.
We mourn their loss, celebrate their lives, and offer the love and prayers of a grateful nation to their families.
Mr. Clinton mentioned the name of each of the 17 victims and praised the courage and character of the men and women who serve in the armed forces.
And he delivered this clear message for those who carry out attacks on members of US military.
For those who attacked them we say you will not found the safe harbor.
We will find you and justice will prevail.
America will not stop standing guard for peace, or freedom, or stability in the Middle East and around the world.
At the end of the somber ceremony, President Clinton asked everyone to join him in a moment of silence followed by the Navy Hymn and Taps.
We have been here so many times before the threat of a wider war in the middle east.
There has been impressive progress but a lasting past remains elusive.
President Clinton today considered flying to the middle east for an emergency summit meeting, but he backed away.
How did it come to this so swiftly.
Here's Andrea Mitchell.
Reporter.
The president returns to Washington today, hoping to salvage something from eight years of Middle East diplomacy.
What went wrong.
To many peace seemed so close at Camp David in July.
How did it all fall apart.
First, Palestinian resentment.
On the street, people see no economic rewards, aren't any better off after years of peace talks, and they resent the U.S. for blaming Arafat when the summit collapses while praising Israel's prime minister Barak.
The prime minister moved forward more from his initial position than chairman Arafat, particularly surrounding the questions of Jerusalem.
It's quite clear the Palestinians do not accept the various proposals put forward to divide Jerusalem.
Reporter.
Arafat appears weak, and radical groups like Hamas gain strength.
A weakened Arafat emboldens a great deal of forces that does not want peace.
Reporter.
Second, Israeli frustration.
Many Israelis feel Barak goes too far by offering Arafat partial control of the holy sites, gets nothing in return.
I think Barak was very forthcoming at Camp David.
The intransigence or failure of Arafat to come forward with any counterproposal I think frustrated the prime minister and frustrated the Israelis.
Reporter.
Finally, the summit raises false hopes, is not well prepared by Washington.
The U.S. rushes ahead, eager for a breakthrough before the end of Clinton's term.
Other Arab leaders like Mubarak of Egypt and Fahd of Saudi Arabia are not sold on the deal, tell Arafat to hold out.
If a concerted effort was put together to consult with these people and bring them on board, then probably Arafat would have been able to cut a deal.
I think the United States did not prepare adequately for Camp David.
They should have been much more careful in the preparation and more assured of getting some kind of an agreement.
Reporter.
With most observers saying that Camp David only made a bad situation worse, questions tonight as to why the president would even consider going to another summit with even less hope of a solution.
Washington.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld took part in a Q&A with the troops today that was anything but cozy.
Disgruntled soldiers complained to Rumsfeld about long deployments and a lack of armored vehicles and other equipment.
From the Associated Press : "You go to war with the Army you have," Rumsfeld replied, "not the Army you might want or wish to have."
Spc. Thomas Wilson had asked the defense secretary, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?"
Shouts of approval and applause arose from the estimated 2,300 soldiers who had assembled to see Rumsfeld.
We do not have proper armored vehicles to carry with us north," Wilson, 31, of Nashville, Tenn., concluded after asking again.
Wilson, an airplane mechanic whose unit, the 278th Regimental Combat Team of the Tennessee Army National Guard, is about to drive north into Iraq for a one-year tour of duty, put his finger on a problem that has bedeviled the Pentagon for more than a year.
Rarely, though, is it put so bluntly in a public forum.
Rumsfeld said the Army was sparing no expense or effort to acquire as many Humvees and other vehicles with extra armor as it can.
What is more, he said, armor is not the savior some think it is.
You can have all the armor in the world on a tank and a tank can (still) be blown up," he said.
Can't say that's the most comforting answer.
Police intercepted 33 African immigrants who came ashore Thursday in southern Spain aboard an overcrowded boat, including several pregnant women and other travelers suffering from hypothermia, police said.
Spanish media showed dramatic photos of police struggling to carry women on the verge of fainting after they were found wandering through Tarifa, Spain's windswept southern tip, Civil Guard officials told Spanish news agencies.
Police also arrested two Moroccan men suspected of trafficking in human beings and navigating the Zodiac boat across from Africa, Efe said.
Twenty-six of the would-be immigrants were from sub-Saharan Africa, six of them women, and the other seven were males from North African countries, police said.
Red Cross officials administered first aid on the scene, and the detainees were taken to a processing center for the government to begin expulsion proceedings.
Tens of thousands of destitute Africans try to enter Spain illegally each year by crossing the perilous Strait of Gibraltar to reach the southern mainland or by sailing northwest to the Canary Islands out in the Atlantic.
They seek a better life doing menial jobs in Spain or hope to use the country as a stepping stone to other points in Europe.
Most are caught trying to sneak in and some die in the attempt.
Just reported from AP that Condi Rice has been chosen by President Bush to become the new Secretary of State for his second term.
I agree with his choice and think she will make a much better Secretary then Powell did.
Her views are much more in step with the President then Powell, although he was a true soldier and carried the message.
Plus, any lady who works out to Led Zeppelin and is a Football nut is alright in my book.
Welcome to another hour of news and information on the Voice of America.
I'm David Chadwick, with VOA News now.
The death toll in Colombia from three days of heavy fighting between soldiers and rebels now stands at more than 100.
At least 54 soldiers and 50 guerillas have died in clashes around the northwestern cities of Bagado and Dabeiba.
Nearly all of the buildings, government buildings in those two cities, have been reportedly destroyed.
The clashes began Wednesday, when the rebel revolutionary armed forces of Colombia launched attacks on a number of northwestern towns.
An army helicopter went down close to the border with Panama, killing all 22 soldiers on board.
At the bottom of the sea.
Two months after the submarine "Kursk" went down with 118 men on board, divers have managed to get inside.
They found five bodies so far.
And today, they found a note, written after a pair of explosions ripped through the hull and sent the "Kursk" into the depths of the Barents see.
Here's ABC's bob woodruff.
The note was discovered by divers inside one compartment of the submarine, on the body of 27-year-old lieutenant captain Dmitry Kolesnikov, photographed here on board the "Kursk" three years ago.
"I am writing blindly," he wrote apparently in darkness.
None of us can get to the surface..
Russian officials believe the note was written at least two hours after the sub began to sink.
All the crew from the sixth, seventh and eighth compartments went over to the ninth..
Kolesnikov wrote, "There are 23 people here.
We made this decision as a result of the accident..
The note contains no new evidence about what sank the "Kursk," whether it was an internal explosion or a collision.
But it does contradict the official Russian version that was given to family members, that all 118 men had died instantly.
Today, the chief of Russia's navy was forced to admit to the families he was wrong, that some of the crew not only survived, according to Kolesnikov's note.
Two or three tried to get out through the escape hatch.
But it may have been flooded.
Today, Kolesnikov's widow could not hold back her tears.
"It's horribly painful, it's awful," she said.
I had a feeling that he didn't die immediately, and it turned out my feeling was right.
She also says her husband had a premonition.
Last summer, before he went to sea, he gave her his dog tag and a crucifix, and said he may not be coming back.
Bob Woodruff, ABC news, London.
At least three members of a family in Indias northeastern state of Tripura were hacked to death by a tribal mob for allegedly practicing witchcraft, police said Thursday.
A spokesman said a group of 25 to 30 armed men Wednesday attacked a house belonging to a village quack doctor in Tultuli, 60 kilometers (38 miles) south of Tripuras state capital Agartala.
The mob dragged out three members of a family and (killed) them with machetes and spears before fleeing the area," the spokesman said by telephone from Agartala.
The dead included the quack doctor, 55-year-old Nityalila Naotia, his teenaged son and another member of the family, whom he did not identify.
It was believed Naotia was a practicing sorcerer and through his black magic he had cast evil spells on villagers, prompting a group within the village to eliminate them," the spokesman said.
Police have arrested four people in connection with the killings.
Superstitious beliefs, black magic and demonology are integral to the tribal custom in parts of Tripura and other northeast Indian states.
Many tribes practice faiths believed to be a mix of black magic and superstition.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign.
Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms.
The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days.
Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will.
According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages.
He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party.
The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend.
According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself.
The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out..
But others criticized him, for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, has seriously weakened his authority..
The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired.
Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view..
And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate.
Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state.
U.S. and Yemeni officials have released a photo of one of the suicide bombers killed in the attack on the "USS Cole in the port of Aden October.
17 U.S. sailors were killed and 39 others hurt.
The officials say Yemeni national Hussan Saeed Awad Al-Khamri was described by a boy as having launched the boat used in the attack.
Six possible suspects are still being held in Yemen pending a trial that could start as early as next month.
Investigators say they're still looking for other key suspects.
We've all lived next to some pretty undesirable people at one point or another, but I can't imagine anyone being worse than this.
A Colorado judge ordered two teen-age girls to pay about $900 for the distress a neighbor said they caused by giving her home-made cookies adorned with paper hearts.
The pair were ordered to pay $871.70 plus $39 in court costs after neighbor Wanita Renea Young, 49, filed a lawsuit complaining that the unsolicited cookies, left at her house after the girls knocked on her door, had triggered an anxiety attack that sent her to the hospital the next day.
Taylor Ostergaard, then 17, and Lindsey Jo Zellitte, 18, paid the judgment on Thursday after a small claims court ruling by La Plata County Court Judge Doug Walker, a court clerk said on Friday.
The girls baked cookies as a surprise for several of their rural Colorado neighbors on July 31 and dropped off small batches on their porches, accompanied by red or pink paper hearts and the message: "Have a great night."
The Denver Post newspaper reported on Friday that the girls had decided to stay home and bake the cookies rather than go to a dance where there might be cursing and drinking.
Zebra Report has a picture of the good-intentioned girls.
Maybe delinquency does pay off better.
The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency.
The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas.
Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization.
Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority.
The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S.
The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy.
Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere, Mr. Mulroney said recently.
Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization.
Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper.
Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%.
Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS.
Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said.
The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement.
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms.
The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China," an FDA spokesman said yesterday.
The agency won't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until "satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent" bacterial contamination.
On May 19, the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms.
In subsequent tests, the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated.
The outbreaks were traced to Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables.
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March.
In 1987, China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms, valued at $47 million, to the U.S.
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken "many effective measures" to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes.
He predicted the problem will be solved "very soon..
With the presidential debate tonight in St. Louis, the candidates will be in the middle of a hot political issue that's not getting much national attention -- what to do about the Missouri river, the fabled waterway of Lewis and Clark that joins the Mississippi in St. Louis.
It's a far different river now than it once was, and the question is -- should it be allowed to return to its true form.
NBC's national correspondent is Jim Avila.
Reporter.
The wide Missouri, pioneers called it too thick to drink, too thin to plow.
A shallow, slow moving, swampy river that birds and fish loved in its natural state.
The ebb and flow in a river like the Missouri provides the basis for life itself.
Reporter.
But the Missouri is no longer wild, tamed by dams and dredging.
Now a shipping highway the government says endangers the very existence of three critical river species -- the 100 million-year-old Pallid Sturgeon, the shore-wading the Least Tern.
The Missouri's natural rhythm destroyed, say the experts, by six dams in a system from north central Montana to the Mississippi River.
A transformation turning the meandering river into essentially a deep water ditch.
Without providing the higher flow in the spring and the lower flow in the summer that Missouri river species are adapted to, they're going to disappear.
Today's sturgeon can't reproduce in the river any more, only in man-made hatcheries and sand bars, homes to wading birds are being washed away by deep water.
So to save fish and birds and improve recreational use in up-river states, where tourism is a major source of income, the government wants to alter 50 years of steady water flow.
Re-creating the original river by releasing more water in spring, less in summer -- fighting words for downriver farmers and barge operators.
Try explaining that times have changed, nonsense to the people who live along the Missouri river and don't want to go back to the spring floods.
Reporter.
It's about the water and who controls it.
The Missouri, second longest river in the country.
7 states, 2,500 miles long and now according to conservationists, second on the list of rivers in danger.
Farmers say it's the planting season that's in danger if the Missouri isn't controlled in spring.
And barge owners say two dry months in the summer will ruin business.
What this proposal does is double the cost of operation on the Missouri river and will cause those companies to move off the river.
Reporter.
But according to figures from the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the four grain producing states along the Missouri, producing nearly 5 billion bushels of grain each year, ship very little by barge now.
16.7 million bushels.
That's .3%.
The barge companies do not own the Missouri river.
The flood plain farmers do not own the Missouri river.
Everybody owns it.
We have to find a way to share the Missouri.
Reporter.
And say environmentalists save three threatened  species and a leisure economy dependent upon a wide, untamed Missouri.
Jim Avila, NBC news, Bismarck, North Dakota.
Early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach.
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones.
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu.
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint.
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work.
Last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram.
Oh yes, the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards.
"If there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them," says Les Johns, De Beers's engineering manager.
Here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box.
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality.
While other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use.
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one.
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations.
When the Germans lost World War I, they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer, patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers.
Today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers's stingy approval.
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa.
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever.
Oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents.
Jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers.
On most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag.
The wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop.
Still, miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming.
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds.
There are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling.
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world.
Last year, when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood.
"Nothing is too good for our golf course," says Tony George, a mining engineer.
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from South African control, De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10.
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes.
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheel-like excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach.
Then there is the artificial sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean.
Made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintenance against the battering waves.
When the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward.
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard.
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood.
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves.
The Caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs Mr. George.
They figure it's not a very good advert.
Despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators.
Laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds.
But should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value.
For these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail.
Still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two.
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie.
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe.
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail.
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security.
The United States is hoping that Russia's President Vladimir Putin will follow the advice of his special commission and pardon Edmund Pope.
This week the American businessman began serving a 20-year prison sentence in Moscow after being convicted of spying.
Specifically Russian prosecutors charged that Pope had stolen secrets relating to a high-speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and Washington backed him up.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha, did the Presidential Pardons Commission give any reason for their decision.
It gave several reasons.
I am not sure if those were the formal reasons but members of the commission have been interviewed today by various outlets and they say that they were afraid of the spy mania rising in Russia, that they thought it was really suspicious to them that Edmund Pope was sentenced to the maximum term, whereas the article of the law had 10 to 20 years.
He was sentenced to 20, even though according to the members of the Pardon Commission, the evidence that was presented by the prosecution was far from quotient.
They also said this court did not give the lawyers for the defense due procedure.
The court listened to the defense much less than it did to the prosecution.
Much of this sounds less like a pardon and more like a criticism of the number of institutions that Mr. Putin also has to show some support of,  including his court system and his police and his prosecutors.
How is he going to respond to this and when.
I don't think anybody knows and I don't think anybody will know until President Putin has responded.
It is his decision.
According to the Russian law the Pardon Commission, after it has made its decision, sends it to the President and it's up to him whether to endorse it or not to say no.
One last question for you, Marsha.
He does have a lot to balance doesn't he, President Putin.
Not only the institutions I mentioned but the need to keep things somehow free of tension.
Is this case likely to strain US-Russian relations.
I'm afraid it might.
Recently the Russian policy toward the US has fallen into a line where Russia tries to demonstrate force it once had but no longer does.
It wants to put an end to what is regarded by the current Russian government as humiliation of the past years.
There were numerous attempts to be a source of minor troubles even though Russia can no longer be a source of scare to the west and among such instances there were several, there was just recently flying over by Russian military planes over Kitty Hawk, an American warship.
There is also a scandal that erupted over Russia's declaration that it will sell weapons to Iran, contrary to the earlier made agreement.
Such examples are quite a few already, some of them are combined with material profits for Russia but not necessarily.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of the Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha,  thank you very much for speaking with us.
Pleasure.
An apparent attack on a US warship has left at least six American sailors dead and about 35 injured.
The explosion came as the guided-missile destroyer USS Cole was refueling at a port in Yemen.
NPR's Chad Pergram reports.
Both the White House and the Pentagon said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism.
President Clinton immediately whisked to the region investigative teams from the FBI, the Pentagon and the State Department.
The attack comes as US forces in the Middle East have been placed on a heightened state of alert after days of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians.
Defense Secretary William Cohen said the US would continue to protect its interests around the globe.
No one should doubt our resolve to remain a force for peace and for stability and no one should assume that they can force us to retreat.
No one should assume they can attack us with impunity.
The Cole had just arrived in the harbor for a refueling stop.
Officials say men aboard this small boat had been assisting the Cole with mooring lines just before the blast.
Chad Pergram ,NPR News, Washington.
A former US Army sergeant has pleaded guilty in New York to conspiracy in the bombings of American Embassies in east Africa in 1998.
Ali Mohammed, a native of Egypt, has admitted to five charges of conspiring with a Saudi born dissident Osama bin Laden to attack US targets in the Middle-East.
More than 220 people died in the blasts.
Feminists have a reason to celebrate today as an appeals court just threw out the convictions of their martyr, Andrea Yates, by ruling that one of the prosecutor's expert witnesses gave false testimony at her trial.
Yates, in case you have forgotten, is the women from Texas who heinously drowned her five kids, aged 6 months to 7 years, one by one, in her bathtub.
Liberal feminist organizations rushed to Yates' defense, most notably the National Organization for Women, which provided money for her defense fund and held candlelight vigils.
No such ceremonies were held for her five dead children.
In 2002 a jury sentenced Yates to life in prison for the deaths of three of her children.
She was not tried in the deaths of the other two.
Today the 1st Court of Appeals overturned the convictions and ordered a new trial.
We can only hope for the same verdict.
An investigation is under way into a fatal airliner accident in Mexico last night.
It happened as the DC-9 was trying to land during a rainstorm.
The Aero Mexico jet skidded off a runway and into a neighborhood in the town of Reynosa, about 50 miles from Brownsville, Texas.
Four people on the ground were killed.
But the 83 people aboard the plane escaped with only scrapes and bruises.
British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown on Tuesday named the current head of the country's energy regulator as the new chairman of finance watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA)
Former senior banker Callum McCarthy begins what is one of the most important jobs in London's financial world in September, when incumbent Howard Davies steps down.
Davies is leaving to become chairman of the London School of Economics, one of the best-known parts of the University of London.
Brown said McCarthy would bring to the FSA "an unrivalled combination of experience of the public sector, experience as a senior practitioner in the financial services industry, and chairman of a highly successful regulator."
McCarthy currently heads the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, or Ofgem, which regulates Britain's privatised energy industry.
As well as previously holding senior positions at Barclays Bank, BZW and Kleinwort Benson, McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.
Under Davies's watch, the FSA became Britain's sole regulatory body for financial services in November 2001, taking on the various functions of nine separate agencies.
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his U.S. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the Contra rebels.
Lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras, and President Bush parried the question at a news conference here Saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees..
But Mr. Ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the Contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said yesterday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Mr. Ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it..
The threat came during a two-day celebration in Costa Rica to highlight Central America's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by President Bush, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and 14 other Western Hemisphere leaders.
Mr. Bush returned to Washington Saturday night.
Mr. Ortega announced on Friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic Contra assaults against his army.
Saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the U.S. ends its financial support for the Contras.
He asked that the remaining U.S. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels.
Not only did Mr. Ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as Nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned February elections.
Outside observers are gathering in Nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates.
And important U.S. lawmakers must decide at the end of November if the Contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the Bush administration in March.
The humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the Nicaraguan border with Honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by Congress in February 1988.
While few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, Mr. Ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said yesterday on "Meet the Press": "I would hope after his {Mr. Ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid..
Senetor Dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan leader.
While renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by Congress and de-emphasized by the Bush administration, Mr. Ortega's statement provides Contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue.
The administration should now state that if the February election is voided by the Sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.
In these circumstances, I think they'd win..
Senetor Mitchell said that congressional Democrats intend to honor the March agreement to give non-lethal support to the Contras through the February elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the Contras not initiate any military action.
Mr. Ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as U.S. officials were acknowledging that the Contras have at times violated it themselves.
Secretary of State James Baker, who accompanied President Bush to Costa Rica, told reporters Friday: "I have no reason to deny reports that some Contras ambushed some Sandinista soldiers..
Mr. Baker's assistant for inter-American affairs, Bernard Aronson, while maintaining that the Sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "It's never very clear who starts what..
He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire.
In addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending Contra aid, Mr. Ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some U.S. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the February elections.
Administration officials traveling with President Bush in Costa Rica interpreted Mr. Ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections.
Mr. Abrams said that Mr. Ortega is seeking to demobilize the Contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections.
"My sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
U.S. soldiers moved to capture Baghdad's Saddam International Airport early Friday and fought running battles with Iraqi defenders along the city's southern fringes.
A vise is closing on the regime,'' U.S. President George W. Bush said.
Some frontline units went on heightened alert against the threat of chemical weapons, ordered to wear rubber boots and suits despite temperatures that soared into the 90s.
There was fierce fighting in Kut, to the south of Baghdad, where desperate Iraqis armed with rifles charged tanks in a suicide raid.
We mowed down'' the attackers, said Lt. Col. B.P. McCoy.
Despite declarations that more tough fighting lies ahead, the top U.S. military official indicated there may not be an all-out battle for Baghdad.
Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested isolating members of the old regime in the capital -- cut off from the rest of the country -- while an ``interim administration'' is put in place to begin work on a postwar government.
A meeting to organize an interim government could be held in Iraq within a week, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday night.
For the first time in the war, large parts of Baghdad lost electricity.
The cause was not known.
Myers told reporters at a Pentagon briefing that Americans had not targeted the power grid.
Tracer rounds lit the night sky and artillery boomed near the airport a few kilometers (miles) from the heart of President Saddam Hussein's capital of 5 million people.
At one stage, it appeared that U.S. forces had taken control of the airport, ``and then it got more confusing with continued fighting, Myers said Thursday night.
Capture of the airport would give American and British troops a facility for airlifting equipment and troops to Baghdad.
Along the city's southern edge, U.S. tanks and Bradley vehicles destroyed at least seven Iraqi armored personnel carriers and more than 15 Iraqi tanks in fighting that went on for more than four hours.
Two weeks into the war, American commanders reported a string of successes -- on the battlefield and within an Iraqi population initially reluctant about embracing invading troops.
Kurdish fighters in the north chipped in, when a top leader suggested they may agree not to seek control of the northern city of Kirkuk.
There were battlefield setbacks, as well.
Two Marines were killed and one injured in the close-quarters fighting in Kut.
And an Army soldier investigating a destroyed tank in central Iraq was killed by friendly fire when he was mistaken for an Iraqi, the military said.
U.S. defense officials also were investigating whether a Navy Hornet jet that crashed Wednesday was shot down by a U.S. Patriot missile.
The Navy was searching for the pilot Thursday.
The overall toll of American troops dead passed 50, and Bush visited a Marine camp, which has lost 13 -- more than any other installation.
He's in heaven,'' the commander in chief told the family of one fallen Marine in a private moment.
To the cheers of thousands earlier in a speech, he vowed victory, and said, ``A vise is closing on the regime.''
Iraqi officials issued the latest in a series of exhortations in Saddam's name.
Fight them with your hands.
God will disgrace them,'' they said, referring to invading American and British troops.
But the daily urgings seemed increasingly at odds with the military situation across the country, and Myers said Saddam had lost control of 45 percent of Iraq's territory.
As conventional units fought their way to the outskirts of the capital, officials said special forces had raided the Tharthar presidential palace near Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
Documents were seized at the site north of Baghdad, said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks at U.S. Central Command in the Persian Gulf, but no ranking members of the regime were found.
That's all right, he added, there's other operations ongoing.''
To the far north, U.S. special forces and Kurdish militiamen captured the town of Bardarash and a nearby bridge, one of few routes into the city of Mosul near government-held oil fields.
Iraqis had held the town for 13 years.
In the country's southern region, British forces penetrated closer to the center of Basra, and warplanes dropped 500-pound (225-kilogram) and 1,000-pound (450-kilogram) laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi intelligence complex.
Die-hard defenders have held out for days inside the city of 1.3 million.
American officials cited continuing examples of Iraqis cooperating with invading troops.
In Najaf, they said a prominent cleric under house arrest by the Iraqi government had urged the population not to interfere with the operations of American or British forces.
A small group of Iraqi defenders has been holding out inside the city in a mosque, considered a Shiite holy site, and local clerics said one religious leader had recently arrived in hopes of arranging for their safe passage out of the shrine.
Ground forces closed in on Baghdad from separate southern approaches, the Army from the southeast and Marines from the southwest, in advances begun Tuesday night.
American and British helicopters and planes bombed positions in Kut, and Marines and Iraqis lobbed grenades at close quarters.
Between 10 and 15 Iraqis armed only with rifles charged Marine tanks in the suicide charge.
Two U.S. Marines died in the fighting -- and a medic who tried to save one of them sorrowfully buried his resuscitation equipment on the spot.
Army forces rolled past dozens of dead Iraqi soldiers and bombed-out hulks of Iraqi military equipment as they made their way toward Baghdad from the area around Karbala.
Many more Iraqi soldiers surrendered to the overwhelming force of the Americans, and were shuttled to the rear.
At the same time they worried about chemical weapons attacks, Brooks disclosed that a special operations force in the southwestern desert had found a number of bottles ``marked in strange ways.''
He said an investigation was under way.
Walter Sisulu and the African National Congress came home yesterday.
After 26 years in prison, Mr. Sisulu, the 77-year-old former secretary-general of the liberation movement, was dropped off at his house by a prison services' van just as the sun was coming up.
At the same time, six ANC colleagues, five of whom were arrested with him in 1963 and sentenced to life imprisonment, were reunited with their families at various places around the country.
And as the graying men returned to their homes, the ANC, outlawed in South Africa since 1960 and still considered to be the chief public enemy by the white government, defiantly returned to the streets of the country's black townships.
A huge ANC flag, with black, green and gold stripes, was hoisted over the rickety gate at Mr. Sisulu's modest house, while on the street out front, boys displayed the ANC colors on their shirts, caps and scarves.
At the small four-room home of Elias Motsoaledi, a leading ANC unionist and a former commander in the group's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, well-wishers stuck little ANC flags in their hair and a man tooted on an antelope horn wrapped in ANC ribbons.
I am happy to see the spirit of the people," said Mr. Sisulu, looking dapper in a new gray suit.
As the crowd outside his home shouted "ANC, ANC," the old man shot his fists into the air.
I'm inspired by the mood of the people..
Under the laws of the land, the ANC remains an illegal organization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.
But the unconditional release of the seven leaders, who once formed the intellectual and organizational core of the ANC, is a de facto un-banning of the movement and the rebirth of its internal wing.
The government can never put the ANC back into the bottle again," said Cassim Saloojee, a veteran anti-apartheid activist on hand to welcome Mr. Sisulu.
Things have gone too far for the government to stop them now.
There's no turning back.
There was certainly no stopping the tide of ANC emotion last night, when hundreds of people jammed into the Holy Cross Anglican Church in Soweto for what became the first ANC rally in the country in 30 years.
Deafening chants of "ANC" and "Umkhonto we Sizwe" shook the church as the seven aging men vowed that the ANC would continue its fight against the government and the policies of racial segregation on all fronts, including the armed struggle.
And they called on the government to release Nelson Mandela, the ANC's leading figure, who was jailed with them and remains in prison.
Without him, said Mr. Sisulu, the freeing of the others "is only a half-measure..
President F.W. de Klerk released the ANC men -- along with one of the founding members of the Pan Africanist Congress, a rival liberation group -- as part of his efforts to create a climate of trust and peace in which his government can begin negotiations with black leaders over a new constitution aimed at giving blacks a voice in national government.
But Pretoria may instead be creating a climate for more turmoil and uncertainty in this racially divided country.
As other repressive governments, particularly Poland and the Soviet Union, have recently discovered, initial steps to open up society can create a momentum for radical change that becomes difficult, if not impossible, to control.
As the days go by, the South African government will be ever more hard pressed to justify the continued imprisonment of Mr. Mandela as well as the continued banning of the ANC and enforcement of the state of emergency.
If it doesn't yield on these matters, and eventually begin talking directly to the ANC, the expectations and promise raised by yesterday's releases will turn to disillusionment and unrest.
If it does, the large number of right-wing whites, who oppose any concessions to the black majority, will step up their agitation and threats to take matters into their own hands.
The newly released ANC leaders also will be under enormous pressure.
The government is watching closely to see if their presence in the townships leads to increased anti-government protests and violence; if it does, Pretoria will use this as a reason to keep Mr. Mandela behind bars.
Pretoria hasn't forgotten why they were all sentenced to life imprisonment in the first place: for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
In addition, the government is figuring that the releases could create a split between the internal and external wings of the ANC and between the newly freed leaders and those activists who have emerged as leaders inside the country during their imprisonment.
In order to head off any divisions, Mr. Mandela, in a meeting with his colleagues before they were released, instructed them to report to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka as soon as possible.
The men also will be faced with bridging the generation gap between themselves and the country's many militant black youths, the so-called young lions who are anxious to see the old lions in action.
Says Peter Mokaba, president of the South African Youth Congress: "We will be expecting them to act like leaders of the ANC..
They never considered themselves to be anything else.
At last night's rally, they called on their followers to be firm, yet disciplined, in their opposition to apartheid.
We emphasize discipline because we know that the government is very, very sensitive," said Andrew Mlangeni, another early Umkhonto leader who is now 63.
We want to see Nelson Mandela and all our comrades out of prison, and if we aren't disciplined we may not see them here with us..
And this is VOA News now.
I'm Tom Crosby.
As we have been reporting, the White House confirms Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are going to meet separately with President Clinton later this week.
Meanwhile, there has been continued trouble in the streets of West Bank and the Gaza Strip with at least two more Palestinians killed, Sunday in clashes with Israeli troops.
Laurie Kassman reports the trouble came despite an impassioned plea from Prime Minister Barak that Mr. Arafat rein in the rioters and return to the negotiating table.
On Saturday, Palestinians reported more than 30 injuries.
But reports of the fighting also talked of a drop in the level of violence, since both sides agreed to a cease-fire late Wednesday night.
More than 170 Palestinians have died and more than 6000 are reported to have been wounded in clashes with the Israeli military.
Several Israeli soldiers and civilians have also been killed.
Shopkeepers in East Jerusalem are being urged to close their doors to protest against the killing of two Palestinian teenagers on Friday, Southeast of Jerusalem.
Both Arab and Israeli businesses are suffering from the latest violence.
A shopkeeper in the Arab town of Jaffa, which is adjacent to Tel Aviv, complains that few Israelis venture into the area since clashes erupted there a few weeks ago.
Jaffa is usually bustling with Israeli and foreign tourists.
All our work is dependent totally on the Jews.
If they are not coming, so really we cannot work.
I mean, what happens that the Arabs here, the 20,000 Arabs in is dependent on the Jews going to their market and the Jews coming here.
So we cannot live, I mean, we are really totally paralyzed right now.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have agreed to meet separately with US President Bill Clinton to see how to ease tensions and get the peace process back on track.
The meetings will take place later in the week after the US presidential vote on Tuesday.
Laurie Kassman, VOA News, Jerusalem.
From the St. Pete Times : Some Florida legislators want to give people the right to shoot an attacker in a public place.
A House committee voted Wednesday to allow people to shoot to kill in self-defense if they are attacked "in any other place where he or she has a right to be."
Sponsored by Rep. Dennis Baxley, an Ocala Republican, the bill (HB 249) passed 13-0.
State law defines deadly force as that which is likely to cause "death or great bodily harm, such as firing a gun at a person or a vehicle.
Florida courts consider deadly force a last resort and have held that a person being attacked has the "duty to use every reasonable means to avoid the danger, including retreat, prior to using deadly force."
But this legislation says a person who is under attack in a public place "has no duty to retreat.
Law-abiding people should not be told that if they are attacked, they should turn around and run, NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer told lawmakers.
This bill gives back rights that have been eroded and taken away by a judicial system that at times appears to give preferential treatment to criminals.
Baxley held up a stack of more than 800 e-mails from Floridians who he said have written him to support the bill.
He said 62 House members, a majority, have endorsed his bill, and supporters include Attorney General Charlie Crist and groups representing Florida sheriffs, police chiefs and police officers.
Rep. Jeff Kottkamp, R-Cape Coral, said the bill reminded him of a sign he saw on a constituent's house while campaigning door-to-door.
Kottkamp said the sign, next to a doorbell, showed a smoking .44-Magnum handgun and the words: We don't dial 911.
This is great news for Florida gun carriers because now to defend yourself you don't have to first make sure a "duty to retreat" is impossible.
Currently, if one's life is threatened he/she must make sure it is impossible to escape before using deadly force on an attacker.
Grief engulfed Austria, one day after a fire in a cable car filled with skiers killed at least 155 people.
It happened inside a tunnel high in the Austrian Alps.
Here's NBC's Ron Allen.
As helicopters carried emergency crews to the scene of the disaster nearly 100 Americans headed home to military bases in Germany, without eight members of their ski clubs who never came back.
Major Drew Stathis and his 8-year-old daughter say they might have been trapped, but they were just five minutes behind the group.
In the Army you kind of expect, prepare yourself.
But not on a family vacation.
That's where the tragedy is.
Lieutenant Mike Coe got tired of waiting for a train and left a family of four Americans who died, standing in line.
It is horrifying what happened to them.
And it is horrifying how close I was to -- I mean, I guess I'm a good, impatient American who did not want to wait in line.
Today this Alpine resort town came to an abrupt halt as more than 150 victims were all but positively identified.
Friends and relatives who'd been waiting and hoping were taken to a private memorial service.
Up the mountain the usually packed ski areas were completely deserted.
Investigators still haven't figured out what caused this disaster.
Several eyewitnesses have told them they saw flames coming from the train as it headed up the mountain, before it entered the tunnel.
One official here said, by the time the driver noticed the fire, it already was too late.
The main concern now is to remove and identify the victims.
These Americans ended a holiday weekend burdened by a deep sense of loss.
Nobody is looking forward to the long bus ride with our friends missing.
It's going to be hard.
Hard for this entire nation mourning the worst disaster here that anyone can remember.
Ron Allen, NBC News, Kaprun, Austria.
Edmund Pope, the U.S. businessman convicted of espionage in Russia, is offering the first details of his eight-month stay in a Moscow prison.
Speaking from a U.S. military hospital in Germany, Pope says he was treated well by prison guards, but suffered from mental anguish and depression.
Today, Pope is undergoing an extensive medical checkup, to see if there is any recurrence of bone cancer.
He's undergoing tests for skin cancer as well.
He will wait for the results before returning home to the U.S.
Pope was pardoned yesterday by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
A Moscow court has denied a request by US spy suspect Edmond Pope for a medical examination, despite his rare bone cancer.
Mr. Pope's condition has gone untreated since he was jailed five months ago.
Russia accuses the former US naval intelligence officer of illegally obtaining secrets about a high-tech Russian torpedo.
On Friday the court denied a series of defense motions that also included a request to tape the proceedings and replace the court translator, who works for Russian security.
The trial opened Wednesday and has been suspended until Monday.
In Yemen, a bomb threat has forced the tightening of security at the hotel housing US investigators probing the attack on the USS Cole.
Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters the situation caused the Secretary of Defense to call US field commanders.
The Secretary held a video conference call with all the commanders in chiefs, as well as the service chiefs and the service secretaries and the topic was force protection.
The hotel has been hosting scores of investigators who are looking into the apparent suicide bomb attack on the navy destroyer that killed 17 US sailor two weeks ago.
It was a parent's ultimate nightmare.
As the crippled jet prepared for an emergency landing, Sylvia Tsao wrapped her 23-month-old son, Evan, in blankets and, following cabin-crew orders, placed him on the floor.
She held him down tightly, trying to protect him.
Suddenly, the world seemed to end," she told investigators later.
Crashing into a cornfield, United Airlines' Flight 232 flipped over, and she lost her grip on her son.
I saw for an instant my son's body floating and flying" toward the back of the plane, Ms. Tsao recalled.
When the plane stopped moving, she frantically tried to find him.
But Evan died of smoke inhalation.
July's Sioux City crash has fueled an emotionally charged debate.
Safety advocates and members of Congress, calling babies "the neglected population," are stepping up a campaign for the mandatory use of infant safety seats on all flights.
But the Federal Aviation Administration is reluctant to require separate seats for babies because of the added cost for traveling parents.
Some FAA officials note that few infants have been killed in plane crashes, raising the question of whether safety seats really are needed.
A 1981 Harvard Medical School study that scrutinized accidents in the late 1970s concluded that perhaps three babies would have been saved in a five-year period if safety-seat use had been required.
The National Transportation Safety Board will take a close look at the issue during four days of hearings that begin today on the broader issue of what caused the crash that killed 112 people.
Infants', toddlers' and young children's safety should no longer be ignored as if they don't count," Mrs. Tsao wrote to the board in advocating use of the safety seats.
All 50 states require that small children be strapped into safety seats in cars.
On planes, FAA rules dictate that children two years old and over have their own tickets and be strapped into regular seats, just as adults are.
Babies under two may sit on laps and fly for free.
But it is almost impossible to keep hold of a baby during an air crash, or even in severe turbulence.
During the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson of Cincinnati lost her grip on her baby as the plane lurched and tipped over.
Another passenger heard one-year-old Sabrina's cry and pulled her from an overhead luggage compartment.
The FAA encourages the use of safety seats, but in the past many parents have run into problems trying to use them, even when the plane was only half-full or they had bought an extra ticket especially for the baby.
When Vanessa Merton, an associate dean at Pace University School of Law, decided to take her young son to Europe last spring, she called four carriers to ask about their policies on car seats.
The people acted like I was transporting heroin, she says.
One reservation agent told her -- incorrectly -- that the airline barred the use of the seats on flights.
After the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson bought a car seat for her daughter for the flight home to Cincinnati.
But on one leg of the trip, she was ordered by a flight attendant to take Sabrina out of the seat and hold her during takeoff and landing -- the most dangerous parts of any flight.
Airlines say that such mistakes are decreasing in the aftermath of Sioux City, but proponents of the safety devices say they still get complaints from parents.
People are told one thing on the phone, another at check in, another at the gate, and another on the plane, says Stephanie Tombrello, executive director of the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association, which petitioned the FAA in June for mandatory use of child-safety seats.
The Association of Flight Attendants, the main flight attendants' union, is strongly backing that request.
The FAA argues that requiring safety seats for all babies might actually diminish, not enhance, safety.
As part of such a rule, officials say, parents would probably be required to buy an extra ticket for the baby.
The increased cost of flying would inevitably encourage some families to drive rather than fly, they say.
Commercial airlines have the lowest accident rate of all transportation modes -- much lower than cars, for example.
Anthony Broderick, the FAA's acting Executive Director for Regulatory Standards and Compliance, contends that the current rule is the best approach because it allows parents to make their own decision on whether to use a safety seat.
But he admits that the agency is in a very uncomfortable position.
He says the agency soon will propose that airlines be prohibited from denying the use of safety seats.
Most airlines don't prohibit their use.
He says the agency also will seek public comment on whether the seats should be required.
Walter Coleman, Vice President of Operations for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for the major airlines, describes the call for safety seats as "legitimate" and says the group is studying the issue.
But privately some airline officials fear that if parents must buy extra tickets for babies, whole families will stop flying.
Others worry that the FAA might write a rule forcing airlines to pick up part of the tab for increased infant safety.
Generally, airlines say they welcome the use of a government-approved safety seat and will even allow the restraint to take up a regular seat for free if the flight isn't crowded.
Most car seats made in recent years are certified for use on aircraft and are so marked..
But space can only be guaranteed if a ticket is purchased.
What the industry really wants is some kind of device that would protect babies without taking up an extra seat.
But no one has come up with anything that is safer in a crash than the current practice of bundling babies up and trying to pin them to the floor.
Parents are advised against holding the infants, for fear that in an accident the babies could be crushed by the adult's weight.
Proponents of safety seats are turning up the heat on the FAA.
Yesterday, Rep. James Lightfoot, an Iowa Republican, sent FAA Administrator James Busey a letter signed by 56 House members urging the agency to require infant safety seats.
If the FAA refuses, Rep. Lightfoot says, he will push legislation to require the change.
U.S. forces tightened their grip throughout Baghdad, entering the city for the first time from the north, seizing a military airport and battling snipers and Republican Guard fighters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military faced sharp criticism over assaults that killed three foreign journalists.
Pentagon officials said Tuesday they didn't know whether Iraqi President Saddam Hussein died in the U.S. airstrike on a Baghdad neighborhood the day before.
The strike destroyed three nearby houses and killed at least two people.
U.S. Marines battled snipers as they fought deeper into the capital from the east.
They seized the Rasheed Airport and captured enough ammunition for an estimated 3,000 troops.
Ominously, they also took a prison where they found U.S. Army uniforms and chemical weapons suits possibly belonging to American POWs.
Some army units routed Iraqi fighters from a Republican Guard headquarters inside the capital.
Others discovered a 12-room complex inside a cave, complete with white marble floors and fluorescent lighting.
Members of the U.S. Army's V Corps opened up a new front by entering Baghdad from the north.
The toll on Iraqi civilians four days after Americans first penetrated the Baghdad outskirts is unknown.
But the World Health Organization said Baghdad's hospitals were running out of supplies to treat the burns, shrapnel wounds and spinal injuries caused by the fighting.
Iraqi officials, however, remained defiant, saying Iraq's forces would never surrender to American forces: ``They will be burnt,'' said Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf.
In central Baghdad, a Reuters cameraman and a cameraman for Spain's Telecinco died when an American tank fired on the Palestine Hotel.
The incident raises questions about the judgment of the advancing U.S. troops who have known all along that this hotel is the main base for almost all foreign journalists in Baghdad,'' Reuters Editor-in-Chief Geert Linnebank said.
Tareq Ayyoub, a journalist with Al-Jazeera, died when a U.S. warplane bombed the Arab-language satellite television's office.
An Abu Dhabi TV office in Baghdad also was hit.
Al-Jazeera categorically denied that its Baghdad bureau had been used by Iraqi forces to fire on U.S. troops.
U.S. Central Command said it fired on the TV office and the hotel after U.S. forces came under ``significant'' fire from those buildings.
Associated Press photographer Jerome Delay said he watched from the top floor of the hotel as American tanks took up positions on the bridge.
All the shooting was concentrated on the bridge and across the river,'' where U.S. forces were located, he said.
It was not clear whether any Iraqi leader had been killed in the airstrike targeting Saddam in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood.
Iraqi rescue workers pulled two bodies from the rubble but said the toll could be as high as 14.
I don't know whether he survived,U.S President George W. Bush said of Saddam at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
The only thing I know is that he's losing power.''
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said Tuesday he believes that Saddam is alive, although al-Douri acknowledged he has not communicated with Baghdad.
Bush and Blair sought to minimize their differences over who should govern and rebuild Iraq.
Blair favors a stronger U.N. role than Bush.
There will be a vital role for the U.N. in the reconstruction of Iraq,'' Blair said.
But the key is that Iraq in the end will be run by the Iraqi people.''
In northern Iraq, Kurdish forces tightened their ring around Kirkuk on Tuesday, following heavy coalition airstrikes on Iraqi fronts.
Kurdish militia took control of Sekamian plateau, about 10 kilometers (six miles) north of Kirkuk, Kurdish media reported.
The area affords a commanding view of the city and the vast oil fields of Iraq's No. 2 oil region.
The U.S. military said two planes had been lost.
An A-10 Warthog'' warplane was shot down near Baghdad, believed to be the first fixed-wing aircraft downed by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile since the war began.
U.S. Central Command said the pilot ejected, was recovered by ground forces and was in good condition.
A U.S. F-15E jet fighter also went down early Monday and a search was under way for its two-man crew, the military announced Tuesday.
Officials did not say whether the plane was shot down or crashed accidentally.
British forces in southern Iraq worked to restore order in the heavily looted streets of Basra, as desperate citizens swarmed water tanker trucks the day after British soldiers claimed Iraq's second largest city.
British forces also began establishing the country's first postwar administration Tuesday, granting a local sheik power to set up an administrative committee representing the groups in the region.
One of the rules of thumb that has guided my (limited) business career from the beginning is that China is never as lucrative as it looks.
This assumption is based on about 150 years of economic history, including several booms in interest and investment in China.
Their biggest problem: There's usually a 200-to-1 ratio of Nearly Starving Peasant Laborers to Absurdly Well-Off Government Employees.
And now it's an iffier 100-to-1, since there are also rich private sector employees and the labor force isn't quite so expendable.
What they've been missing for years was the real driver behind any consumer economy: Consumers.
Specifically, they didn't have a real middle class.
That's changed in the last twenty years, as increasing social mobility and a burst in foreign demand has finally made China a genuine, rather than theoretical, contender.
And they've even supplied proof of their economic viability, announcing that they've beaten Japan for exports to the US.
If only I'd figured this out in early 2002, when their stock market was by some stretch of the imagination cheap.
I dunno if you want anything to do with their stock market.
For one, its perforance last year was pretty dismal.
More importantly, its a structural nuthouse.
Unfortunately, minority shareholder rights are virtually non-existent, and excluding the dodgy financial statements listed on the exchange, lots of times companies are more interested in generating cash from an IPO then actually bothering with shareholder value.
This Economist article (not sure if registration is required, sorry):
Finally, the Shanghai Composite on July, 1997 was trading at 1189.76.
As of January 27, 2005 it's sitting at 1225.89.
That's an annualized return of roughly 0.4%.
The 5 year return is even worse
You haven't missed much.
Former Danish international Stig Toefting dropped his appeal of an assault conviction and will serve a four-month jail sentence, Denmark's TV2 reported Monday.
Toefting was convicted in October 2002 of assaulting a pair of restaurant workers during a night out with national squad teammates in the capital, Copenhagen.
He was sentenced to four months in prison, but appealed.
The hearing was scheduled for April 10.
TV2, quoting Toefting's lawyer Anders Nemeth, reported that that 33-year-old midfielder was ready to serve his sentence immediately.
Neither Toefting or Nemeth were immediately available for comment.
Earlier this month, Toefting said English Premier League club Bolton let him go so he could prepare for the appeal.
It was unclear whether Toefting would return to Bolton after serving his sentence.
The club said it wasn't aware of Toefting's decision to drop his appeal.
Toefting transferred to Bolton in February 2002 from German club Hamburg.
Toefting has been convicted before.
In 1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence for assaulting a fan who berated him for playing with German club Duisburg.
The popular player -- known for his temperament and the words ``No Regret'' tattooed across his chest -- retired from Denmark's national team after it was knocked out in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.
Toefting joined the Danish squad in 1993 and has 41 caps.
In news overseas, at a United Nations environmental summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, representatives from 122 nations signed an agreement banning the use of 12 highly toxic chemicals.
Among them, dioxins and other chemicals, which are known as "the dirty dozen..
They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, and other genetic abnormalities.
This recent news story is troubling in many different ways.
When I first heard of the story I figured it was some wackjob playing with a new toy but now we find out there have been 7 incidents since Christmas from the West to East coast.
The FBI, concerned that terrorists could use lasers as weapons, is investigating why laser beams were directed into the cockpits of seven airplanes in flight since Christmas.
Laser beams can temporarily blind or disorient pilots and possibly cause a plane to crash.
The FBI is looking into two incidents in Colorado Springs, Colo., and one each in Cleveland, Washington, Houston, Teterboro, N.J., and Medford, Ore., according to federal and local law enforcement and transportation officials, some of whom spoke only on condition of anonymity.
A federal law enforcement official, who declined to be identified by name, said Thursday there is no evidence of a plot or terrorist activity.
But pilots are troubled by the incidents, and the FBI earlier this month warned of the possibility that terrorists might use the devices as weapons.
It's not some kid, said Paul Rancatore, a pilot who serves as deputy chairman of the security committee for the Allied Pilots Association.
It's too organized.
Loren Thompson, who teaches military technology at Georgetown University, called it a "rather worrisome development," though he said experts would be more puzzled than alarmed.
What we're talking about is a fairly powerful visible light laser that has the ability to lock onto a fast-moving aircraft," Thompson said.
That's not the sort of thing you pick up at a military surplus store."
Thompson said a piece of equipment that could do the things the FBI suspects would be "fairly expensive and fairly sophisticated."
It sounds like an organized effort to cause airline accidents," Thompson said.
Michelle Malkin has a post about this today where some outlets have stopped selling lasers.
Lots of people think that these indeed might be loonies playing with new Christmas toys but I disagree.
These are incidents where the Airplanes were tracked , some as high as 8500 feet.
To track a fast moving plane at that altitude would not be some toy you can get from the local wal-mart.
In my opinion this is quite alarming.
This Isn't Writing, It's Typing has a great post out with a ton of info, some of it quite scary A more frightening scenario is that terrorists may have obtained a Chinese-produced ZM-87 laser blinder which is specifically designed to blind eyesight.
The Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo--which launched the infamous Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995--was discovered to have experimented with the use of lasers as weapons.
According to The Asian Pacific Post, "Cult members apparently obtained laser design information from Russian institutes they visited and built a laser weapon mounted on a truck.
They had planned to use the laser against Tokyo policemen, but the plan failed when the laser malfunctioned during the testing stage."
PoliticAlex also has some info on this story also.
I found the following report that was presented to Congress recently about the shoulder launched missle threat to airliners, which this might very well be a precursor to: Recent events have focused attention on the threat that terrorists with shoulder fired surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), referred to as Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), pose to commercial airliners.
Most believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate this threat.
Instead, a menu of options may be considered, including installing infrared (IR) countermeasures on aircraft; modifying flight operations and air traffic control procedures; improving airport and regional security; and strengthening missile non-proliferation efforts.
Equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems can protect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground-based security measures are unavailable or infeasible to implement.
However, this option has a relatively high cost, between $1 million and $3 million per aircraft, and the time needed for implementation does not allow for immediate response to the existing terrorist threat.
Procedural improvements such as specific flight crew training, altering air traffic procedures to minimize exposure to the threat, and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasures and could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks.
However, these techniques by themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protect U.S. airliners flying to and from foreign airports.
Legislation introduced in the 108th Congress (H.R. 580, S. 311) calls for the installation of missile defense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service.
While this legislation is still under consideration, Homeland Security appropriations designated $60 million in FY2004 and $61 million in FY2005 to fund a program to develop and test prototype missile countermeasure systems for commercial aircraft based on existing military technology.
It is anticipated that at the conclusion of this program, in January 2006, the Department of Homeland Security will be able to provide a detailed analysis of the suitability of such systems for use to protect commercial passenger aircraft.
A CNN poll asks readers to rate the president's State of the Union speech last night.
After 90,000 votes Mr. Bush has a 'C-C+' grade across the board, meaning 45,000 Republicans gave him an 'A' and 45,000 liberals failed him.
But a new CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggests more people side with the president.
70 percent of respondents said Bush's policies on health care were positive, while 66 percent approved of the president's plan for Social Security.
78 percent said U.S. policy in Iraq is hading in the right direction, a 12 percentage point increase over pre-speech polling.
Overall, 77 percent of respondents said Bush is taking the country in the right direction after the speech compared to 67 percent beforehand.
And who wasn't moved by the embrace of mother of a soldier killed in Iraq and the daughter of a man killed by Saddam Hussein's regime?
It was a beautiful moment last night that resulted in the longest standing ovation of the evening.
Today the parents of Marine Corps Sgt. Byron Norwood said the Iraqi woman, Safia Taleb al-Suhail, had turned and introduced herself just before the speech.
She thanked us for our son's sacrifice and made sure we knew the people in Iraq were grateful for the sacrifices that were made not just by our son, but by all of them," Janet Norwood said.
It was an uplifting moment suggesting that maybe we're doing the right thing.
I talked to a friend currently serving in Iraq last night and he says morale is up and the presence of troops is a positive thing.
They just can't pack up and leave.
Not just yet.
We must be patient.
A verdict handed down three years ago today brought debate from both sides of the Atlantic.
In this edition of "Headliners," Bob Glascoff has the story of British au pair Louise Woodward and finds out what she's doing now.
October 1997.
Louise Woodward is sentenced to life in prison on charges she murdered an infant boy.
Woodward, then a 19-year-old au pair from Britain, was accused of killing 8-month-old Matthew Eappen by shaking him and slamming his head.
The case attracted widespread attention in England, where many thought she was innocent.
Woodward had been living with the Eappen family taking care of their two young sons.
Despite receiving a life sentence, her charges were reduced two weeks later from second-degree murder to manslaughter.
She was sentenced to time served and released.
Woodward returned to Britain in 1998 to another controversy.
Her parents were accused of defrauding her defense fund.
They went on trial this year and were acquitted.
Today, Woodward is studying to be a lawyer.
With "Headliners," I'm Bob Glascoff.
Nicolae Mischie, authoritarian leader of a district organization of the main opposition party, has been jailed.
Romania voted in the last December, ousting the so-called socialist party PSD (Social-Democratic Party).
PSD managed to keep a stronghold in poor rural areas, with the help of people like Mischie.
They combined blackmail, using their right of decision regarding the public funds for local leaders opposing PSD, and strong seduction of the uneducated masses, in a marvelous way.
E.g., Mischie, who talks like an idiot, got a PhD in history.
His paper was on a political personality of the 19th century and Mischie bought the house where his paper's subject lived.
Maybe he tried to invest in his paper, maybe he believed sincerely in his admiration for the poor innocent dead guy and his ability of earning PhDs, but using a big car and living in a big house are signs for the masses that the man is an invaluable and irreplaceable leader.
Another misleading sign was his position as a University professor - he was teaching mostly at private universities, which are still ways to buy diplomas here in Romania.
Local leaders did their jobs, but national leaders, pressuring TV stations to lie, associating with old communist ex-president Ion Iliescu, failed to win in big cities.
Social Democratic party was setting strategy for next four years.
It is known that communist leaders die in office (as judges of the U.S. Supreme Court) and Ion Iliescu won't be different.
All the leaders that expressed different points of view will be excluded from the party, that's the untold truth that Romanian media seem to hide or not conceive yet.
Mischie was right to criticize the national leaders, because PSD got a good share in the elections in his area.
But Mischie was wrong, because he did that while in vacation in Switzerland, where you can't go if you earn 20K $ a year.
The new power had nothing to do, but let the policemen do what they should be doing years ago.
Iliescu and Nastase, ex-president and ex-prime minister, are now left only with the leadership of the party and holding this illusory authority.
If Mischie wouldn't take his chance on them, he would still be free, with the help of the weak and weakening strings Iliescu might still pull.
President Clinton has urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to order the release on humanitarian grounds of a US businessman convicted of spying.
A White House spokesman says the two leaders spoke by telephone today, after the Russian government's pardon commission recommended the release of Edmond Pope.
Earlier, a senior Russian official said Edmond Pope could be home by Christmas.
The former US naval intelligence officer was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison Wednesday, on charges he illegally obtained a classified information on a Russian torpedo.
The charismatic leader of Turkey's governing party was named prime minister Tuesday, a step that probably boosts chances that the United States will get permission to deploy troops in the country along Iraq's northern border.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who favors the deployment, hinted that he will reshuffle the Cabinet, but gave no indication if he would purge officials who opposed letting in the troops as analysts have suggested he might do.
Erdogan is extremely popular in Turkey and is likely be one of the few leaders with enough clout to unite his party and gain public support for allowing in the U.S. troops.
Turks overwhelmingly oppose a war -- by 94 percent, according to some polls.
Earlier this month, the Turkish parliament shocked the United States by rejecting the deployment by just four votes.
Erdogan has hinted that he will resubmit the resolution for approval, which could take another week.
The United States is pressing Turkey to act quickly.
Ships carrying equipment for U.S. troops are already waiting off the Turkish coast.
In Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States would ``have a northern option whether or not Turkey fully supports all our requests.
I'm not going to talk about the operational ways of doing it, but just be assured there will be a northern option,'' he said.
Also in Washington, Turkish Ambassador Farouk Logoglu told The Associated Press that the U.S. and Turkish militaries were holding informal discussions on the use of Turkish airspace.
The troop-basing resolution would allow the United States to use Turkish airspace.
If the resolution is not passed, Washington would likely want to use the airspace for strikes against Iraq and for airlifting troops to northern Iraq.
Refusing access to the troop deployment would mean Turkey would lose a US$15 billion U.S. aid package that Washington has offered to help cushion the country's economy if there is war.
It would also threaten Turkey's possible role in the future of Iraq.
Turkey, which fears northern Iraqi Kurds may declare independence in the aftermath of a war, has been pressing for a say if Saddam Hussein is ousted.
Secession by Iraqi Kurds could inspire Turkey's rebel Kurds, who for 15 years have been fighting for autonomy.
After he was elected, Erdogan said Turkey wanted assurances from the United States on its role in Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday there had been talks that Turkish troops could be deployed ``a short distance from their border to try to avoid refugee infiltration.''
Iraqi Kurds fear that Turkish troops could move deep into the autonomous enclave in northern Iraq and have threatened clashes.
Rumsfeld also said that like Turkey, the United States doesn't want to see a breakaway state: ``Our interest, needless to say, is to see that Iraq remains a single country,'' he said at the Pentagon news conference.
Prime Minister Abdullah Gul resigned earlier Tuesday to make way for Erdogan, who won a parliamentary seat in by-elections Sunday.
Gul will remain as a caretaker prime minister until President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approves Erdogan's Cabinet, a move that could happen as early as Wednesday.
Erdogan said he would submit his Cabinet list to the president ``as soon as possible,'' and leaders of Erdogan's Justice and Development Party met Tuesday evening.
When asked about possible changes in the Cabinet, Erdogan said: ``Perhaps there will be a small amount of change, a certain number of revisions.''
Gul's resignation had been long expected.
Erdogan heads the party but was constitutionally barred from running in November elections because he was jailed in 1999 for anti-secular activities.
The Justice party changed the constitution after taking power in the elections.
Erdogan, a leader of Turkey's pro-Islamic movement when he was jailed, said he moderated his policies in prison.
His party considers itself conservative and no longer uses the word 'Islamic' in its literature.
He now also advocates letting in U.S. troops for a war against Iraq even though it is a fellow Muslim state.
Unlike the soft-spoken Gul, Erdogan has a reputation as a fighter.
Erdogan will be willing to engage in a bruising confrontation in a way that Gul was not willing to,'' said Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
If Erdogan decides that for his own reasons, and not U.S. pressure, he wants this, he will push it through.''
Tensions over the basing agreement spilled over into parliament Tuesday when opposition deputy Ufuk Ozkan shouted ``You are all American lackeys!'' at members of Erdogan's party, the Anatolia news agency reported.
A furious Justice party member, Fehmi Husrev Kutlu, rushed toward Ozkan, bumping into him and sending his eyeglasses flying, Anatolia reported.
Other legislators surrounded the two to head off a brawl.
In South Asia, authorities in Bangladesh's Southwestern port of Mongla have called on the Army to control riots that have left at least four people dead and 58 injured.
Officials say the trouble began when striking dock workers tried to storm the port authority offices and police fired to disperse them.
The demonstrators are demanding that more people be hired to load and unload goods at the port.
The name Father Frost may not be familiar to you, but to Russian children, Christmas wouldn't be the same without him.
Denise Dillon reports.
Santa Claus visited the northern Russian city of Veliki Ustyug to meet with his Russian counterpart, Father Frost.
It's believed Veliki Ustyug, which is about 600 miles north of Moscow, is the hometown of Father Frost, one of the main characters of Russian Christmas stories.
The 50,000 residents here have a deep respect for the history of their town, and it seemed as though all of them bundled up against the cold and came out to welcome Santa and Father Frost as they rode into the town's central square on a horse-drawn carriage.
People who live here hope this is the beginning of a long tradition that others around the world will celebrate with them.
A new great holiday came to our town.
This is how new traditions are generated.
And I hope this holiday will become nationwide soon.
As for us, we are always happy to see guests in our town.
When Santa arrived, the temperature was 16 degrees below 0, but that did not stop the Russian folk singers and dancers from performing traditional dances.
Later, Santa visited Father Frost's home, where they met with all the good little boys and girls.
When you believe in Santa Claus, then you are good people and good children.
Then your dreams can come true.
Children around the world believe that Santa Claus or Father Frost will bring them good luck, and presents, for the holidays.
Denise Dillon, "Headline News."
From the Associated Press : City residents will vote next year on a proposed weapons ban that would deny handguns to everyone except law enforcement officers, members of the military and security guards.
If passed next November, residents would have 90 days to give up firearms they keep in their homes or businesses.
The proposal was immediately dismissed as illegal by a gun owners group.
Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else "actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment," according to the measure.
Gun Owners of California, a Sacramento-based lobbying group, quickly called the ban illegal.
Sam Paredes, the group's executive director, said state law bars local governments from usurping the state's authority to regulate firearms.
The amazing thing is they are going to turn San Francisco into ground zero for every criminal who wants to profit at their chosen profession," Paredes said.
Washington, D.C., is the only major American city that currently bans handgun possession by private citizens.
Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for the National Rifle Association, said San Francisco would be remiss to use that city as a model.
If gun control worked, Washington, D.C., would be the beacon.
However, it's the murder capital of the United States," he said.
If approved, the weapons ban would take effect in January 2006.
Quote of the day: "Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment."
So preserving property or life within the scope of self-defense and protection of the home is not allowed.
No thanks.
If the people vote for this measure it will be hard to sympathize with them when robbery and rape rates skyrocket, because burgulars will know homes are not guarded, and rapists will know the only thing stopping them from the victim they desire is their own inhibitions.
Thousands of people in Botswana have lined up to view the remains of an African man whose body was stuffed and exhibited in a Spanish museum for nearly a century.
The man was returned to Africa after complaints from the UN and other organizations that displaying his body was racist and offensive.
The man will be buried at a funeral service tomorrow.
You are listening to BBC news for The World.
I'm Gregor Craigy.
President Clinton says he's willing to meet separately with Israeli and Palestinian leaders if both sides work to end the Mideast violence.
The president proposed the talks in a call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Mr. Clinton says he wants to see Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak abide by promises to end the bloodshed made at last week's emergency summit in Egypt.
A White House spokesman says Arafat is reviewing the offer.
Meanwhile, some 30,000 anti-Israeli protesters clashed with police in Jordan.
Demonstrators from across the country traveled to a west bank border town to call for the return of Palestinian refugees.
The number of police and protesters who were injured is still not known.
The blood red nation of China is trying to curb the effects of a devastating 20-year-old policy that outlawed women from having more than one child.
As a result, only about 100 girls are born for every 119 boys, because couples traditionally favor males.
Beijing has set a goal of reversing the imbalance by 2010, and to do this they will outlaw the selective abortion of female fetuses to correct an imbalance in the ratio of boys to girls.
So now by killing the males they can hopefully narrow the gender gap.
What a country!
From Reuters : Sex-selective abortion is already banned but technologies such as ultrasound have made it easier to know a baby's gender in advance, increasing the chances for aborting girls.
Despite a desire to curb the sex imbalance and a relaxation in recent years that allows rural families to have two children if the first is a girl, China has shown no sign of abandoning the one-child policy and cracks down on those who advocate against it.
One such activist is Mao Hengfeng, who was dismissed in 1988 from her job at a Shanghai soap factory after becoming pregnant a second time.
Last April, the Shanghai public security bureau sentenced her to 18 months in a labor camp for campaigning against the one-child policy.
In other news: feminists still believe they're second-class citizens in the United States.
A Pakistani court in central Punjab province has sentenced a Christian man to life imprisonment for a blasphemy conviction, police said Sunday.
Judge Shahid Rafiq, of the district court in the industrial city of Faisalabad, found Ranjha Masih guilty of defiling Koranic verses during a protest rally by the minority Christian community in 1998.
In a verdict handed down on Saturday, the judge also ordered Ranjha to pay a fine of 50,000 rupees (about 870 US dollars), they said.
Ranjha was accused of tearing down a billboard carrying verses from the Koran in Faisalabad during a Christian demonstration after the city's bishop committed suicide over the 1985 blasphemy law.
Faisalabad's Catholic Bishop John Joseph, who had been campaigning against the law, shot himself in the head outside a court in Sahiwal district when the judge convicted Christian Ayub Masih under the law in 1998.
Ayub Masih was charged in 1996 with blasphemy for allegedly defending British author Salman Rushdie, whose novel "The Satanic Verses" infuriated radical Mulsim clerics who accused the author of defaming Islam.
The Pakistani supreme court last year aquitted Ayub Masih, who had denied uttering any word against Islam or the Prophet Mohammad.
Blasphemy is punishable by death under the Pakistan Penal Code.
However, no blasphemy convict has ever been executed in the country.
Christian rights activists campaigning against the laws, introduced by late military dictator General Zia-ul Haq, say they are mainly used to persecute Christians or to settle feuds over land.
The US Navy destroyer damaged apparently by a terrorist bomb while refueling at the Red Sea port Aden has begun its journey back to the States for repair.
As Dave Gavlak reports, the USS Cole was towed out of the Aden harbor to awaiting Norwegian transport ship, that will actually carry the damaged destroyer home.
The American national anthem played as four tug boats pulled the USS Cole slowly out of Yemen's Southern port of Aden.
The Cole was badly damaged two weeks ago in an apparent suicide bombing that killed 17 US sailors.
Security was tight as the ship was towed out.
American and Yemeni patrol boats mounted with machine guns escorted the Cole out to open waters while American helicopters flew overhead.
Some Yemenis expressed relief to see the ship leave.
Many locals said they feared the bombing of the ship would serve as an excuse for continued US military presence in the Gulf country.
Diplomats and analysts have commented that a joint investigation into the attack may in fact strengthen ties between the world super power and the poor, but strategic Arab state.
US and Yemeni officials say they believe Islamic militants may have carried out the bombing.
So far two little known Islamic groups have claimed responsibility for the attack.
Yemeni authorities claimed they have detained over 70 people for questioning.
These include some Afghan-Arab volunteers who came to Yemen after fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Dave Gavlak for VOA News, Cairo.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres is expected to meet soon with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in an attempt to quell Mideast violence.
The meeting comes amid fresh clashes between the two sides.
Fighting broke out in Ramallah, Hebron and at the border crossings between Israel and Gaza today.
Three Palestinians were killed, at least 49 people wounded.
Overnight, Israeli gunships attacked three headquarters of Fatah, the political party allied with Arafat.
Israel calls it a response to Palestinian guerrilla warfare.
Arafat is condemning the attacks.
Read this report on the U.S.-Russia Technology Symposium.
It's a great summary of the paradoxes of the Russian economy: They have a huge untapped supply of valuable IT labor, but their IT exports are only a tenth of their military exports (and only a thirtieth of India's IT exports).
They develop lots of new technology, but nobody can tell who owns what.
And, of course, their securities laws and property rights are even flimsier than China's -- after the Putin administration mugged Yukos on the grounds that it was too attractive a target to leave alone, they lost a lot of trust.
Still, they have an unbelieveable amount of untapped potential.
The nuclear submarine "Kursk" could become a permanent underwater grave for 118 Russian sailors.
Russia's top admiral says he may scrap efforts to recover the bodies if experts decide the mission would endanger deep sea divers.
All those aboard the "Kursk" were killed in August when the sub sank after being damaged by an explosion in the Barents Sea.
The cause of the disaster has not been determined.
An international salvage team is due to arrive at the scene of the accident tomorrow.
Got job?
And so, I have rejoined the world of the fully employed.
After Christmas, I got a call from the wife of one of my former bosses (at my last full-time job).
She was looking for a Development Assistant at the retirement community where she works.
I started here 4 weeks ago.
WM is affiliated with, but not run or fully supported by, the denomination I've been a part of all my life (UMC).
My grandmother (who was Baptist) lived here for a few months before she died in 1995, so I have many connections to the job.
Our offices are in one of the patio homes, and I have my own lovely office with a window.
The job's only about 12 miles from home, and I'm going against the bulk of the traffic mornings and afternoons.
It all seems perfect and yet.
Oh, I'm so thankful to be somewhere so nice where I might actually make a difference in people's lives, and I want to keep an open mind and hope it'll last forever, but I have a feeling I'll be restless within a year or so.
My boss is a very nice person, but conservative and resistant to technology, i.e. computers, internet, etc.
We just got new computers a week and half ago, and she's griping about XP (her old OS was Windows 98--mine was 95, so I'm thrilled with the new stuff).
I tell her it'll just take some getting used to.
We'll see.
I'm not making the kind of salary I was hoping to get, but it's the best salary I've gotten thus far.
When I was fulltime in radio I made a little less, but I got quite a few remotes, which make up for not getting a topnotch salary.
I'm still doing my TV announcing and my weekend radio stuff, so that money will help.
I'm going to start actively pursuing more voice work in the next month or so, too.
My plan is to pay off my car early, and then work on the other debts.
I think it's time to go on and fill out the adoption applications.
I'm terrified of more debt, but Mom and Dad will help with the money.
I'm not sure they realize how expensive it all is.
I'm thinking we might lean toward adopting from Guatemala, but we've still not hashed it all out.
It's almost bad making some money now, because while most of me wants to save as much as possible, the other, smaller part is screaming loudly for stuff, stuff, stuff!!!
I've got a trial subscription to XM at work because of the Dell computers, and now I'm lusting to have it all of the time.
G got me a nice office stereo for my birthday and it does have an aux jack, so I could listen to it here.
He asked if I wanted a car stereo, and I said no, but I do.
There are so many things I want.
A garage.
A dining room set.
New stuff for our house.
New clothes.
New everything.
But I want family more.
I think part of the draw of the other stuff is I could get it now.
But I'd be paying for it later.
Money makes the world go round and round and round til I'm just dizzy.
Time is reporting today that a al-Qaeda operative was captured and is spitting out that they have plans in the work to smuggle nukes into the US from Mexico, see the article here.
Thank god Bush is still our president, although I strongly disagree with him on his new immigration policy.
This policy would just make it easier for the enemy to get within our borders.
From the Associated Press : A lone gunman opened fire with an assault rifle Sunday inside a crowded mall in upstate New York, wounding one person before running out of ammunition and being subdued by employees, authorities said.
The gunman began shooting inside the Hudson Valley Mall shortly after 3 p.m. in Kingston, nearly 90 miles north of New York City.
The 24-year-old gunman went into a Best Buy store and started firing.
When he ran out of ammunition, he was captured by mall employees, police said.
Ulster Town Supervisor Fred Wadnola identified the gunman's weapon as an AK-47 assault rifle.
Everyone was running and screaming.
Then I heard the shots," witness Heather Craig told Fox News.
Whoa!
You're telling me someone was able to take an AK-47 "assault rifle" into a mall and injure people?!
But it's New York.
They have gun laws!
And because New York has such strict gun laws - meaning citizens are prohibited from concealing weapons - a gunner can use bag-toting shoppers as target practice because guns laws keep mall shoppers at his mercy.
Had an armed civilian been inside the mall, perhaps he could have intervened before the suspect began injuring people before he ran out of ammo.
But not in New York.
Because there people like me who have never had so much as a traffic ticket in life cannot conceal weapons, unlike in Florida, where you walk past us everyday without even knowing it.
Toyota Motor Corp. said Tuesday it will promote Akio Toyoda, a grandson of the company's founder who is widely viewed as a candidate to some day head Japan's largest automaker.
Managing director Toyoda, 46, grandson of Kiichiro Toyoda and the eldest son of Toyota honorary chairman Shoichiro Toyoda, will become one of 14 senior managing directors under a streamlined management system set to be introduced after a shareholders' meeting in June, the company said in a statement.
Toyoda, who joined Toyota, based in Toyota city, central Japan, in 1984, spearheaded the automaker's Internet and telematics business -- a technology that puts wireless communications into vehicles.
Considered a candidate for future Toyota president, Toyoda oversees its China business, a critical market for the automaker.
Toyoda has been on the star track for years.
When he joined the board in 2000, he was its youngest member.
Under a reform led by President Fujio Cho, the membership of Toyota's board of directors will be slashed to 27 from 58.
Executive vice presidents will be reduced to seven from nine.
The new system is designed to ``speed up decision-making and operations,'' Toyota spokesman Shigeru Hayakawa said.
Toyota's top posts held by Cho and Chairman Hiroshi Okuda remain unchanged.
Kiichiro Toyoda founded the automaker in 1937, transforming the loom manufacturer started by his father into an automaker.
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the so-called Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society.
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants.
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop.
If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980.
They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady.
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races.
Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice.
Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep.
Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves.
If we want to survive as a people, he says, "we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others..
In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever.
If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation.
People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation, says the son.
The Orange Workers speak sincerely.
We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer.
We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly..
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night.
Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa.
So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the white walled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know..
The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers.
Impossible, impossible, say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades.
We can't do without their help,says Mrs. Conradie.
Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them..
Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation.
What they want us to do just isn't practical," he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks.
I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money..
Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom.
We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd.
By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account..
Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960.
The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations," says Mr. Verwoerd.
Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners..
He apologizes for sounding pushy.
Look, he says, If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea..
And they will even serve it themselves.
An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable.
The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot..
He speaks only in Filipino.
Batibot,which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show.
In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language.
It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show.
When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, "it's no longer an issue..
The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino -- once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon.
Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language.
For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse, says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines.
There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions.
They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language.
There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.
What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia..
The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English.
But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role.
According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino.
It's not as if we're teaching language per se, he says, "We're just using it..
These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks.
With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold.
Batibot lacks the polish of Sesame Street.
Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing.
But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment.
Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot..
During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English.
Welcome all to my new site.
I've decided to incorporate my old work blog into a general blog, the work diary is up on the right titled "my work diary".
EFF YEAH!
BUSH WON!
OK then.
My next thought.
The world is a much better place now that the terrorist Yassar Arafat is dead.
Here is a good one minute video on his great legacy Here.
This guy was one of the early innovators of terrorism in this century and he is protrayed by the Main Stream Media (MSM for short) as a "freedom fighter".
Because of him millions of palestinians chose "jihad" over peace with Isreal.
He innovated suicide bombers and plane hijacking plus he embezzelled hundreds of millions of dollars from aid funds.
and this guy got a nobel peace prize, what a disgrace.
UPDATE 1 - Drudge is reporting that Arafat has been skimming 2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories.
MAG: Arafat Skimmed $2 Million a Month From the Gas Trade Sun Nov 14 2004 09:53:40 ETNew York.
Last year auditors discovered Arafat was guilty of skimming $2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories, TIME reports.
In August 2002 international donors forced Arafat to sign over his investments to the Palestine Investment Fund, which was audited by U.S. accountants and managed by Palestinian Finance Minister Salam Fayyad, a former International Monetary Fund official.
After scouring corporations throughout the Arab world and bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg, the auditors identified $800 million, which has been made a part of the Palestinian Authority's official budget.
It's the most successful financial reform in the Arab world, -- Jim Prince, president of the Los Angeles-based Democracy Council and head of the audit team, tells TIME.
People close to Fayyad's investigation told TIME of Arafat's skimming from the gas trade.
Breaking the gasoline smuggling and corruption boosted the Palestinian Authority's official treasury by $10 million a month and cut gas prices for ordinary Palestinians.
Arafat's death means his followers may never know just how much more they may be owed, "writes TIME's Matt Rees in "Where's Arafat's Money?"
In the mid-1990s, Arafat controlled a financial empire worth at least $3 billion.
By the time of his death, he was down to his last $1 billion, according to Israeli-intelligence estimates.
Arafat wife Suha's outburst that his successors were "trying to bury [him] alive" came after she learned that Arafat had signed over at least $800 million to the government of the Palestinian Authority two years ago, TIME reports.
Top Palestinian officials say Suha wants the new chief of the P.L.O., Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei to give her money out of the P.L.O.'s party coffers.
But a senior P.L.O. official tells TIME, "they'll pay her a pension, and that's it."
People familiar with Arafat's finances say the Palestinian leader sent Suha $200,000 a month out of the Palestinian Authority's budget for the Office of the President.
French authorities are investigating transfers of $15 million from Swiss banks to Paris accounts in Suha's name at the Arab Bank and at BNP Paribas Bank, a French bank, TIME reports.
Senior Palestinian security officials tell TIME that Arafat also shipped money to the gunmen of the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Developing.
Sure sounds like a Nobel Prize winner to me.
A court in Moscow today sentenced American businessman Edmund Pope to 20 years in jail.
Pope, a former naval officer, was found guilty of collecting secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and he had a powerful ally.
President Clinton had appealed for clemency for Pope on health grounds and had brought the case up with Russian President Vladimir Putin, but Mr. Clinton's pleas apparently fell on deaf ears.
The Russian court today handed down the maximum sentence.
Still, The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow says that Pope has not yet exhausted his legal options.
He has got 7 days to appeal this particular sentence.
There is also the possibility of asking for a presidential pardon, Pope has actually indeed already done that.
It's just that his wife said that she has not heard neither from the President nor his office.
His health is a big issue as well, isn't it.
Yes, Pope has been suffering from a rare bone cancer in the past and he has been consistently complaining about his health ever since last Spring when he was taken in to the Lefortovo prison.
The thing is that he has not been allowed any access to American doctors and even to Russian doctors of his own choosing.
He has been examined by the Russian doctors in the Lefortovo prison but they have just said that his complaints are unfounded and that it might be a case of severe rheumatism or something like that.
They are not sort of allowing the possibility of his bone cancer reoccurring.
One of the things that has been said here is that Mr. Pope may have run afoul of a changing mood in Russia about what kind of military and security information might be made available to the west for business purposes.
That his intentions were innocent to begin with, but the times changed and what he did began to look more and more like espionage.
That is certainly a possibility but we don't know actually precisely because we don't even know what the initial charges are.
The whole trial was held behind closed doors and the details of the accusations against Pope have never been fully released.
We know that the prosecution claimed that he was trying to purchase secret plans for a top-secret high-speed Russian torpedo.
He was claiming all the time, and his lawyer was saying that he was sort of trying to purchase plans that had been actually out in the open but we do not know the precise legals of that.
That is one of the possibilities.
Another thing which is mentioned here is that Pope simply ran afoul of a new trend in Russia which was a trend where the security services were getting the upper hand where they were trying to prove that they are actually doing their job, that they are catching spies, that they are getting convictions.
We have, for example, today's reaction by General Alexander Zdanovich, he is the head of the FSB support programs.
He was very, very brief in his comments after the sentencing.
He said that the court has said that FSB investigators have acted correctly and in accordance with the law and he says, "Russia has its secrets, we will do our best to protect them".
Maybe Pope simply ran afoul of such attempts by the Russian Security Services to show that they are doing their job.
Putin, on the one hand, is certainly trying to show that he is in charge and that no one from the outside is going to get away with anything.
By the same token though he is not eager to run afoul of the United States and the State Department is very upset.
Is there any possibility that Mr. Putin might consider a pardon.
I would say there is a very strong possibility of that.
We know that President Clinton has spoken to Vladimir Putin about this when they met last time, and certainly the Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has brought up the issue a number of times, as has the State Department indeed with the Russian Foreign Ministry.
In a curious way the sentencing of Edmund Pope might be the beginning of an end of this ordeal for him.
Because now that there is a sentence, once the judiciary process is started, once the FSB brought him to trial everybody here expected that the trial will end and that it will end with a conviction.
But now that this judicial process is over there is a very, very strong likelihood, that's the feeling here in Moscow that President Vladimir Putin might pardon Edmund Pope.
There is a good reason for that, his ill health.
So it would be a nice humanitarian gesture and a way of offering a friendly hand to the west and to the United States in particular.
The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
Thanks a lot, Nenad.
You are welcome.
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World service, PRI and WGBH in Boston.
I'm Lisa Mullins.
American spy suspect Edmund Pope took the stand again today in a Moscow courtroom.
The former naval intelligence officer faces charges of stealing secret designs for a high-speed Russian torpedo system.
Pope denies acting illegally and President Clinton and Secretary Of State Madeleine Albright have called for his release on health grounds but Russian prosecutors are pressing ahead as The World's Nenad Sebek reports from Moscow.
The trial was suspended earlier in the week because of Pope's poor health.
Pope has a history of bone cancer but a doctor working for the FSB, the Russian security service, pronounced Pope fit enough to stand trial today.
The proceedings are held behind closed doors and Pope's lawyer said today that his client is still very weak and that he wants a new interpreter, says the current one works for the same agency that has charged Pope.
The lawyer Pavel Astakhov says his client is innocent when it comes to espionage.
The whole case as Astakhov claims is an exercise in politics.
This is the first time in almost 40 years that a foreign national is being tried for espionage.
It's quite blatant.
Officials from the security force, which used to be the KGB, are openly boasting about taking an American citizen to court.
Way back in 1961 US military pilot Garry Powers was tried and sentenced but later on exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.
But Powers was caught red-handed.
His U2 spy plane was brought down by Soviet Air Defenses.
Pope was arrested as he was trying to purchase blue prints for what he says is a 10-year-old underwater propulsion system or as the prosecutions claims ultra modern, secret Russian torpedoes.
Former Russian Army Intelligence Officer, Vitaly Schlykov says Pope could easily have been a victim of the Russian obsession with secrets.
We have of course a secrecy culture in this country for decades and decades and reminisce of it are coming to the surface in this case.
The laws on secrecy are still intact from the times of the Soviet Union.
Guilty or not, Pope is being held under a very harsh regime in the Moscow Lefortovo prison where his wife Sherry visited him last week.
We took two pictures of our grandson and they won't let him keep the pictures and I took a coat and gloves and they wouldn't let him have those, but we did get to embrace and we did get to talk about our family for one hour.
Prison rules say that an inmate can only receive approved gifts on the first and third Thursday in a month.
And Sherry Pope's short-term visa didn't enable her to stay that long.
She says she even appealed to the Russian President.
Ed's mother and I both wrote letters to President to ask him to please take into consideration that Ed is 54 years old and that we want him home.
Military intelligence analyst Vitaly Schlykov says Putin is probably caught between a rock and a hard place when it comes to the American's trail.
I'm sure that it came unexpected for Putin.
He wouldn't have approved on a case like this because politically it is very harmful but he came from the ranks of the FSB himself.
He has to pretend that he is sticking to his guns in this case.
In Schlykov's opinion, Pope is likely to get convicted.
But he believes that immediately after the sentencing Pope is likely to be pardoned by Moscow.
US Congressman John Peterson, who has been championing Pope's cause, says he fears that might be too late for Pope.
The main thing we have been pushing for months is health care.
Earlier we had asked for an American doctor to see him.
When they continued to say no then we found Russian doctors.
The judge delayed the trial for a day and a half so we could furnish her with a list of doctors and hospitals in Moscow and after we provided that information she said no.
Pope's lawyer Pavel Astakhov says that what the authorities here call medical care is a joke.
In Pope's case medical control means everyday testing for his suspected cancer.
What they do here is take his blood pressure and temperature.
The very least they could do is take blood tests and bone marrow tests.
The court has even rejected our demand for medical expertise to establish whether he is fit to stand trial.
As Strakovs says he does not trust the Judge Nina Barkova at all.
He says she has rejected almost every one of his 40 objections and suggestions during the trail so far.
Strakovs is now trying to arrange for fresh witnesses for his defense of Edmund Pope, but is not hopeful that even that will be granted by the court.
For The World, this is Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
American Future has a link up to a article written in yesterdays Houston Chronicle.
It describes how the European Governments look to be changing their tune in regards to President Bush.
Why you ask?
But there is arguably more to this sea change than just a grumpy acceptance of the status quo.
From a European perspective, three things are making it easier to warm to the Bush White House.
One is the death of Yasser Arafat.
No issue divides Europe and the United States more keenly than the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
For the last few years, Europeans have criticized Bush for failing to put enough pressure on Israel to get out of the occupied territories and for refusing to deal with Arafat.
That another reason why I respect Bush so much, his refusal to acknowledge that windbag terrorist Arafat.
May he rot in hell.
But since Arafat's death, Europeans and Americans have been able to find common ground: supporting Ariel Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza, putting pressure on Israel to let the Palestinians hold elections and, covertly, backing Mahmoud Abbas to become the next Palestinian leader.
A second reason is Europe's growing worries about Islamic terrorism.
The murder in November of Theo van Gogh, a provocative Dutch filmmaker, at the hands of an Islamic militant has been called Europe's 9/11.
Though the two events are obviously not fully comparable, it is certainly true that American conservatives, such as Francis Fukuyama and Bernard Lewis, have found a wider audience recently for the idea that radical Islam is inimical to European traditions of tolerance.
You mean those radical muslims can be kinda nasty sometimes?
Get outta here.
Keep doing business like the cowards in Spain and they will more then likely have their very own 9/11 to cry about.
The third force is the reappearance, albeit in a milder form, of the threat that kept the trans-Atlantic alliance together for half a century.
The Russian bear is growling again.
The Ukrainian election --- complete with its KGB-style poisoning of the opposition leader and heavy-handed electoral fraud -- has reminded European diplomats of Vladimir V. Putin's determination to control his "near abroad."
They should be very worried about this item, I believe Putin is slowly sliding Russia back to what it once was.
Hopefully our Government isn't asleep at the wheel with this situation either.
There is a personal edge to all this.
Just as the snooty continentals eventually came to admire the gormless Hollywood actor, there is a grudging willingness to rethink some prejudices about the inarticulate Texan.
Many European leaders once swallowed the Michael Moore version of history: that Bush was an ignorant interloper who stole the White House.
His thumping re-election, however, shows that he represents a large body of conservative American opinion.
In short, Europeans are getting used to the idea that it is not Bush who is the exception, but the U.S. itself that is exceptional --- and that if they want to deal with this exceptional superpower they need to humor it rather than rile it.
Strangely enough, this has been Tony Blair's strategy all along; it is rapidly becoming the Continent's strategy, too.
Couldn't of ended that article any better myself.
Get used to it France, we ain't going nowhere.
Congratulations from foreign leaders poured into the governor's mansion in Texas today.
The messages were addressed to President-elect George W. Bush and they all contained words of welcome and optimism.
But truth be told for most international figures, Bush is something of an unknown.
He has traveled little and his diplomatic experience is limited to contacts with Mexican officials during his tenure as governor.
The World's Jeb Sharp has been hunting down clues to the foreign policy of the incoming administration.
A few broad foreign policy themes emerged during the campaign.
Chief among them are debate over the wisdom of US intervention.
Bush clearly favors limiting the use of American force and troops to solve conflicts overseas.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says that view is consistent with the philosophies of two top Bush advisors, Russia expert Condoleezza Rice and retired General Colin Powell.
Certainly, Condoleezza Rice, certainly Colin Powell who I expect, the two of them to be the dominant force in the next administration on foreign policy.
I certainly think they believe they would like to not intervene as much as the Clinton administration or I guess the previous Bush administration did.
In fact, Condoleezza Rice who is slated to become Bush's National Security Advisor has already said she'd like to see US troops pulled home from the Balkans.
But, Robert Kagan says its one thing for Bush's advisors to state a philosophy, its quite another to implement it.
I think they may find the world has a way of intruding itself and that it won't be that easy to pull forces out of the Balkans for instance, without destroying the NATO alliance.
After Rice made some comments about having a new division of labor, I think that was the word she used with regard to NATO and peacekeeping issues, there was a riot in Europe and the real fears that the United States was getting ready to withdraw from the continent and I think they had to walk that back a little bit.
The Balkans is just one example where the Bush administration will have to walk a fine line in delineating a different approach from that of Mr. Clinton.
The foreign policy challenges facing the next President are daunting.
The Mid East peace process is on hold with Israelis and Palestinians practically at war.
The sanctions regime against Iraq has unraveled.
Russia and China are alarmed at the prospect of America beefing up its missile defenses.
India and Pakistan, now nuclear powers are locked in a dangerous standoff.
Stability in East Asia is another pressing concern.
But despite the challenges, Northeast Asia expert Bates Gil of the Brookings Institution is encouraged by what he knows of the Bush foreign team.
One of the most interesting aspects of the new likely team under the Bush administration is first of all, extensive experience in defense and military affairs.
Secondly, it's easy to point to a number of persons who will have leading positions who have had extensive experience in East Asian affairs.
So you have a combination of depth of experience plus an understanding of the region.
Both of which will come in handy if there is a crisis with China over Taiwan or relations with North Korea deteriorate.
In such a crisis, Bush is likely to rely on the advice of government officials who cut their teeth during the cold war.
Some critics like Gore advisor Bruce Jentelson worry that the Bush team will be out of step with today's issues.
Issues related to globalization, global public health, technology, and those challenges.
Yet in my view a truly realistic policy cannot be based only on the old agenda issues, really has to address these new agenda issues as well.
But no matter what sort of expertise Bush's international affairs people bring to the White House, they won't be able to fully control what happens on their watch.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says each President's foreign policy is ultimately shaped by events, not theories.
Really, most of a President's foreign policy comes down to how they respond to specific events.
Bill Clinton did not come in to office intending to send troops to Haiti and the Balkans, and events sort of forced his hand and I think that, you know, the truth is Bush administration comes in with certain kinds of prejudices, but we will have to see how they respond to crises.
And the only thing that I'm confident of is that there will be crises.
President-elect Bush is expected to begin naming his top cabinet picks in the next few days.
Those choices will mean everything when the first crisis rolls around.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
Rudolph Giuliani will wed his companion, Judith Nathan, on May 24 in the ex-mayor's old home, Gracie Mansion.
The news was announced Thursday by Giuliani spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.
His successor, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, will perform the ceremony.
Giuliani, 58, proposed to Nathan, a former nurse, during a November business trip to Paris -- five months after he finalized his divorce from Donna Hanover after 20 years of marriage.
In interviews last year, Giuliani said Nathan gave him ``tremendous emotional support'' through his treatment for prostate cancer and as he led the city during the aftermath of the Sept.
11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
We were close already,'' Giuliani said.
And then we went through hell together.''
Giuliani and Nathan began appearing in public together in May 2000.
Soon after, he announced that he and Hanover were moving toward legal separation.
During the legal proceedings leading up to the divorce, a judge ruled that Nathan could not visit Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence, as long as Giuliani's children lived there.
Giuliani and Hanover have two teenage children, Andrew and Caroline.
The divorce settlement called for Giuliani to pay Hanover more than $6.8 million.
Hanover, 53, is host of a syndicated television show, ``Famous Homes and Hideaways.''
Last month, she and her fiance -- an old high school sweetheart -- invited the press along as they went shopping for wedding bands, saying they are planning a wedding in the New York City area this summer.
Giuliani's first marriage to his second cousin, Regina Peruggi, lasted about 14 years.
It was annulled by the Catholic Church because the couple had not obtained a church dispensation required when second cousins marry.
Nathan divorced wallpaper salesman Bruce Nathan in 1992.
They have a teenage daughter.
The Giuliani-Nathan nuptials will be a first for Bloomberg, who is making an exception from his policy of not performing weddings, said Bloomberg spokesman Ed Skyler.
Giuliani regularly officiated at weddings while in office.
The mayor is honored by their request,'' Skyler said.
The dictator Suharto has fallen, the constitution has changed, the media was unshackled, democratic elections held, and East Timor freed.
After Sept. 11, 2001, Indonesia was quick to sign onto U.S. President George W. Bush's global war on terror.
Yet, Washington maintains a 12-year ban on arms sales to the world's most populous Muslim nation with the aim of curbing human rights abuses still happening despite momentous political change.
Frustrated, Jakarta's generals are looking elsewhere to replace antiquated arsenals.
Later this month Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri travels to Moscow to seek the Kremlin's help in modernizing her increasingly obsolete 300,000-member armed forces.
She is also likely to open the way for Russian companies to vie for lucrative deals in the oil and gas sector, long dominated by American and British resource giants.
Although opposite ends of the Earth, Indonesia and Russia have some basic things in common.
Both are geographically sprawling with massive multiethnic populations.
Both are struggling to preserve national unity as they fight separatism and build democracy after the collapse of decades of authoritarian rule.
Both are resource-rich, but face huge economic problems made worse by endemic corruption.
And, currently, both have opposed the U.S.- led war on Iraq.
Indonesia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Marty Natalegawa says Megawati's meeting with Russian President Putin slated for April 21 will touch on the Iraq crisis.
But other diplomats say that issue will serve primarily to bring the two closer together on bottom-line issues such as trade and arms sales.
Analysts worry that Indonesia's military is now so degraded it can no longer control the borders of the far-flung archipelago, allowing for easy infiltration by extremists.
Last year's Bali bombings, which killed 202 people, illustrated the threat of terrorism in Indonesia.
And, broad opposition to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq threatens to lead to a backlash by militant Islamists.
Nearly everybody in Indonesia sees this Iraq war as completely unnecessary and there is widespread public opposition to U.S. policies,'' said Jusuf Wanadi of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
Close ties between Moscow and Jakarta are not unprecedented.
Indonesia relied on Soviet military assistance in the 1950s under Megawati's father and founding President Sukarno, but these were severed after the anti-communist Gen. Suharto seized power in 1965.
The United States quickly became the Southeast Asian country's main weapons supplier, and annual arms sales peaked at US$400 million in the 1980s.
In 1991, however, the U.S. Congress banned this after Indonesian troops killed hundreds of civilians in East Timor.
In 1999, East Timor became free, but only after Indonesian forces laid waste to it as they withdrew after a pro-independence referendum.
The shocking level of destruction prompted U.S. lawmakers to expand the ban to cover almost all military ties with Indonesia.
Since then some in the Bush administration -- particularly Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Jakarta and a prime architect of the Iraq war -- have pushed for the ban to be repealed.
So far, U.S. lawmakers have reinstated only a limited officer training program.
But that's far from enough for Indonesia's generals.
I think the Indonesian military has finally decided that restrictions and conditionalities from Washington are just not worth it,'' said Juwono Sudarsono, a former defense minister.
So they want to look for alternative sources for planes, helicopters and other hardware.''
Moscow has already had some success in wooing Indonesia as a customer.
Jakarta has recently purchased some Russian weapons, including 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles, a squadron of naval Mil-2 helicopters and a dozen BTR-80A amphibious carriers for its marines.
Currently, Indonesia uses short-range Rapier missiles purchased 30 years ago to protect its vital oil and natural gas fields in Sumatra, Borneo and Papua from air attack.
Replenishing them has been a big problem,'' Sudarsono said.
Air defense commanders want to augment the Rapiers with Russia's impressive long-range S-300 missiles, or shorter-range systems such as the SA-15 Gauntlet or shoulder-fired Igla.
The Air Force is reportedly considering purchasing several squadrons of Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors, considered the world's premier dogfighters.
Previously, Indonesian Air Force commanders preferred Western jets that were compatible with the U.S.-made F-16 fighter-bombers already in the Indonesian inventory.
But neighboring Malaysia's success in integrating Russian MiG-29s and American F/A-18 Hornets persuaded them otherwise, Sudarsono said.
If Megawati does stiff-arm the United States on the weapons issue, it is unlikely relations with Washington will be permanently damaged.
Whatever happens, Indonesia, a mainly Muslim but politically secular state, is natural ally in the struggle against terrorism and religious militancy.
What could be more worrying for Washington is Russia's economic ambitions.
Trade between Indonesia and Russia increased by dlrs 36.2 million to dlrs 203.5 million in 2001 -- the last year for which statistics are available.
Analysts say this can only grow.
The real concerns, though, are in the petroleum sector.
Megawati and Putin are expected to sign agreements to give Russian companies a toehold in Indonesia's oil and gas industry, long dominated by American and British giants such as Exxon Mobil and BP.
The lawyer for a Russian military journalist convicted of treason filed an appeal Wednesday in an effort to overturn the guilty verdict against his client, who was released on parole earlier this year, news agencies reported.
He asked the court to invalidate the verdict and throw out the criminal case against Pasko, they said.
Pasko was sentenced to four years in prison in December 2001 for illegally attending a meeting of top military commanders and taking notes there.
A military court said he intended to pass the notes to Japanese media with which he had worked.
Pasko, whose sentence included time served, was released in January for good behavior after serving more than two-thirds of the sentence.
He has maintained his innocence, saying the military was punishing him for exposing environmental abuses by the Russian navy, including the dumping of radioactive waste into the sea.
Reznik said an initial appeal he lodged the day Pasko was freed never reached the presidium of the Supreme Court, according to Interfax.
The lawyer said the court's military board had refused to launch proceedings on the appeal.
Reznik said he addressed the new appeal directly to Supreme Court Chairman Vyacheslav Lebedev and asked that it not be considered by military judges ``because the military justice system has adopted a biased attitude against Pasko,'' Interfax reported.
I was hoping for another incredibly drawn-out story, full of antitrust drama, lurking potential bidders, and contentious confrontations between executives.
And then MCI just sort of accepted a Verizon deal without really bothering anybody.
Clearly, their corporate culture has suffered -- 25 years ago, MCI was the brawling upstart in the telecom industry, constantly challenging AT&T's right to exist, much less to monopolize the phone system.
And now, they're swallowed by Just Another Monolith.
I expected better -- meaner and tougher, sure, but better nonetheless.
Palestinian security forces returned Monday to the positions they held in the Gaza Strip before the outbreak of the 33-month Palestinian uprising as Israel removed all major checkpoints in the coastal territory, a Palestinian security source said.
Police officers took up their positions across the Gaza Strip, enjoying a freedom of movement they have not known since the intifada exploded in September 2000, the source said.
Palestinian police have taken over all the posts and positions they held before September 28, 2000.
It is the first time they have had freedom of movement with cars and weapons since the start of the intifada," the source said.
The move marked a huge step forward in carrying out the US-backed Middle East "roadmap", which aims to end the months of bloodshed and create a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the northern town of Beit Hanoun late Sunday, police took up positions there and in the neighbouring town of Beit Lahiya, he said.
They also deployed along the border with Israel.
The handover is a credibility test for the Palestinian Authority, which must show it means business when it comes to reining in hardline groups plotting attacks on the Jewish state.
In another first in the almost three-year intifada, the Israeli army allowed Palestinians free circulation on the trans-Gaza highway as troops abandoned three major checkpoints across the coastal territory.
Traffic was flowing freely through the Netzarim junction, just south of Gaza City, the Kissufim junction by Deir al-Balah in the central Gaza Strip, and the Guest House junction just south of Deir al-Balah after the army withdrew.
The three military checkpoints on the highway, which runs the entire length of the Gaza Strip, had transformed the trip from north to south, ordinarily a 30-minute ride, into a grinding two or three-hour ordeal and came to symbolise the horrors of occupation.
Israel has implemented most of the agreement except for a few issues," the source said, pointing out that Israel had still not removed two military observation posts at the Kissufim junction and the Guest House junction.
Although there was free movement along the trans-Gaza highway, several other roads remained temporarily closed, he said.
The Karni-Netzarim road, which runs east-to-west across the route, was still closed as was the section of the highway passing close by Kfar Darom settlement, just south of the Guest House junction, he said, adding both were likely to be opened in the coming weeks.
Another road, leading from the southern border town of Rafah to Khan Yunis, would be opened within 10 days, he said.
Adressing Palestinian complaints, an Israeli military source confirmed troops had installed a gate at the Netzarim crossing and at the southern Guest House junction but said that they were only there for when Jewish settlers needed to use the road.
A ban on Palestinian men under the age of 35 being allowed to move freely was still in force but that was expected to be lifted later on Monday or early Tuesday.
The army also handed over control of Rafah border crossing between the Gaza Strip and Egypt to the Palestinians, security sources said.
Six Palestinian police officers were allowed to return to the Palestinian section of the border crossing, which had been taken over by Israeli troops shortly after the start of the uprising.
Under the 1993 Oslo accords, which granted a measure of autonomy to the Palestinians, the Rafah border crossing with Egypt was to be jointly managed by both Israel and the Palestinians, although Israel had final control over the zone.
Although the crossing has, in principle, been open for movement between the two territories -- while being frequently closed by Israeli for reasons rarely explained -- the Palestinian section has been manned by Israel for more than two years.
Fifteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded Wednesday as a suicide bomber blew himself up on a student bus in the northern town of Haifa, the first bombing in Israel in exactly two months.
Several hours later, dozens of Israeli tanks advanced into the northern Gaza Strip backed by helicopters which fired at least three rockets in the Jabaliya area, Palestinian security sources said.
Palestinian medical sources said 60-year-old Mohammed al-Biyari was killed in his home near Jabaliya refugee camp by the rocket fire and another wounded.
A second rocket landed in farmlands and the other hit a house inside the refugee camp, but without causing further casualties, Palestinian security sources said.
Two 13-year-old children were among those killed in the Haifa bus bombing, Israeli public radio said, adding that most of the victims were youngsters.
The army said two soldiers were also among the dead.
The bus was ripped to shreds while travelling between a residential area and Haifa university.
Of the 33 injured still in hospital late Wednesday, two were in intensive care and six others in serious condition, the radio said.
Israel's night-time raid in Gaza involving around 40 tanks and armoured vehicles came after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened his security cabinet to discuss a response to the bomb attack.
Israeli media said the retaliation was unlikely to be on a scale that would risk disrupting US preparations for war on Iraq.
The Palestinian suicide bomber on the Haifa bus came from the southern West Bank town of Hebron, public radio said, naming him as 20-year-old Mahmoud Hamadan Salim Qawasmi.
Apart from his ID card, also found in the wreckage were the remains of a letter allegedly outlining his plan to carry out a suicide attack and praising the September 2001 destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, it said.
Israeli police were not immediately available for comment, but Palestinian sources in Hebron said Mahmoud Qawasmi was a 21-year-old student with links to the Islamic radical group Hamas.
Israeli forces moved into Hebron's Al-Sheikh district where his family lived and arrested Qawasmi's brother and father after the bombing, they said.
Without claiming responsibility, Hamas and another hardline group, Islamic Jihad, said the blast was revenge for a string of bloody Israeli army raids into the Gaza Strip in recent weeks.
But the Palestinian Authority condemned the attack, saying it would divert international sympathy away from the far higher Palestinian civilian death toll.
We condemn all attacks against civilians including today's attack in Haifa," said information minister Yasser Abed Rabbo.
The Palestinian leadership said the attack would serve as "a pretext for Israel's government and occupation army to step up its deadly campaign which caused the deaths of 77 Palestinians in February".
It was the first bomb attack inside Israel since January 5, and came just days after the hawkish Sharon appointed the most right-wing government in Israel's history on a pledge to get tough on security.
In the January attack, two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up in central Tel Aviv, killing 23 other people.
Israeli government spokesman Avi Pazner called the latest deadly blast a "very grave attack" and said the Jewish state would take "vigorous action against the terrorist organisations".
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been dealing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks when the Haifa bus was blown up.
US President George W. Bush condemned the attack on innocents in Israel," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, adding that "his message to the terrorists is: Their efforts will not be succcessful.
He will continue to pursue the path to peace in the Middle East
EU foreign policy supremo Javier Solana likewise slammed the attack, although he also took a jab at Israel, saying, "There have been too many civilians killed in the last weeks and the last days."
In London, a spokesman for the British prime minister said Tony Blair "condemns absolutely what has happened".
The spokesman added that he "would obviously call on all sides to do what they can to break the cycle of violence, because it is only through engagement that we can realise the vision everyone wants to see.
There needs to be dialogue in order for this to be resolved."
The bus attack came just two days after Israeli forces staged a bloody raid into a refugee camp in central Gaza targeting a founding member of Hamas, which has spearheaded suicide bombings against the Jewish state.
Hamas vowed to continue its attacks, while the Palestinian Authority accused Israel of trying to disrupt top-level Palestinian meetings to discuss reforms of Arafat's administration.
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said international intervention was needed to break the cycle of violence.
Eight people, including a pregnant woman and a 13-year-old child were killed in Monday's Gaza raid, provoking US-led international calls for Israeli restraint.
And on Tuesday, Israeli troops shot dead an elderly Palestinian shepherd outside a Jewish settlement on the edge of Gaza City.
In the West Bank, an eight-year-old Palestinian boy as well as his brother and a sister were wounded late Wednesday by Israeli gunfire in a village north of the town of Ramallah, their elder sister said.
Israeli troops shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and critically injured two children, ages 7 and 9, during conflicts in the West Bank that erupted Tuesday as Israeli and Palestinian leaders moved toward talks on a new Mideast peace plan.
The shootings which the Israeli army said came in response to attacks by Palestinians throwing stones and molotov cocktails -- came a day after Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that Israel's occupation in the West Bank must end, stunning both dovish opponents and hardline allies.
Sharon's remarks and Israel's conditional acceptance Sunday of the so-called ``road map'' to peace were expected to jump-start stalled Mideast peace negotiations.
A summit between Sharon and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, had been planned for Wednesday but was postponed, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials, who blamed each other for the delay.
The officials said no new date had been set; Israel Radio said the meeting would take place Thursday.
A three-way summit with U.S. President George W. Bush could take place as early as next week, possibly in Jordan.
Israeli soldiers shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and wounded a 7-year-old boy after opening fire at stone throwers in the Tulkarem refugee camp in the West Bank on Tuesday, Palestinian hospital officials said.
The army said troops fired, and hit a boy, after a Palestinian youth threw a molotov cocktail.
In a village near the West Bank city of Nablus on Tuesday, Israeli troops opened fire on youths throwing stones, hitting a 9-year-old Palestinian boy in the head and critically wounding him, and hitting two 12-year-old boys in the legs, lightly wounding them, Palestinian hospital officials said.
A 10-year-old boy was struck in the leg by a rubber bullet, but was not seriously hurt, the officials said.
Military sources said troops were trying to break up stone-throwing protests, but did not use live fire.
The army was not aware of any injuries.
Five Palestinian children, a Palestinian woman and a police officer, were injured Tuesday after accidentally detonating explosives in the West Bank city of Hebron, Palestinian security officials said.
The children found the explosives in two plastic bags under a tree and accidentally detonated the first bag.
After a police officer arrived, the second bag exploded, seriously injuring him, the officials said.
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager Monday and another surrendered after infiltrating from Gaza, the military said.
They were unarmed and apparently looking for work.
In a village near the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was killed during an exchange of gunfire.
Also Monday, Israeli soldiers fired on four diplomatic vehicles in the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, diplomats said.
There were no injuries from the incident.
Peter Lundberg, an official from the Swedish Consulate in Jerusalem, said that two bullets hit the windshield of the Swiss Consulate's armored car, and that small-arms fire also was directed at other cars from Sweden, Denmark and the European Union.
Military sources said the Israeli army had established roadblocks at the entrance to Beit Hanoun to prevent Palestinians militants from leaving the area.
The sources said shots had been fired in the air when vehicles tried to skirt the roadblocks.
The violence erupted after Sharon endured withering criticism Monday from members of his own Likud Party over his Cabinet's acceptance of the U.S.-backed ``road map'' peace plan.
Sharon indicated a 180-degree turnaround after decades of warning that an Israeli withdrawal from even small parts of the West Bank could endanger Israel's existence.
Skeptics, however, wondered whether Sharon's conversion was a shrewd effort to deflect U.S. pressure in the hopes the road map would fail before Israel had to make tough concessions.
To keep 3.5 million people under occupation is bad for us and them,'' Sharon said in remarks broadcast on Israel Radio.
The term ``occupation'' is anathema to the Israeli right, which believes Israel has a legitimate claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip for religious and security reasons.
Palestinians and their dovish Israeli allies routinely use the word ``occupation'' when demanding that Israel leave the West Bank and Gaza and dismantle Jewish settlements.
Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and Gaza for a state.
On Sunday, Sharon's Cabinet conditionally approved the ``road map,'' a three-phase plan that begins with a halt to violence and envisages a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 2005.
Sharon told party critics he was committed to finding a political solution to the conflict, including an Israeli withdrawal from West Bank population centers.
This can't continue endlessly.
Do you want to remain forever in Ramallah, Jenin, Nablus?'' he asked.
Likud lawmakers charged that the road map was slanted in favor of the Palestinians and endangers Israel.
In his remarks Monday, Sharon left himself an out.
What will happen if Palestinian terror continues?
Nothing.
Nothing will happen.
The Palestinians will get nothing,'' he said.
Critics have said Sharon's long-held condition that all violence must stop before peace moves is unrealistic and guarantees failure of any peace initiative, including the road map, thus releasing him from the necessity of following through on his remarks.
Liberal lawmaker Yossi Sarid argued Sharon was trying to keep his intentions murky to persuade the U.S. government that he was committed to the plan, while his hawkish allies could assume he was just making a tactical move to end U.S. pressure.
Ariel Sharon likes to walk in the fog, because then no one knows where he is headed,'' Sarid wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily.
A court in Moscow has convicted American businessman Edmund Pope of spying and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Pope, a retired naval officer from Pennsylvania, was accused of illegally obtaining secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
He argued throughout the case that the information he obtained was already available to the public.
The White House denounced the court action calling it unjustified and wrong.
Pope's wife and his lawyers have also called for his release on health grounds, saying that he suffers from a rare form of bone cancer, which may have returned during his eight months in a Russian prison.
Corey Flintoff, NPR News, Washington.
U.S. and British troops were moving on the strategic southern port city of Basra Saturday after a massive aerial assault pounded Baghdad at dawn.
Thousands of beleaguered Iraqi soldiers in the south surrendered in the face of the major push.
The battle for Basra, an oil hub of some 1.3 million people, was underway by midday, with coalition troops trying to surround Iraqi positions and force a surrender.
U.S. aircraft bombed Iraqi tanks holding bridges close to the city.
Iraqi forces responded with artillery fire.
Earlier Saturday, Baghdad was again targeted, one day after a massive U.S. aerial bombardment in which more than 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on the capital.
The nine-story Security Headquarters in the Iraqi capital took a direct hit, strewing bricks, masonry and glass across the street in the al-Salhiya neighborhood of central Baghdad.
As coalition troops advanced, an entire Iraqi army division gave itself up, U.S. military officials said.
The division -- the 51st Infantry Division, with 8,000 men and as many as 200 tanks, a key unit in the defense of Basra -- was the largest defection in a day when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's forces showed signs of crumbling.
Allied successes were marred by the collision of two Royal Navy helicopters over the Persian Gulf in which all six British crew members and one American were killed.
Saturday morning, American Marines and British troops rumbled along the main road from the Kuwaiti border to Basra, Highway 80, nicknamed the ``Highway of Death'' during the 1991 Gulf War, when U.S. airstrikes wiped out an Iraqi military convoy along it.
American units advancing west of Basra have already secured the Rumeila oil field, whose daily output of 1.3 million barrels makes it Iraq's most productive.
Until Basra, U.S. and British troops had encountered little resistance, even when they seized nearby Umm Qasr, and moved to secure key oil fields.
Iraqis mostly fought back with small arms, pistols, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
Regular Iraqi forces had withdrawn from Basra but elements of Saddam's security forces are continuing to resist, British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon said Saturday.
Other units moved into airfield complexes in western Iraq believed to have Scud missiles capable of reaching Israel, and possibly weapons of mass destruction.
Early Saturday, more units were waiting in Kuwait to smash through any Iraqi resistance.
Hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, Humvees and trucks were lined up in parallel columns waiting in single-file to cross the Iraqi-Kuwait border.
By early next week, U.S. ground forces led by the Army's 3rd Infantry Division are likely to be at the outskirts of Baghdad, where they could face greater danger from the Republican Guard, some commanders said.
After weeks of delay, Turkey relented and agreed to let combat aircraft fly over its territory.
At the same time, however, Turkey sent 1,000 troops into northern Iraq, and the government said it would send more to prevent Iraqi Kurds from creating an independent state.
The United States strongly opposes any unilateral move by Turkey into northern Iraq.
A Turkish military spokesman on Saturday denied Turkish troops had crossed into Iraq.
The United States and Britain suffered their first casualties Thursday and Friday as they pushed into Iraq, with two U.S. Marines killed in combat and another eight British and four American Marines dying in a helicopter crash that appeared to be accidental.
There was no clear figure of Iraqi casualties.
Australian commandos, who have been operating deep in Iraq, destroyed a command and control post and killed a number of soldiers, according to the country's defense chief, Gen. Peter Cosgrove.
In an address Saturday, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf told Iraqis that fighting had been ``fierce.''
He said most of those captured by allied forces were civilians, not soldiers.
He claimed Iraqi troops had destroyed five tanks.
He said more than 200 Iraqis had been injured, including women, children and other civilians who were being treated at five hospitals in Baghdad.
Hoon said Saddam's regime was crumbling under the pressure of a huge air assault.
As last night's dramatic television coverage showed, the lights stayed on in Baghdad, but the instruments of tyranny are collapsing,'' he said.
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan, speaking on Iraqi Radio, was quoted by the British Broadcasting Corp.'s monitoring service as accusing Britain and the United States of working to ``eliminate'' the state of Iraq.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ramadan said, ``It is also regrettable and deplorable that the (U.N.) General Secretariat has not issued any statement or reaction that condemns or deplores this aggression.''
Despite the heavy bombing, which the U.S. Central Command said targeted military command and control installations, the Iraqi regime gave no sign of quitting.
Bombers have also hit targets in the northern cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
The Iraqi government released a video of Saddam, in uniform, meeting with his son Qusai, the commander of the Republican Guard, and the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmad.
It was unclear when the video was made.
U.S. intelligence officials said the Iraqi command and control system was in disarray, and U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said, ``The regime is starting to lose control of their country.''
Colombia's second largest Marxist rebel army has released forty-two soldiers and police officers.
Government officials say the National Liberation Army freed the captives today in Northern Colombia.
The forty-two prisoners were captured two years ago during clashes with the guerilla group.
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war..
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination..
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever..
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized..
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
Beginning early next year, visitors to Yosemite National Park in California will see some changes.
A new plan is aimed at protecting the giant Sequoia trees, scenic valleys, and waterfalls from the impact of four million tourists a year.
Under the new plan, visitors will have very limited access to the park by car.
The 343 million-dollar plan will create a new shuttle bus system to alleviate traffic congestion.
It will also remove roads from meadows, create more hiking trails, and restore campsites damaged by a 1997 flood.
Yosemite spokesman Scott Gediman says while these measures have been controversial, the preservation effort will not sacrifice visitor enjoyment.
And so we certainly do not want to limit access or will not limit access to the National Park, but we need to design the facilities, design parking areas, design the infrastructure in a way that we can handle these large amounts of people.
Yosemite is not alone in seeking new management strategies to preserve natural areas.
Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is putting in a light rail system.
And Zion National Park in Utah has just established a new shuttle bus system.
With environment briefs, I'm Roseanne Skirble.
This is The World.
I am Lisa Mullins.
Putting aside a half century of acrimony, Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright met today with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang.
Part of the purpose of this historic visit is to lay the groundwork for a possible trip to North Korea by President Clinton before his term ends.
Albright's visit to Pyongyang is the first by a high level US official since the communist state was established in 1948.
Kong Dan Oh is a Korean expert who has just written a book called 'North Korea through the Looking Glass'.
She is now in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
We know that the visit is making big news there in Seoul.
Can you tell us what is being reported about the meeting between the two sides from the South Korean perspective.
Well, when I look at about six major daily newspapers, basically the top news was Madeleine Albright meeting with the Chairman Kim Jong Il.
And basically that indeed this is a very historic event, and some kind of euphoria and very positive upbeat feeling.
But at the same time, the reports are basically telling the importance of this meeting that is that they have to talk about the very critical security matter issues such as missile and nuke.
But nonetheless, the meeting was very crucial, so I think all in all, it was a very positive beginning.
And how much of South Korea as you mentioned is bordering on euphoria, get this new relationship with Pyongyang and at the visit by Secretary of State Albright.
I know that you have taken a more cautious approach, and I wonder if that applies to Secretary Albright's visit in general.
Do you believe that the US is doing the right thing.
Or is perhaps the United States, in your view, moving too quickly to try and patch things up.
I am kind of taking a slightly cautious approach, simply because if Madam Albright is there, without the really thinking down the road some kind of strategic consequences of this meeting, simply because we are interested in seeing this gentleman and maybe before our term is over, let me meet you.
I think that kind of simple approach to be wrong.
But if she understands importance of this meeting and further brings up substance of issue to be resolved between the North Korea and the United States, I think that is very desirable.
What you're saying is that you feel that the part of the impetus of the North is influenced by the fact that the United States has a presidential election just a couple of weeks away.
I think that is a definitely correct statement, provided that maybe the Republican candidate, Mr. Bush to be elected.
North Korea was very, very scared that Mr. Bush would take a much more hawkish and conservative approach.
So before this Clinton administration comes to be over, they would like to lay down the ground rules and kind of create some kind of positive improvement to deal with the United States.
And obviously one of the most important agendas for tomorrow is to discuss the possibilities of President Clinton's next visit sometime in November.
I know that you have concerns about how a potential visit by President Clinton might be portrayed within North Korea itself.
Why is that a concern of yours.
My fundamental belief is that Kim Jong Il has not really made his mind or made a decision to push the reforms, even in the session of 1978 Chinese reform that was taken by Deng Xiaoping.
He is now gambling, he is trying, but he has not really changed his manner or his policy whatsoever.
His economy and his society's politics is really getting in real deep trouble.
He has to show his power and he's been telling his people that I am the true leader and the world is afraid of us.
All the imperialist capitalist is afraid of us.
That we are the center of the universe.
Without the North Korea, the globe is not existing.
Let me show you that I am the true leader and they will come to our country to pay visit, courtesy visit for me.
And so now Putin visited, President Kim visited, Jiang Zemin will visit next year and the President Clinton will go.
Domestic consumption of this visit will be immense, without changing any policy toward the freedom of proliferation  .
Is it really possible with the kind of close watch that the outside world is now going to be invited to give to North Korea, that Kim Jong Il could actually not change a thing in terms of his policies, internally or externally.
I am exactly wondering like you, and I think that there is a maybe the possibility actually is going up.
So I don't object really any of these like U.K. normalization, you know.
I don't have any objection.
But only when the leaders and the elite, the policy elite, is aware of that what they are bringing and what they are negotiating and how they would like to have an impact on North Korean society, I think that's the important key question.
Kong Dan Oh is the author of the book 'North Korea through the Looking Glass', speaking to us from Seoul, South Korea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
The nations of southern Africa know a lot about managing elephants; their herds are thriving.
But the nations of Europe and North America have decided they know better.
At this week's U.N. conference in Lausanne, they imposed a global ivory ban that seeks to overturn local policies.
A Zimbabwean delegate argued that the ban would "guarantee the extinction of the elephant..
Legitimate ranchers, who have an interest in preserving the herds, would go out of business.
Poachers would control the underground trade.
Many delegates were willing to craft a compromise, but U.S. delegate Constance Harriman and others thundered that down.
The Greens from the First World wanted a morality play, not a negotiation.
Fortunately, the nations of southern Africa haven't totally surrendered their sovereignty.
Five countries announced they would not honor what one Zimbabwean delegate wryly called the "made in Switzerland" solution.
In fact, they seemed a mite resentful.
The director of Zimbabwe's Wildlife Department described American conservationists as "fat little puppies from urban environments who don't know a thing about Africa..
That's not fair; they're not all fat.
I wish I could have been at a Pub, or wherever these people convene, to see the reactions from all the Britons who read the Telegraph this morning (emphasis added): Britain's gun laws are aimed at the wrong target, curbing and criminalising legal ownership while failing to tackle huge rises in shooting offences over the past few years, according to an international firearms legislation expert.
Prof Gary Mauser said that Britain was making the same mistake as Canada and Australia in focusing on legal owners - a section of the law-abiding community where gun crimes, such as the Dunblane massacre, were aberrations.
The Home Office and police chiefs should instead tackle the possession of guns in criminal hands, said Prof Mauser, a member of the independent Fraser Institute in Canada.
He has given evidence to select committees of the House of Commons and the Canadian Senate and predicted the escalation of gun crime on Britain's streets.
His warning comes as gun crime incidents are averaging about 29 a day in England and Wales, more than twice the level of when the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
In the past two years, there have been cases of schoolchildren and a baby, killed or injured by guns.
I believe that factors of political correctness are at work, he said.
Police crackdowns, Home Office initiatives and over-regulation of legally held weapons create froth and they may even fool the police themselves into believing they are doing something about gun crime."
Prof Mauser added: The sad truth is that while the police officers are inspecting farmers' gun cabinets to see if they comply with regulations somewhere in the UK, someone, who has not filled in a firearms certificate form, will be smuggling a gun into the country or selling one to an inner city youth."
Recorded gun crime rose by three per cent to 10,590 incidents in the year to June.
Two-thirds of gun crime takes place in London, Birmingham and Manchester.
It doesn't matter to these people that crime has skyrocketed since the irrational ban on private gun possession went into effect in Great Britain.
Just as long as it's there, they feel safe.
Gazprom, the main Russian gas company, has been denied a $10 billion credit line due to the political situation in Russia.
The company intended to use the cash to pay an artificially low price for Yukos assets (hence that firm's bankruptcy filing a few days ago -- you know it's bad when you have to use US courts to protect your own assets from appropriation by your home country).
It's starting to look like Putin's goal is a sort of judicial nationalization -- taking control of key assets through court, rather than executive, fiat.
But the markets have caught on, and Russia may be deprived of the capital it needs to grow.
Don't expect any of the Russian leadership to reverse course; given the current trends there, they'll just Blame the West when their screwy plan screws them over.
A frozen mountaintop in Tibet may offer an important clue about whether the Earth is warming perilously.
Researchers at Ohio State University and Lanzhou Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology in China have analyzed samples of glacial ice in Tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years.
The ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the Earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead.
A substantial warming would melt some of the Earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas.
If you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said Lonnie Thompson, a research scientist at Ohio State who dug for and analyzed the ice samples.
To compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen.
These measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change.
Analysis of ice from the Dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in Tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last Ice Age, Mr. Thompson said.
Some climate models project that interior regions of Asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes.
But the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, Mr. Thompson acknowledged.
According to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the Earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space.
Skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide.
Instead, the Dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year.
Other temperature data show similar unexplained swings.
Climate varies drastically due to natural causes, said Mr. Thompson.
But he said ice samples from Peru, Greenland and Antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
As the leading candidate for president of his country in next year's election, Mario Vargas Llosa ought to be in an enviable position.
But his country is Peru, where political visibility, especially for a believer in democracy and free enterprise -- a right winger in Latin American eyes -- makes a man a target for assassination.
For almost any Peruvian these days, to show an interest in public office is a heroic gesture; for Mr. Vargas Llosa especially so, since he already has achieved a high position in the world's eyes as a writer.
Published everywhere to universal acclaim, doted on like a movie star in the Hispanic world from Barcelona to Ushuaia, Mr. Vargas Llosa could live comfortably on his royalties and console his political conscience with the thought that Peru is a hopeless mess not of his making and that he already did his best to reform it with his magnificently cinematic novel about the years of military dictatorship of his youth, "Conversation in the Cathedral..
But, after some hesitation, he is back on the stump and also still writing important novels about Peru.
The Storyteller (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $17.95), splendidly translated by Helen Lane, first appeared in Spanish in 1987 before the Peruvian economy had reached its present state of virtual collapse.
And in any case the story takes place a bit earlier than that, when the guerrilla war in the highlands had not yet made internal travel a gamble with destiny.
Even still, the very first sentence of this fable that weaves together Peru's most advanced and most primitive cultural strands speaks of "my unfortunate country..
The narrator may be talking about the depredations of the Shining Path Maoists among the Indians of the Andes, or he may be referring to the plunging inti, Peru's rubber currency, or the corrupting effect of the cocaine trade.
But he is swiftly drawn into a tangle of memories about a less newsworthy and more exotic part of Peru: its corner of the Amazon jungle.
This narrator is a foil for Mr. Vargas Llosa, a cosmopolitan writer with one well-tailored leg in journalism.
He is in Florence to shake himself free of Peru and get some writing done, just as Mr. Vargas Llosa has gone to Paris and now goes frequently to London for the same purpose.
But this narrator happens upon some photographs in a gallery, pictures taken in Peruvian Amazonia of the untamed and nomadic Machiguenga tribe.
And they remind him of his own experiences with that unhappy scattered culture and of his friend at Lima's University of San Marcos, Saul Zuratas.
Saul was a high-strung student of ethnography, a Jew marked doubly as an outsider because of a huge wine-dark birthmark on his face, for which people called him Mascarita, Mask Face.
Saul knew about the Machiguengas from his studies, and through him the narrator became interested in this most recalcitrant and un-Westernizable of all the indigenous peoples who had come under the Spanish yoke.
Saul, meanwhile, came to believe that anthropology, even at its most benign, was as insidious a form of cultural imperialism as the superficially more blatant activities of Christian missionaries.
Saul mysteriously disappears.
This is what we know at the end of the opening section of "The Storyteller..
The next voice we hear sounds like this: "There was no evil, there was no wind, there was no rain.
The women bore pure children.
If Tasurinchi wanted to eat, he dipped his hand into the river and brought out a shad flicking its tail . . ..
And this: "Moving, walking.
Keeping on, with or without rain, by land or by water, climbing up the mountain slopes or climbing down the ravines..
The speaker is never identified.
He tells his stories in his majestically simple way, in a "language" all his own.
There are creation myths and cosmologies and hunting stories -- a whole culture is contained within these dreamy narratives.
It is as though Mr. Vargas Llosa had recorded a storytelling session at a Machiguenga campfire.
And this is just the effect he hopes to have on the reader, as he alternates chapters in his "own" voice with chapters somehow "borrowed" from the Machiguenga storyteller.
For most of the book, there is no direct connection between its urban and its Amazonian modes.
But the contrast between them becomes a living thing through the brilliant contrast of narrative styles that Mr. Vargas Llosa creates.
He controls this counterpoint like a novelistic Bach, reaching an audacious extreme in a hilarious chapter in which the "Vargas Llosa" voice relates his adventures as an inept television newsman.
But the joke turns serious when a reportage takes him to Amazonia and he encounters the missionaries who know more than anyone else about the Machiguengas.
By this point, the narrator has become obsessed with finding out about the Machiguenga storytellers, who, he had heard years before, functioned like cultural glue for a tribe split into many small bands in constant motion through the jungle.
The storytellers traveled among the bands, reminding them of their identity.
But why would no Machiguenga the narrator meets during his reportage even admit that there were storytellers.
The narrator eventually deduces the extraordinary answer, which is confirmed in a literally Kafkaesque manner by a storyteller in the next chapter.
I am trying to give away as little as possible, but this is not really a mystery or some kind of jungle thriller.
It will be read for the brilliant clash of styles of narration and the even more brilliant way that they have been tied together into a large metaphor for literature and its function in society.
More than 50 people are dead in Nigeria, after a leaking oil pipeline burst into flames outside the commercial capital, Lagos.
The blast and resulting fire Thursday, ripped through an area near a fuel-loading depot owned by the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Witnesses report seeing burnt bodies littering the charred grounds while many other victims are being treated for injuries sustained in the blaze.
A spokeswoman for the Petroleum Company says the fire was caused by vandals.
Ivory Coast's army has pledged its loyalty to opposition candidate Loran Gbagbo.
The pledge followed a tumultuous 24 hours that ended the rule of the junta, which seized power last December.
Soldiers and civilians took to the streets to celebrate the departure of junta leader General Robert Guei.
In an address on state television, Wednesday, Mr. Gbagbo, leader of the Ivorian Socialist party, said he would be forming a cabinet shortly.
A U.S. businessman accused of spying says he has no chance of getting a fair trial in Russia.
Edmond Pope appeared in a Moscow courtroom today and read from a 40-page statement, denying charges of espionage, and protesting his treatment by the court.
Russian prosecutors say Pope tried to buy secret blueprints for a high-speed torpedo used by the Russian military.
Pope's supporters say he was seeking information on an old Russian underwater propulsion system.
Slobodan Milosevic's wife will go on trial next week on charges of mismanaging state property during the former president's rule, a court said Thursday.
Mirjana Markovic, the power behind the scenes during Milosevic's 13-year reign, is accused of illegally providing their grandson's nanny with a state-owned luxury apartment in Belgrade in 2000.
The Belgrade district court said that Markovic will be tried along with 10 other Milosevic-era officials who face similar charges of ``inappropriate use of state property'' that carry a sentence of up to five years in jail.
The trial will start on March 13, the court said.
Milosevic and his wife wielded enormous power in Yugoslavia for more than a decade before he was swept out of power after a popular revolt in October 2000.
The post-Milosevic government later extradited him to the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the Netherlands.
Since then, many of Milosevic's political and business allies as well as his two children have been accused of crimes.
Markovic, the leader of the neo-communist Yugoslav Left party, lost her parliamentary immunity from prosecution after she failed to become a deputy in the parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, the country that last month succeeded Yugoslavia.
North Korea's military may have fired a laser at a U.S. helicopter in March, a U.S. official said Tuesday, as the communist state ditched its last legal obligation to keep itself free of nuclear weapons.
The aircraft's censors detected the unknown type of laser while it was flying near the heavily fortified frontier that divides the two Koreas, the U.S. military official said on condition of anonymity.
No one was injured and no equipment was damaged in the incident.
North Korea said Tuesday that a 1992 agreement with South Korea not to deploy nuclear arms on the Korean Peninsula was nullified, accusing the United States of derailing the deal.
The inter-Korean declaration on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was thus reduced to a dead document due to the U.S. vicious hostile policy to stifle the DPRK with nukes,'' said the North's official news agency, KCNA.
DPRK stands for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's official name.
The announcement came as U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun were about to meet Wednesday in Washington to discuss North Korea's nuclear programs.
The accord was the last remaining legal obligation under which North Korea was banned from developing atomic arms.
In January this year, North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a global accord to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
A U.S. military official in Seoul, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday North Korea is believed to have exported US$580 million worth of missiles to Iran, Pakistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Yemen and the United Arab Emirates in 2001.
In December, a shipment of North Korean missiles bound for Yemen was briefly stopped in the Arabian Sea.
North Korea accuses the United States of planning to attack the communist country, which Bush has branded part of an ``axis of evil'' along with Iran and Iraq.
It also revived its claim that the U.S. military keeps many nuclear weapons in South Korea, turning the country into ``the biggest nuclear advance base in the Far East.''
Washington says it wants to use dialogue to resolve the nuclear crisis, although U.S. officials have not ruled out a military option.
North Korea ``keenly felt that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would only remain as a daydream unless the U.S. drops its hostile policy toward the DPRK,'' KCNA said.
It said the U.S. invasion of Iraq taught it that ``a war can be averted and the sovereignty of the country and the security of the nation can be protected only when a country has ... a strong military deterrent force capable of decisively repelling any attack to be made by any types of sophisticated weapons.''
In New York, South Korean President Roh said he will never condone North Korea's nuclear development, but Seoul and Washington agree the nuclear standoff with the North must be solved peacefully ``by all means.''
It is incumbent upon Pyongyang to give up its nuclear project and come forward as a responsible member of the international community,'' he said.
When the North takes this route, the Republic of Korea and the international community will extend the necessary support and cooperation.''
Julianne Lee, a Roh spokeswoman, said the North Korean statement might be a negotiating ploy in the wake of talks last month with U.S. officials in Beijing.
During the talks in Beijing, U.S. officials said North Korea claimed it already possesses nuclear weapons, and that it had reprocessed 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods -- a move that could yield several atomic bombs within months.
North Korea offered to drop its nuclear and missile programs in exchange for security guarantees and economic aid, according to U.S. officials.
The nuclear crisis flared in October, when Washington said North Korea admitted having a secret nuclear program in violation of a 1994 treaty with Washington.
Many people in North America will be able to experience a partial solar eclipse tomorrow.
But scientists say it won't block much Christmas sunlight in most places.
As always, eclipse fans are being warned not to look directly at the Sun because that can cause permanent eye damage.
The eclipse will occur at around 12 P.M. Eastern Time.
The best view will be in the Northeast.
An Oregon girl missing for 15 years has been reunited with her family.
The mother says her daughter was taken by her baby-sitter when she was just 3 years old.
The alleged abduction of Fallon Marie Hodges was never reported to police.
Authorities say the girl contacted law enforcement in Nevada last Friday saying she needed help in finding her identity.
She says she was abandoned by her surrogate parents, one of whom was her alleged kidnapper.
Britain's going to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea.
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made the announcement on his arrival in the South Korean capital, Seoul.
But Cook says establishing ties with North Korea doesn't mean London will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in the country.
We have diplomatic relations around the world, we are going to find out who is a human rights breaker, we have very deep and very real concerns.
The advantage of having diplomatic relations is that we can have a direct dialogue in which we can raise these concerns and express our deep anxiety for the need of improvement in them.
Cook says the South Korean leadership is keen on international help in bringing its northern neighbor in from the cold.
Britain said today that it is normalizing relations with North Korea.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair called the decision a historic breakthrough.
It comes  just days ahead of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's trip to the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
Britain's foreign minister Robin Cook, who made the announcement, said opening diplomatic links could help ease tensions between North and South Korea, technically the two countries are still at war.
Germany said today that it also plans to normalize relations with Pyongyang.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation in Washington DC.
Mr. Harrison, Britain, Italy, prior to that Australia, the Philippines now and apparently Germany all bringing the most secretive state into the fold.
How about the United States, where does that leave us.
Well, I think President Clinton will get some good political cover.
From what Britain has done, if he goes to Pyongyang, as is now being discussed, Secretary Albright is going to go, the number two man in North Korea was in Washington last week.
Things are moving, what's particularly important is that Britain has not attached any conditions.
The United States has imposed a number of conditions on normalizing with North Korea.
The most important of them is that it renounce its missile program and its nuclear weapons program, or rather reach agreements on limiting and possibly ending them both, and as of now we are not in a position to normalize relations with North Korea just like that.
We will want negotiations on some of these contested issues.
Well let me ask you more about America's interest now and Britain's move, I mean how do you make sense of what's happening, especially if Britain was involved in a war with North Korea as obviously was the United States, and until recently North Korea was considered by the US a rogue nation.
It is still shrouded in secrecy, as we said, including in its nuclear weapons program.
Are you trusting of these newly forced alliances, do you consider what Britain is doing either reckless or ill advanced.
No.
And I don't think it is an alliance really, it is just conducting diplomatic interchange with them.
It is not even clear how soon Britain is going to have a mission in Pyongyang.
And so I think it certainly isn't reckless to establish diplomatic relations, and I think indeed it is a very healthy thing because the present leadership of Kim Jong Il, son of the late General You  , he has been trying to open up to the outside world.
He doesn't want to reform his internal economic system or political controls.
On the other hand he needs western capital, he needs supportive international agencies to deal with tremendous economic problems that North Korea has had since the end of the cold war, when they lost their Russian and Chinese economic subsidies.
So that trend of North Korea opening up to the outside, it seems to be, it should be encouraged.
So then as North Korea opens up more and more, what are the possible repercussions down the road for the nearly 40,000 American troops who remain in South Korea.
Well, North Korea's attitude has been that if the United States and North Korea are friends and the North Koreans don't feel threatened, they wont object to some US forces remaining in the Korean peninsula in a new role.
That is to say, if they are going to be there as allies of South Korea against North Korea, then the North Koreans don't want them there, they will keep putting on the pressure for the US to get the forces out.
The North Koreans are certainly not going to end their missile program, if the US continues to maintain some aspects of its military presence in the Korean peninsula such as its aircraft.
So I think they are going to ask for military concessions in order to do what we want them to do regarding missiles, but I think that the assumption that this improvement in ties between North and South and between North Korea and other countries is going to lead to the complete withdrawal of the US from Korea in the near future, certainly I don't think at all, are.
Mr. Harrison, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Thank you.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation, speaking to us from Washington DC.
Chapter 21
The Last Epoch of Menelik- The Conclusion of the chronicle
In Ethiopia the first years of the 19th century were times when many new things were seen and started.
Moreover, Emperor Menilik all of a sudden became ill and started to become weak although he deserves appreciation for bringing civilization.
With regards to education his attempts so as to make his country's people assiduous, and to enable them understand the value of education and start learning could be seen form the strict proclamation he issued.
Conquering Lion of the tribe of Judah Menelik II Emperor of Ethiopia up to now anyone with a skillful hands to do thins used to be called names, therefore, nobody used to work hard to learn and train.
If we line with such harmful situation, churches would be closed, above all, Christianity wouldn't e found.
In other countries not only would they learn each thing, but they also do new things.
Therefore, let all boys and girls enter school offer their six years of age.
Families who are not attentive to teach their children, when the parents die their properties would the transferred to the government, instead of to their children.
It's my government which prepares students and teachers.
1899, Emperor Menelik".
The issuance of this strict proclamation of confiscation of ownership of land and property is one doesn't comply with education legislative decree showed his great intention with regards to education.
So, for the first time, to start European education, he brought teachers form Egypt an opened a school which is called up to now in his name the Menelik II school in 1908.
He did this thinking that it is the first road for a nation's civilization.
During that time, unless one wanted to use it for clerical services in the church or to be a writer, no one took the skills of reading and writing seriously.
Indeed there were many important things that used to be improved and established.
However, he didn't get enough time for other things and improve greatly the administration apart from developing a nation at a time of war, protecting the enemy that came and establishing peace to his people.
Out of what we callas Menelik's peaceful era, the years after the Adowa war, 6 years were the time when emperor Menelik was obliged to stay at home due to illness, and as a result, his natural diligence and strength became weakened and hindered most of the work.
The first feeling of weariness and illness seemed to have started around 1905.
At a time of consultation meeting, a feeling of boredom was seen on him rather than the usual alertness and motivation for work and understanding with patience.
His strong body seemed to have become wearied.
His main intention was to transfer in a strong base to his grandson whom he fostered, the one Ethiopian government which was a stable territory of state which he toiled for years and established.
Hence, in 1909 he gathered his main governors, army officials and lords before Bishop Mathewos and have them vowed that his grandson Honorable son Iyasu was to be the heir so that they wouldn't betray him.
After that the 6 years up to his death were emperor Menelik's time of illness.
When he was caught by illness he was 67 years old.
During this time of illness, impress Taitu tried her best to seize power.
Nevertheless, the emperor, army officials like Tesema and Habte Ghiorgis who were obedient servants an other lords of the house were seriously opposed the idea of her taking power and so the empress' wish wasn't fulfilled.
Prince Mekonnen whom Menelik likes and trusts as his own son and who expands the Harar Province and whose name is mentioned as a hero during the Adowa war died earlier in 1906.
Army official Tesema, too died at a time when emperor Menelik was seriously ill in 1911 just before the emperor's death.
Emperor Menelik who had done all great things in history and unforgettable, the skills of which he brought about were worthy an glittering like a diamond, was forced to patiently hear in his illness unto death in 1914 things that were being done in his government, which may probably be against his will.
In his 35 years of power, he over came very difficult situations with luck patience and wisdom.
His time of power had a lot of struggle and needed great sacrifice and de void of repose.
In this struggle, he was able to receive the prestigious crown of history through his accomplishment, in being able to combine the wishes of the two heroic kings, Emperor Tewdros, who wished to make Ethiopia one, and Emperor Yohannes, who displayed a great love for his country, and in doing so, Menelik could make Ethiopia wide and strong.
After this what remained was through following his steps holding fast and preserve what he struggled and toiled for.
Emperor Menelik also was a fair judge, that was expected from a king above any other work, who loves straight and truthful things, and who properly punished the wrong doer, and for the one who was done wrong, he kept it rights.
He was also popular for his generosity to the poor and being compassionate supporter.
He was a king who used to say in Ethiopian land, after the right land measurement had been make with a long leather or rope, "If during my reign, anyone doesn't take hold of land and those who preferred to get in to your province of birth, you'll remain without land as well as remain staying where you are."
So, due to his generosity and mercifulness, he used to be called by the name a compassionate mother is called and an unforgettable title among his people "motherly Menelik".
The priests, merchants and farmers whom Menelik used to give mantle, soft palate-horse, mule, silver, and oxen and cows, though officially his death, was obscured after December 11, 1914, his people knew from hearsay that he had passed away , and so they used to compose averse at every work place.
The Empress' Time of Banishment
On April 11, 1911 Tesema the Duke died of a sudden illness.
Since the Honorable son Iyasu was only fifteen then, he was the heir of King Menelik, he started ruling Ethiopia independently.
Nevertheless, being aware of his lack and maturity of administration he chose some of the royal family members to help him, but with regards to sharing counsel it was told that they didn't have the skill and the strength.
(Based on the conventional generation live Taye Gulelat, next to Abeto Iyasu, was by far capable than any other members.
Look at the Honorable child Mahtemeselassie woldemeskel Hulke, Generation of the Royal Family of Sahleselassie, table (2nd line).
Abetu Iyasu, after ruling as being a plenipotentiary, in order to avoid the prophecy that "a queen would arise after king Menelik", he reminded queen Taitu to altogether get out of the Palace and stay at Intoto in banishment, (After seeing the political clash that was going on in Addis Ababa, especially the activities of General Ayalew, who was observed by Lord Michael as being opposition to his son's authority, he was expecting serious measures to be taken against him; in contrast, he was not only released from his arrest but also given promotion at Kembata town, which left him an aching void.
Instead of this, when it is looked at from the matter that led them to have strong desire to oppose the ‘empress' relatives, it is possible to estimate the reason as to why the long-standing conflict with Lord Wole was tight with regards to the matter mentioned above).
Because Abeto Iyasu had not entered the palace queen Taitu spent few months there and on the fifth day of July according to the command was decided to make her move to Entoto.
At the time Lord Wole consulted his followers to go to Addis Ababa the army leader General Yimer explained his readiness to war for the he said how could we keep silent while the Queen is deposed from her authority.
Lord wole was quoted saying along with the criticism and explained that war was wrong "How could I dismantle the government I built with menelik".
Honorable son Desta Aleme, Zini Kemahu).
Before she started her journey on Thursday, she entered the drawing room where her husband's corpse laid to rest next to St. Mary church, at 4 o'clock in the morning.
The death of Emperor Menelik was not disclosed to the public because General Habte Giorgis consulted them not to.
Unable to control her tears, the Empress said, "I have already put aside my harvest, what do I have here, my lord! I will also follow you in my time," and cried.
The people who were around her were touched by her sorrow.
And started crying.
The sorrow over the death of menelik has not yet been forgotten form the side of the people, and the additional eviction of empress Taitu from the palace was thought to induce the mourning, so the nobility, the lords and the honorable ladies wiped their tears and sympathized with each other so as to keep the secrets that has been kept as yet and not letting it out to the public at this coincidence.
Just at five o'clock the candle that was moistened by bees wax was flickered by the butlers like torch sparkling on the area, surrounding the empress making her ready for the journey.
The commander of cavalry brought the empress' mule.
The mules of the nobility, the lords, the honorable ladies and the thirty-nine ladies of the bed-chamber, were outside the premise of the palace waiting for the arrival of the empress.
As the empress started her journey accompanied by her butlers and servants, all followed her with their mules.
When ever she feels tired the journey would break, she would ride off the mule and would sit on a chair that is given to her for taking some rest, and after a while continue the journey.
After traveling seven chapters and reached Intoto area, and a field named Usher Tezazu, a carpet was laid for her honor and on it was a sofa where she laid for a while.
The men welcomed her with cheering while the women with cries of jubilation.
The priests with their ordination out fits and choirs rhythmically danced with the church song.
As soon as the welcoming ceremony was completed the honorable journey continued in high spirits the music that came out of the large wind instrument like a fife, a single-string violin and the harp loudly played accompanying it.
The parade was large.
However, the death of king Menelik which was kept secret was feared to bring about chaos due to the excessive number of the army.
Yet, the people who realized the empress' journey to Intoto expressed its heartfelt sorrow and has no other idea, the Empress appreciated and said, "we really have people" which revealed the love of the people.
As soon as she reached the Intoto palace, she invited the nobilities, lords, honorable ladies and all those army who were gathered there with a feast for the time coincided with the end of June which was also the end of "the apostle's fasting".
During the time of her banishment, for a year and six months and twenty-two days, her loyal servants and all the army didn't rob her from princlliness.
The nobility, the lords, the honorable ladies too were dropping by her day after day giving the appropriate prestige and honor.
Even Abeto Iyasu used to go and see her taking various gifts.
In Ethiopian government administration it's known that kings used to chose and empower their consultants and for this there was an old proverb that says "A king without consultant would never reign for more than a year".
After the few dates of reminding, the uncle of Mr. Zewditu, governor Weldegiougis' land was seized by they order of honorable son Iyasu, and come to Empress Taitu asking her for being a go-between.
The empress sent the honorable kebede Adenew to honorable son Iyasu who by then used to live in his father, Duke Michael's premise, and the lather bowed his head and gave her message, and promised that he would make the release of his land effectual.
Afterwards, "Does she ever mention me?"
What did she say about me?
He asked and the messenger replied "yes she mentioned your name" and when he asked "how does she mention my name?" and the messenger replied, "he's my son, and I'm his mother and you're his sister and why didn't he visit us? What did we do to him?" and feeling regret, the honorable son Iyasu told her that he would come "Tomorrow afternoon" and she went off with this message.
On the morrow Empress Taitu was waiting him with Mrs. Zewditu, and honorable son Iyasu came as he said, and at first, the food-table was ready before the empress and Zewditu so honorable son Iyasu asked as to where his food-table was; the empress showed him hers and since he was not so happy to eat with one food-table with the empress, the empress quickly reminded him that we were to feel unhappy to eat with you in one food-table for, not you for you are not the king or queen, so they ate with one food-table and he received thank son the release of the land, and honorable left out.
After wards, the empress who was impressed by her messenger's skill apart from properly delivering the message sent by the empress his deeds to tactic fully bring them closer, asked "where on earth, for Christ's sake, did you get such a diligence" to which he replied "God pointed out for me" he said.
If we mention, for instance, the minister of defense, General Habte Ghiorgis bringing gifts of as many oxen, honey and butter, bowing and showing his obedience to her.
Honorable Kebede Adenew, Zini Kemahu, July 5, 1980)
Since the empress knew the role he played in the conspiracy against her he came to visit her for the first time since she was banished here less than month ago and she asked him "Habte Giorgis When did you start liking me?"
You have me placed under an interdiction not to get in to my original dwelling place" and added other wards of criticism.
The General in his very witty and wise nature.
I made consultation with the lords so that you should not go to your region.
It's to protect us from being blind.
If you go what kind of eyes, and what light do we have, I thought about Ethiopia.
And as to you, what other, who made things stable? It's you! He replied.
After listening patiently and attentively to him, and reflecting on it for some time, realizing that with the participation of authority others would gain political experience that help the country, she said, "Habte Ghiorgis, you convinced me! Thank you very much!" and order her servant to receive his gift.
Interview of Priest Mekonnen and the Wiseman Abebe Worede and all who were these on September 29, 1972
Since on the occasion of the General's visit a feast was ready to invite the people, the lords gather together and came to the hall where the empress was located, and enjoyed the banquet.
At this juncture the empress gave farewell to general HabtetGhiorgis saying "Don't leave me, visit me".
Nevertheless, the Empress Taitu's yoke of banishment was lifted with less than three months' time.
The reason for this was Honorable son Iyasu's government could stay long and in September 1917 the cabinet of ministers Mrs. Zewditu Menelik coronated Empress Zewditu and was made to substitute and lead the government.
However, the mother Empress thought of honorably returning to the former palace would make her standard low and so preferred to stay at her palace in Intoto.
What's termed as the fasting of the apostles and be broken on July 13 commonly called the fasting of June.)
After Empress Zewditu came to power, she loved and respected her more than any other time, historians told.
After she became Empress, she had to stay in the palace inviting and talking to guests for a month.
But after a month, she went to Intoto Palace to pay a visit to Empress Taitu.
After reaching there and met the mother empress, as she tried to bow and salute her, Empress Taitu reminded her that the crown of Ethiopia Empress Zewditu had on her head was more respected and at that time this kid of salutation would rather be done by her for it was her turn to do so, and there fore, mother the empress stood up and kissed her, it was told.
While Empress Taitu were at Intoto, she used to pray day and night wishing Ethiopia not to fall at some fault.
She used to offer her advice for the occasional request of government affairs.
For this it would be exemplary to mention what she contributed in October 1917 when the king of Wollo, Michael, opposing his son's Honorable Iyasu's deposition from his power and eviction, called for his army fro war against the new regime.
as soon as this was heard the nobilities and lords of Shoa region said let's fight region going to Wollo, but General Habte Ghiourgis preferred to go to the Empress to Intoto an consult her before that.
You didn't take a wise decision for the land of Wollo is by nature barricade, so you'll have killed so many people.
Armies from Wadla Delanta area would attack you so by hook or crook bring them to Shoa, Michael is a hero, he's hasty and he'll come," she gave her wise advice.
Honorable Iyasu in his short-term office went to different regions.
The main causes for his downfall were (1) frequenting strict control, warning demotion and even punishment of death on higher officials (2) doing things that are not expected of his standard, and committing injustice, (3) not only didn't have close relation ships with officials and lords, but also didn't give due respect to elders, (4) participations which made him be suspected to have changed his religion to Islam, etc...
The several officials who were displeased by Honorable son Iyasu's administration raised these points and exaggerated, it by saying that, according to the international situation before world war I, the honorable son Iyasu has an agreement of ammunition purchase with Austria, who was an ally of Nazi, Germany, and had discussions with embassies of Germany, Turkey governments, while the British and French governments were following the matters attentively.
And later using photographic techniques, put honorable Iyasu under Muslim cultural outfits, disseminated these photos which contributed for his down fall.
In addition, an Armenian, father Mussie Leon and the owner of Cinema Empire was said to go to Egypt and brought 20,000 copies of the photograph.
Mussie Kachik Zeni Kemahu, april 1980.
The nobilities and the lords being guided by the war strategy given by the empress, were waiting for King Michael, and as she said he came to Shoa traveling day and night, where General Habte Ghiorgis fought him at a place called Segelle Meda with his army of Shoa in a few days and became victorious, taking captive of the king, history remind us.
On the other hand, as has been mentioned above, Empress Taitu apart from sharing ideas and practically supporting Emperor Menelik, after the Emperor's death she didn't stop offering advice to Empress Zewditu from her banished area, Intoto, so as to guard her commands from going out of balance and sustain her authority.
It was known that Emperor Menelik was sick and even after his assign away, the time became a transition and numerous power rival cries put Ethiopia in great controversy and this would make her a weak country, and since this was a great opportunity for a foreign enemy who would like to split up the country, she was very worried.
Because of this, time and again through the messages she used to send by her confidantes, she was advising ways of Empress Zewditu to strengthen her power, her special secretary who is still alive, Honorable son Desta Aleme, speaks.
Honorable Son Desta: repeated 5 July, 1980)
HAILE SELASSIE I
PRIZE TRUSET
1964-1968
Ethiopia studies Award 10 October 1964 PROF, MARCEL COHEN A Frenchman and  scholar of renown , professor Mrcel Cohenhas extensively written on Ethiopia especially on our history, customers, ceremonies, and games. In addition to his scholarly commitments, professor Cohen has been awarded the Croix de Guerre in both world wars.
The Haile Selassie award for Ethiopia Studies of a value of Eth. $20,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to professor Marcel Cohen, doyen of Ethiopiacists world-renowned linguist and Semitic scholar, for his creation in paris of the school of Ethiopian Studies, and for the inspiration which, his orginginal research and brilliant writings have given to his contemporaries, his pupils and his pupils' pupils.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY PROF. MARCEL COHEN
C'est avec une grande fierte que jiai requ la distinction qui m'a ete accordee ici comme couronnement de ma carriere d'ethiopisant. Au bout de plus de quarante annees ouj'ai enseigne i'amharigna et le geez, j'ai eu le plaisir, le bonheur, je dois dire, de former , d'aider plutot a la formation d'un assez grand nombre de savants plus jeunes que moi, qui continuent mes travaux, aet dont vous connaisez plusieurs, parce qu'ills sont venus travailler ici dans le pays-meme. ii y en aqui sejournent encore parmi vous, d'autres qui sont venus et qui revidendront encore. je dois mentionner aussique pendant ces annees d'etntre vous pourront connatre.
C'est avec joie que je me suis retouve dans cette ville que jen'avais pas vue depuis 53 ans. je l'ai trouvee evidemment changee. j'ai vu la sous mes yeux ce que je capitale. Du temps ou j'y etais deja le grand Menelik ii avait introduit cet instrument de la vie moderne qu'est i'imprimerie, et il avait fovorise la creation de premieres ecoles. Aujourd ' hul ce sont des livres en grande quantite qui s'imriment ici. ii y a beaucopu de jenes auteurs, et sous le patronage de Sa majeste I' Empereur Haile Selassie les decoles se sont multipliees  et se multiplint et s'augmentent toujour. Et e plus il a founde cette nouvelle organisation dont nous beneficions aujourd;hui, et dnt je laremercie encore pour ma part.
His imperial Majesty awarding prof. Marcel Cohen, presented by H.E . Commodors Iskinder Desta.
Africa Research Award 10 October 1964
PROF. WILLIAM LEO HANSBERRY
professor William leo Hansberry was born in Mississipi and educted in HArvard, Virginia State Collge, the Universities of Oxford and Cairo and has served Howard University over a long period of time. Beginning 40 years ago, he introduced the first course on early African civilisations, course eriched and documented with material obtained often at his ownd expense and presented always with his exemplary dedication to the truth revealed by research.
Prof. William Leo Hansberry is an Adviser and Distinguished professor of the University of Nigeria;a Trustee of the African- American institute ; for eight years the was Chairman of the Governing council of Africa House in Washington, and also Adviser to the private organisation,, Operations Cross-roads Africa."
The Haile Selassie Award for AFrican Research of a value of Eth. $70,000, gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to professor William Leo Hansberry for his an thropological, archaeological and historical studies of Africa, for being the tourch bearer who opened the eyes of his fellow-Americans to see and appreciated the vast and still uncharted world of African history, and for the inspiration he gave to a whole generation of students - the present leaders of African and through them the people generation of students- the present leaders of Africa and through them the people generation of students- the present leaders of African and through them the people generation fo students- the present leaders of Africa and through them the people of Africa-to reafffirm their identity so that they can face the future with faith, confidence and courage.
Acceptance speech by Prof. William Leo Hansberry
For nearly 50 yyears, I have been endeavouring to search out and correelted and synthesize in a critical and humanized manner the relevant evidence relating to Africa's true position in world history and in world affairs. In the course of this effort, I have been profoundly impressed by the abudance of evidence relating to Africa's storied and unstoried past. But I have often been deeply distressed by the fact that the truie import of this evidence was so little known to the world at large.
I was therefore immensely pleased when I learned that your imperial Maesty had established a Trust which has as one of its primaerey objectives to recogize and encourage those who are devoting themselves to the task of making this vast body of evidence available in convenient from to the world at large. I was especially gratified of evidence available in convenient form to the world at large. I was especially gratified when I lerned that I had been chosen as a recipient of the first Haile Selassie I prize Trust Award for African Research in m y efforts towards this end.
I am confident, your imperial MAjesty, that many of my fellow-Americans and African brothers join me in expressing to you and the Trustees of the Haile Selassie I prize Trust my very deep gratitude for the great honour which you have bestowed upon me for my effort over deep gratitude for the grat honour which you have bestowed upon me for my efforts over the years to asssist in correcting longstanding misconceptions about Africa's proper place in world  history and in world affairs.
May God grant that your great work continue for many years to come.
His imperial Majesty awarding prof. W.L. Hansberry, presented by Ato Wondowesen Mengesha.
H.E ATO KEBEDE MIKAEL
H.E ATO KEBEDE MIKAEL has assured himself and honoured place among Ethiopia authors through his litary achievements and dedication to intellecual pursuits.
The Haile Selassie Award for Amharic Literature of a value of Eth.$7,000, gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to H.E. Ato Kebde Mikel, for his signifcant contribution to the enrichment of the Amharic language by providing rich and diversified literature to the learning and reading public, by adapting renowned literary national language is flexible, rich , adaptable, and capable to express not only the cultural heritage of Ethiopia but also the heritages of other nations.
H.E. Ato Kebede Mikael, laureate of Amharic Litrature.
ATO AFEWERK TEKLE
The Ethiopia artist of international repute was born in 1925 E.C in Ankober in teh province of Showa. His early training as an artist was mainly at the Slade Faculty of ARts in London, He has since studied in paris, Rome, Florence and Spain. The works of Afewerk Tekele are to be found in private and public collection in Europe, Russia, America and Africa.
Te Haile Selassie Award for fine Arts of a value of Eth. $7,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to Ato Afewerk Tekele, versatile and disciplined artis, for his outstanding paintings, drawings, landscapes, oils, and portraits which eloquently express his particular world environment, and for his contribution in being among the first to introduce contemporary techniques to Ethiopian subject matter and content.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY ATO AFEWERK TEKLE
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
On this solemn occasion of my extreme happines, I cannot help remembering that repeated affirmation by the many schoars and philosophers, who have contemplated at length on this life of ours "that a span of man's life is somposed of sorrow and happiness alternately".
In saying this, the span of my young life, particularly in my childhood, I do not recall any happiness, except times filled with suffering and sorrow. But now, thanks last few years the fruits of my hard work have brought me appreciation from the one who brought me up and educated me, my sovereign Emperir; admiration from the who brought me up and educated me, my Sovereign Emperor; admiration from the enlightened public at large, and great happiness to me as I have never experienced.
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY,
I humbly beg your gracious MAjesty to allow me to tell those in this assembly. in particular those who witnessed and gave me moral support in my diffcult and sometimes impossible struggles in teh creative field for the dignity and integrity of art. With your gracious permission I was to say to them "I aM INDEED HAPPY TODAY AND THEY SHOULD BE HAPPY TOO!"
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY, The patron and protector of Ethiopian, indeed of African Art,
In being the first artist to receive this prize which is highly esteemed and possessing the historic name of your Majesty, I feel  indeed most  honored. May God and history reward you.
Long live the Emperor
May Ethiopia live forever
H.I.M awarding Ato Afewerk Tekle, presented by Ato Abebe Kebede.
TEKA EGHANO AND COMPANY
During the past seven years the company of take Eghano has continually striven to produce coffee of ever-improved quality. At the same time, it has given priority to the human take of promoting the level of its employees and their training for better achievements.
ATO TEKA EGHANO
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY!
It is great joy to me to come before Your Majesty and express my throughts, For reasons that agriculture is belived to be Ethiopia's Source of economy, and for my being the award recipient of the Haile Selassie I Prize Trust, my joy is double fold.
Although plantation of coffee- the cause for our award- is a tiring task, we started growing coffee wigthout having enough capital, but with spirit and courage. Under Mr. Costa Alexandrakis, Mr. Guisseppe Galantina and my self collaborated to this venture and now we are granted this honour. Aside from this , the money we borrowed from teh Development Bank of Ethhiopia-established by Your Majesty's farsightedness is the rsult of this honour.
YOUR MAJESTY!
people from teh province I reside in say that , "cofffee kills her owner and rises herself", and I belive that they have good resons for saying this. Allthough it is difficult to use manual power of only few, as has been repeatedly stated by Your majesty, agriculture, and in particular coffee plantation is the step to development.
In any kind of work, there should be moral support. It is when there is such support that one's spirit is aroused. It is our hope-be it for coffee or any other  kind of agriculture- that there will  be many Ethiopian specialists, for their help and advise are needed.
For the privilege in cooperative farms, and in our day and night endevour, I managed to establish a company in my name, and for me to receive an award in the name of the company is a significant example to all private farm investors.
I believe that this award will arouse the urge of thousands of Ethiopias, and inspire them to work, and abolish the idea of saying. "We work, but out work is not recognized". The award is not limited only to the joy of the recipient, but will not b e denied that it is a base to development and prosperity of Ethiopia.
As people form any party of the world with prominent services recive awards from this Trust, I believe that we, Your people of Ethiopia, according to our ability would with spirit and wholeheartedness serive to be participants of international awards.
Long live Your Imperial Majesty!
Long live His imperial Highness!
Long live Ethiopia for every free.
H.I.M awarding Ato Teka Eghano, presented by Dr. G.E.W. Wolstenholme.
ETHIOPIAN TYRE ECONOMY PLANT
The Ethiopia Tyro Economy plant merits recognition for endeavors contributive to the growth of the national economy and the exemplary value of its activities during the seven years of its existence.
The Haile Selassie Award for industry of a value of Eth. $ 7,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to The Ethiopian Tyre Ecopnomy plant for its examplary management that  has manifested over a period of seven years daring, ingenuity, progressiveness, and energetic leadership. The management has insight and ability to explore and succeed in a venture that was initially uncertain but which later succeeded  not only in the limited objective of rethreading used tyres, but in the larger enterprise of producing rubber soles for the previously importing shoe industries in Ethiopia.
His Imperial Majesty awaring Ato Gebreyesus Oda, Presented by Mr. W.J. Pile.
በአዲስ አበባ ከአሥመራ ዐድዋ፤ ባሕር ዳር ድሬዳዋና በሀገር ሕይወት ለሚገኙ በብዙ ሺ ለሚቆጠሩ ወጣቶች የመንፈሳዊ የትምህርት እዲሁም የማኀበራዊ ኑሮ አገልግሎት በመስጠት የወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኀበር ለኢዮጵያ ሕዝብ ደህንነትና ዕድገት ረድቷል። እርዳታ የሚያስፈልጋቸውን ጠቃሚ እርዳታ ለመስጠጥ ማህበሩ ያከናወናቸው ሥራዎች ለሀገር ጥቅም ከመስጠታቸውም በላይ ማኀበሩ ጥሩ ምሳሌ ለመሆን ችሏል።
የወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር ከ፲፯ ዓመታት በሚበልጥ ጊዜ ለሰው ልጅ ደህንነት የማሰብንና ዕውቀትን የተመረኮዘ የማኀበራዊ ኑሮ ተካፋይነትን ዓላማዎች በትምህርት በማኀበር  ከ ፲፯ ዓመታት በሚበልጥ ጊዜ ለሰው ልጅ ደህንነት የማሰብና ዕውቀትን የተመረኮዘ ማኀበራዊ ኑሮ ተካፋይነትን ዓላማዎች በትምህርት በማኅበራዊ ኑሮና በስፖርት ፕሮግራም ከመቶ አምሳ ሺህ በሚበልጡ ኢትዮጵያውያን አእምሮ የመቅረጽ ከፍያለ አገልግሎ ስለ ሰጠ የ፲፱፻፶፯ ዓ.ም የቀዳማዊ ኃይለ ሥላሴ ሽልማት የኢት ብር ፯ ሺህ ከወርቅ ኒሻንና ዲፕሎም ጋር ይሰጠዋል።
የክቡር ኮሌኔል ታምራት ይገዙ የወ.ወ.ክ.ማ ሬዚዳንት መልስ።
ግርማዊ ሆይ
የኢትዮጵያ ወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር በኢትዮጵያ ሰለፈጸማቸው ሰብአዊ አገልግሎቶች ከቀዳማዊ ኃይለ ሥላሴ የሽልማት ድርጅት ስለተሰጠው ሽልማት በቦርዱ አባሎችና በልዩ ልዩ ኮሚቴዎች በሠራተኞቹና በማኅበርተኞቹ በጠቅላላው በብዙ ሺ በሚቆጠሩ ደጋፊዎቹ ስም ጥልቅ ምስጋናችንን አቀርባለሁ።
ይህ ዛሬ የኢትዮጵያ ወጣቶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኀበር ያገኘው ክብር በመላው ዓለም ያለውን የወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር የብዙ ጊዜ አገልግሎት የሚያስታውስ ነው። የወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናው ማኅበር እንደ አውሮፓውያን ዘመን አቆጣጠር በ፲፷፻፵፬ ዓ.ም በጆርጅ ዊልም በእንግሊዝ አገር ከተመሠረተበት ጊዜ አንስቶ ዘርን ቀለምን ሃይማኖን ሳይለይ ሰውን በመንፈሱና በአካሉ በአእምሮውም ለማጎልመስና ለሁሉም ሰብአዊ አገልግሎት መስጠት ዋና ዐላማው ነው። በአሁኑም ጊዜ ሰማንያ የሚሆኑ አገሮች  በአባልነት የሚኙበት የዓለም የወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር ዋና መሥሪያ ቤት በጄኔቫ ይገኛል።  ግርማዊነትዎ የወጣቶች ወነንዶ ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር በኢትዮጵያ እንዲቋቋም በ፲፱፻፵ ዓ.ም ስለፈቀደ የኢትዮጵያ ወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር በ፲፱፻፶፫ ዓ.ም በዓለም ወ.ወ.ክ.ማዎች ኅብረት ውስጥ ሙሉ አባል ሆኖ ታወቀ።
የኢትዮጵያ ወጣቶች ወንዶች ክርስቲያናዊ ማኅበር በልዩ ልዩ ፕሮግራሞች በብዙ ሺህ ለሚቆጠሩ ሰዎች አገልግሎቱን ያበረክታል። እነዚህም  ልዩ ልዩ አገልግሎች መሠረተ ትምህርት የሕጻናት ትምህርት ቤት የእረፍት ጊዜ ምቾት መስጠት እስፖርት ለልጆች ለክበብ አገልግሎ ለሕዝብ የእውቀት መስጫ ፕሮግራም  ባሕላዊ የሙዚቃ ፕሮግራም ንግግር ፤ ክርክር በህብረትና በቡን የመጫወት ትምህርት የእጅ ሥራ ትምህርት፤ ለማጎልማሶችም እንደየዝንባሌአቸው  የክበብ አገልግሎ እንደጠቃነታቸው እየታ  ይሰጣሉ። የቦዱ ሥራ አስኪያጅ በድርጅቱ ውስጥ የልዩ ልዩ የሥራ ክፍል ኮሚቴ አባሎች የማኅበሩ ሠራተኞ በበጎ ፈቃዳቸው የፈጸሙትን ከፍ ያለ አገልግሎ ለገረርማዊነትዎ ስገልጽ ከልብ ከማመስገን ጋር ነው።
We wish to express our appreciation for the untiring work and devotion of our YMCA Board of MAnagers, our many committees, and our staff.
We are deeply grateful to Your imperial MAjesty for your continued inspiration to and support of our YMCA. Be assured that the award money will be used for the extension of program services for youth and the medal will be displayed in teh young Men's Christian Association. Be assured that the award money will be used for the extension of program services for youth and the medal will be displayed in teh young Men's Christian Association.
This recognition and honor is not only a great joy for the YMCA but it is also a humbling experience and a challenge. It is humbling in that it makes us evaluate and see our many shortcomings, and humbling as we are made aware of the power of God and the way in which this power works among people in the positive ways in which god makes all things possible. This is a challenges as we see ways in which we might better serve God and as we look to the future. Once again, Your imperial Majesty and the Haile Selassie i prize Trust, thank you for this honour, the Haile Selassie i prize Trust Award for Humanitarian Activities.
His imperial Majesty awarding H.E. Colonel Tamrat Yigezu, presented by H.E. Ato seyoum Haregot
EMPRESS MENEN AWARD 10 OCTOBER 1964
THE NOBEL FOUNDATION
Throughout this century the Nobel foundation has translated the beneficence of Alfred Nobel into a great record of international awards, The foundation has won the respect and administration of the greater part of teh world for its integrity, courage impartiality, internationality and conscientious judgement.
The Empress Menen Award given once in four years on teh intiative of the Trustees- with a value of Eth. $35,000 , gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to The Nobel foundation, for services to humanity in the recognition and encouragement of high purpose wherever it may be found in teh world.
ACCEPTANCE SPEEC BY PROF. A. TISELUS
In deep respect, teh Nobel Foundation with to express their gratitude for the great distinction conferred upon us, the Empress Menen Award.
The Haile Selassie i prize Trust and the Nobel Foundation have similar aims- ro recognize and to encourage achievements to the benefit of mankind. The Haile Selassie i prize Trust Awards and teh Nobel prizes also have in common that they are to be given to the worthiest without regard to  nationality, race , religion of political creed.
Our experience has show to us that it is possible to fulfill this high purposes, The difficulties are obvious and shrtcomings cannot be avoided. However, we are under the impression that even in a world of conflicting opinions in many perhaps in most questions, it is possible to find a manifest international opinion for awarding those who have made particularly valuable contributions to human welfare, human welfare in its widest and deepest sense, as an expression of teh gratitude of mankind.
We have the greatest respect and admiration for the initiative taken  by your imperial Majesty in creating this prze Trust. We believe that it is significant that Ethiopia with its high clutural ambitions and its prominent position in the great continent of Africa will be the home of this Trust.
We have great confidence in its future and we shall follow its activities with great sympathy and great interest.
On behalf of the Nobel Foundation, may i express to your imperial Majesty our deepest gratitude.
Empress Menen Award: Prof.  Tiselius, on behalf of the Nobel Foundation, receives the prize.
1965 Haile Selassie prize laureates.
PROFESSOR WOLF LESLAU
professor Leslau was born on November 14,1906 in Czeschowa, poland, at the University of Vienna, and in Paris at the Ecole National des Langues Orientales, and the Sorbonne, where he obtained his Licence-es-Lettres and Docteur-es-Lettres.
He has taught in several institutions among which are Brandeis Unviersity, New School for Social Research, Asia Institute, and the University College of Addis Ababa as a Visiting professor. He is presently [professor of Hebrew and Semitic Linguistics and Chairman of the Department of Near Eastern and Africa Languages at the University of California, Los Angeles. He was recently nominated FAculty Research Lecturer for 1965-66 by his colleagues in recongnition of his achievements in Semitic studies. Author, educator, orientalist, Prof, Leslau has written 17 books and over 200 articles.
Prof. Leslau has conducted research in teh Eghiopic languages during the last thirty years and published extesnively, his most important contributions including a Tigrgana grammar, the obnly scientific grammar of Tigre, a description of the Gafat languge, a number of studies of teh history of Amharic, numerous studies on teh Gurage dialects, a Harari dictionary, and a series of articles on Arabic loanwords in the Ethiopian languages.
His intrest, however, its by no means limited to pure linguistics, but extends to culture and folklore He has made a scientinc study of the Falashas and their litrature, and has also done much to polularize Ethiopia folkore in other lancs. As a dedicated teacher, he has striven to encourage young Ethiopian scholar to take an interest in the scientific study of their own culture and linguistics, and their litrature, and has also done much to popularize Ethiopian studies in the New World.
Prof. Leslau will  be awarded the 1965 Haile Selassie Award for Ethiopian studies of a value of Eth.$20,000 - gold medal, and diploma for his outstanding scholarship in particular for having spent a lifetime systematizing the knowledage of the Ethiopian languages and providing a scientinc classification of them.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY PROF. WOLF LESLAU
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY, Members of the Board, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
I wish to express my profound gratitude to the Haile Selassie I prize Trust for having aganted me the award for Ethiopian Studies. I am particularly happy for having received the award from a country that manifested its intellectual maturity as far back as the 4th century of our era.
Indeed. beginning with that time Ethiopia was able to record its culture, history and religion through inscriptions and literary documents. It is a further a sign of intellectual maturity that the present government of Ethiopia under the leadership of His imperial Majesty Haile Selassie i, Started to take stock of its cultural heritage through the creation of various institutions of research. I am referring to the archeological mission and teh institute of Ethiopian Studies, institutions that investigate the culture of the country in its broad aspects. It is a sign of intellectual maturity to given recognition to the scientific contributions of those individuals who study the various aspects of Ethiopian culture. The Haile Selassie I prize Trust tiook this initiative.
I am particularly happy that the Haile Selassie I prize Trust by granting the Award for Ethiopian Studies to a linguist has recognized the importance that investigation of the country's various languages holds for our knowledage of Ethiopia's cultural and historical past.
His imperial MAjesty awarding prof. W. Leslau, presented by H.E. Lidj Kassa Wolde Mariam.
It is a sign of intellectual maturity that the Award for Ethiopia Studies was given to a non-national for his contributions to Ethiopian Studies. Few nations have achieved this maturity. I hope, however, that the day will come wehen the recipien of this award will be an Ethiopian national, an Ethiopian who will devote his lifetime to the country, the attitude of today's intellectual who studies either at the University of this country or abroad, and the attitude of teh non- intellectual who was curious about my reasons for giving attention to languages such as Chaha, Adare, Selti and Argobba . And when I answered that i did it,, latarik". for history , for research, he understood this reason and gave me his full coopration.
It is this attitude of the intellectual and or the non-intellectual alike that makes us foresee the day when the recipient of the Award for Ethiopia Studies will be an Ethiopian. It is in the hope of having contributed towards the achievement of this goal that I grateful accept eh Haile Selassie Award foe Ethiopian Studies.
H.E. BALAMBARAS MAHTEME SELASSIE WOLDE MESKEL
H.E. Balambaras Mahteme Selassie Wolrd MEskel was born on October 29th , 1950 in Addis Ababa and is the father of ten Children. Educated at Menelik II Schools, Addis Ababa Frency ,, Lycee" in Cairo, and institute National Superieur c'Agriculture Colonial in paris, H.E. Balambaras Mahteme Selassie holds a diploma in general agriculture.
Decorated many times at home and abroad, His Excellency is distinguished public official with many years of dedicated service in various fields. His Excellency has served as Minister of Agriculture, Finance, Minister of State in teh Ministry of Education, and is presently the Minister of public workers and Communications.
The stuggle of Amharic to evolve its own identify and develop as a language was made more difficult than ever before by teh introducation of the compeitive European languages and culture. Tehsis problem can be overcome when the Ethiopian heritage is written and recorded for transmission to future generations. At a period when and Amharic is passing through such a transitional and critical stage, His Excellency has made available works outstanding in their literary beauty of the Ethioppian legacy.
His excellency Balambaras Mahiteme Selassie has admirably and largely fulfilled these obligations to conserve and preserve the Ethiopian heritage through his numerous volumes. His writings, especially,, Yamarigna Kine", ,, Yabatoch kirse" and ,, Zikrae Neger" are examples of teh contributions that have assured His Excellency of a respected and high place among scholars in Amharic.
His Excellency has selectfully and meaningfull compiled poems and sayings and recorded church and court procedures which heretofore have been orally transmittd from generation to generation. The Haile Selassie Award for Amharic Literature of a value of Eth, $7,000 , gold medal, and diploma will be given to His Excellency Balamdaras Mahteme Selassie Wolde Meskel for his outstanding and lasting contributions which ensure a firm cultural foudnationa nd setting for Amharic.
Speech By Balambaras Mahteme Selassie Wolde MEskel, Amharic Literature Award Winner, on October 12th, 1965
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
I am greatly honoured to find myself amongst the prize winners of the Haile Selassie I prize Trust and to receive from your Majesty the Award for Literature.
I was delighted when m y name was announced with those of other winners; my pleasure was even greater when i learnt that the works upon which i had laboured to immortalise the culture and tradition of our country were selected  by teh Committee as my most important contributions towards Ethiopic learning.
The Haile Selassie I prize Trust  has clearly expressed in its publication teh need for and teh value of compiling traditional works, appropriately documented and classifled, and of passing these on teh successive generations, it is indeed very gratifying to find that I have contributed towards this objective.
While it was extremely terrifying to witness the ruthless and barbarous massacre of people and teh destruction of property by teh enemy during the occupation of our country, it was equally distressing to think that tradition and culture might also vanish due to the breaking of the chain in the otherwish smooth continuity of our culture. Furthermore, it was alarming to anticipate that the new generation, readily adopting itself to foreign civilisation, would not k now of our tradition and culture if these were not handed down in writing, and would remain solely under the influence of foreign culture.
It was, threfore, because of this fear that I endeavoured to set aside my personal sentiments, as an author or historian, and sought our elders who had survived teh oppression in order to collect existing writings and subsequently to compile and coordinate all these fragments, often mutilated, so that at last some party of our culture could  be preserved for future generations. The results of my efforts include the books entitled,, Zikre Neger" (Recollections of Bygone Times).,, Yabatoch Kirs" (Heritage from our Forefathers), ,,Amarigna ine" (Amharic Poetry) and,, inkilf Lemine" (Why sleep),. giving a clear picture of our society.
Each of these four books is characteristic: the first shows us that "Our way of life not only reflects our natural abilities but also our tendencies and inclinations", the second that "Most of our proverbs are based on holy writings", the third that "Our poetry is extremely beautiful", and lastly, the fourth that, Our fables illustrate good principles and there is always a moral to be drawn from them".
I feel that I must mention here that I was given sound moral support by the decision of the Ministry of Education and Fine Arts to include the above books in its school curriculum, for which I am deeply grateful, and also for the encouragement and support that I received from friends, teachers and scholars abroad.
In general, our language is rich and beautiful if studied deeply. One word may have several meanings each conveying different ideas.
I believe that the foregoing books, if followed by many other similar works, will give a clear picture of Ethiopian culture.
It is well known that seeking culture from without can make knowledge complete only when it complements the knowledge of one's own. And regarding the knowledge of our own culture, Ethiopia offers a field as rich as it is vast on which to draw. Once our ancestral heritage is reconstructed, nothing would hinder us from making it known to the rest of the world. Thus, it would be expedient for the youth of our country to adopt the motto "We also have it and we are making it known to you". I say this because I know it is the desire of every Ethiopian to see our language and culture propagated.
His imperial Majesty awarding, H.E, Blatten Guesta Mehteme Selassie W.Meskel.
YOUR MAJESTY.
Among the innumerable institutions established by Your Majesty for the development and prestige of Ethiopia, the Haile Selassie I prize Trust is that which offers moral encouragement and a greater cultural life. And, well knowing that the deliberations of the Trustees and their committee of experts are not only of great importance but also very difficult, -- in that the assessment of workers is carried out not through peronal contact with candidates considered, but purely by appraisal of various works through painstaking investigation and review -- I beg Your Majesty's permission to thank, in your presence, The Trustees and all those assisting them in their aduous task.
Long Live His Imperial Majesty
Long Live His Imperial Highness the Crown prince
Long Live Ethiopia in independence.
ATO GEBRE KRISTOS DESTA
Born on the 15th October, 1932 in Harrar, Ato Gebre Kristos Desta was educated in Germany where he obtained diplomas in his academic endeavors and in his professional field of fine arts. In addition to his artistic achievements for which he is being honored, Ato Gebre Kristos writes poems and short stories and he is teaching at the Menelik II Fine Arts School.
A gifted artist with outstanding creative and interpretative abilities, he is largely responsible for introducing non-figurative art in this country. He successfully represents the modern trend among Ethiopian painters and his works constitute a brilliant contribution to the recent development of the world of art at large.
His paintings, which always maintain relationship with reality, manifest a distinct technique full of vitality, discipline, and expressionism.
The growth and evaluation of Ethiopian art have been advanced through his contributions and Ato Gebre Kristos’ past achievements convincingly ascertain that this brilliant artist will further influence the world of art and the coming generation of Ethiopian artists. Ato Gebre Kristos will receive the 1965 Haile Selassie Award in Fine Arts of a value of Eth. $7,000 gold medal, and a diploma.
H.I.M. awarding Ato Gebre Kristos Desta. Fine Arts Prize, 1965.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY ATO GEBRE KRISTOS DESTA
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
The prize Trust which has been established through your Majesty's goodwill and foresight will, undoubtedly, encourage many people and open new avenues to wards different kinds of knowledge.
The main aim of human-being is to make his dreams come true on one hand, and to reap the fruits of his toil on the other. Since civilization itself is history it is difficult to see its result within the span of time of generation or two. But to open new roads of civilization is to encourage the present generation and to pave the way in advance for the coming one. Whenever there is a new kind of civilization, it is possible that the voice of criticism is likely to be heard loud. Any new kind of civilization, if not started at the present time, will become strong and difficult to grasp even when it comes after ten years.
These difficulties have been also felt in the field of Fine Arts -- many artists of the past have been neglected and forgotten during their lifetime, but their works have been praised by the second or the third generation. Although the painter reflects the image of his time and expresses things surrounding him, history has represent ones express the beauty of man and his growth and civilization in general. Although as long as he exists on this planet man is the measure of all things, modern man considers himself as the key to a certain kind of knowledge. But he doesn't boast of his perfection and wisdom.
Modern art also follows the same thought -- the artist tries to see the world subjectively; he tries to express nature around him. On the whole, he endeavors to create new ways and means to explain the universe in general. Nowadays, painting is not limited, and is not led into a narrow channel -- instead, it has become a knowledge which moves fast in many different directions. It is this knowledge of research that makes modern art somewhat confusing. In life as in the creative process confusion has its own laws and symmetry which definer its mere existence -- likewise, abstract or modern art has its own rules and its own language. Until this language is mastered many people might find abstract art confusing. In art, the greatest happiness is work and the result of creation. Modern art, as the classical paintings, doesn't tell stories and show realistic things like the camera does. In the language of modern art the painting itself is an idea; it is the feeling, the thought, and the expression of something. In this twentieth century, when man delves into space and tries to find the meaning of the universe, in painting too, instead of concentrating on himself alone, man sees the world from many different aspects and tries to express the eternal and the universal by creating music in color, line and form.
YOUR MAJESTY.
Like agriculture, industry and economy, which are the backbones of a country, the Fine Arts are gaining importance in Ethiopia -- and the recognition of Modern Art today by this Prize Trust is highly plausible. This prize is for me, until now, the greatest and I honor it. I have submitted to your Majesty my future plan which will be very useful for the development of art in our country -- and I am sure your Majesty will help me.
I thank from the depth of my heart your Imperial Majesty who is the Founder and the Patron of this foundation. I also thank the Trustees and the judges and wish them success in their future endeavor.
DUMCO DUM COMPANY LTD. (MANIFATTURA SACCHI ASMARA)
DUMCO Dum company Ltd. Share Company and its subsidiary, Manifattura Sacchi Asmara, were established in 1950 and in 1960 respectively. DUMCO Dum Company is especially engaged in the extraction of textile fibers from the Doum Palm leaves while Manifattura Sacchi Asmara specializes in the conversion of the Doum fibers into sacks, twines, and cloth.
Technical experts have over half a century attempted to extract fiber from Doum Palm leaves but failed to attain tangible results. DUMCO Dum Co. Ltd. succeed admirably in both perfecting the extraction process as well as in conceiving,  designing, and building a prototype of the machine for processing, it developed this technique after ten years of sacrifice, hard work, and perseverance.
The fiber obtained through this process has proved to be fine substitute four jute on which the world's sacking industry primarily depended. With the latest improvements in techniques and machinery, the Doum Palm fiber price compares favorably ably with the price of jute.
The achievement of the Company, which presently employees 650 people, has proved to be more than a local industrial success and one of self-sufficiency. Other countries such as the Sudan and buying sacks from Ethiopia and many others are considering the establishment of similar undertakings.
Manifattura Sacchi Dum Company Ltd. Asmara will be recognized for the uniqueness in its achievement, its contribution to the national economy, and exemplary importance at the international level. Manifattura Sacchi Dum Company will receive the 1965 Haile Selassie Award for industry of a value of Eth. $ 7,000, gold medal, and a diploma.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY MR. TULLIO CAMERINO
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY፣
The great honor that has been bestowed by the Haile Selassie I Prize Trust upon the group if industrial activities I have the privilege of launching and realizing gives me today the coveted opportunity of expressing to your Imperial Majesty my most heartfelt thanks together with my sincerest respect.
I believe that your Majesty would like to hear from the living, sincere and deeply moved voice of a foreigner working in the freedom of your Empire the expression of gratitude that I feel my duty to extend to all the Ethiopian labor working in my factories. To them, besides to the gracious kindness of your Imperial Majesty and the benevolent consideration of the Prize Committee, I owe the high recognition granted on this unforgettable moment.
From the world of your Imperial Majesty at the time of establishing the Prize Trust, it is obvious that the progress of the Empire of Ethiopia is of primary but not the sole concern of the Ethiopian. He is also concerned with the welfare of the continent of Africa and the whole world as well. It is because of the farsighted and universal concern that your Imperial Majesty has desired that the contribution of Ethiopian citizens as well as foreign nationals living and working permanently in Ethiopia be officially recognized.
The highest summit of world peace, the welfare mankind, mutual understanding between peoples will be reached in the future -- a desirable future -- through work alone. It is work which brings men closer, unit them, and makes them seek together for peace, welfare, and dignity.
It is in work, guided but free, intelligent and qualified , aware and respectful of the human rights that God granted, in work designed to realize the general welfare and unforgetful of the superior aim of the improvements of the individual, that men can hope with good reason to find a peaceful, prosperous and better tomorrow.
Your Imperial Majesty, I most respectfully ask Imperial Majesty to allow me to express here the hope and the wish that not only the prize awarded to me but also the constant benevolence, the high protection and the continuous effort for an ordered progress of this country will make work, loved and respected in the Empire of Ethiopia. May Ethiopia maintain, under the enlightened guidance of your Imperial Majesty, the prominent rank in spiritual and material progress it has attained in these difficult times.
May God protect and bless this country where the work and the initiative of men from every land are respected and helped and may it never fail to have the peace promised on earth to all men of good will.
But the sense of urgency for this meeting matches the rage felt by both Israelis and Palestinians after yesterday's violence.
Today Israel buried one of its two soldiers beaten to death bay a mob of Palestinians yesterday.
Today in Jerusalem, Israeli security forces barred Palestinians under the age of 45 from praying at the al-Aqsa mosque.
Young Palestinians prayed outside and some young men were asked and beaten by Israeli police which may help make clear why arranging a summit is so difficult.
And why the political leaders will have such a hard time keeping the streets -- getting the streets calm.
ABC's Gillian Findlay reports tonight from Palestinian Gaza.
On the streets of Gaza today, talk of summits and peace was the last thing many Palestinians wanted to hear.
Only a day after Israeli missiles destroyed two police boats here, one of them very close to Mr. Arafat's own office.
Today, Israel released footage of yesterday's other attacks shot from inside a helicopter gun ship.
These missiles landed in the city of Ramallah.
With Israeli gun boats continuing to control the coast today, Gaza police were taking no chances.
Abandoning their stations for the city's main square.
What Israel did yesterday has turned anger here to fury.
It is war, Palestinians say, and Mr. Arafat has no business talking peace.
You want a war?
Yes.
Why?
I hope.
Why?
Because no peace.
After all this, no peace.
At another rally in Georgia today, Islamic leaders called openly for terror attacks on Israel.
Extremist groups have a lot of support these days and a lot of power.
This afternoon, a crowd of angry Muslims set fire to a hotel and to homes of people who they say sold alcohol.
Palestinian police did little to stop them.
Even if Mr. Arafat goes to a summit, and even if he signs an agreement, there is no guarantee any more that his people will listen.
Gillian Findlay, ABC News, Gaza.
At the bottom of the sea.
Two months after the submarine "Kursk" went down with 118 men on board, divers have managed to get inside.
They found five bodies so far.
And today, they found a note, written after a pair of explosions ripped through the hull and sent the "Kursk" into the depths of the Barents see.
Here's ABC's bob woodruff.
The note was discovered by divers inside one compartment of the submarine, on the body of 27-year-old lieutenant captain Dmitry Kolesnikov, photographed here on board the "Kursk" three years ago.
I am writing blindly," he wrote apparently in darkness.
None of us can get to the surface."
Russian officials believe the note was written at least two hours after the sub began to sink.
All the crew from the sixth, seventh and eighth compartments went over to the ninth."
Kolesnikov wrote, "There are 23 people here.
We made this decision as a result of the accident."
The note contains no new evidence about what sank the "Kursk," whether it was an internal explosion or a collision.
But it does contradict the official Russian version that was given to family members, that all 118 men had died instantly.
Today, the chief of Russia's navy was forced to admit to the families he was wrong, that some of the crew not only survived, according to Kolesnikov's note,
Two or three tried to get out through the escape hatch.
But it may have been flooded.
Today, Kolesnikov's widow could not hold back her tears.
It's horribly painful, it's awful," she said.
I had a feeling that he didn't die immediately, and it turned out my feeling was right."
She also says her husband had a premonition.
Last summer, before he went to sea, he gave her his dog tag and a crucifix, and said he may not be coming back.
Bob Woodruff, ABC news, London.
In news overseas, at a United Nations environmental summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, representatives from 122 nations signed an agreement banning the use of 12 highly toxic chemicals.
Among them, dioxins and other chemicals, which are known as "the dirty dozen."
They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, and other genetic abnormalities.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the Middle East Thursday, demonstrating against military strikes on Iraq and calling on Muslims to wage jihad against the United States and its allies.
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority issued fierce denunciations of the US-led attacks, while the Egyptian government daily Al-Ahram warned it marked "the beginning an era of US colonisation that will benefit only Israel".
Protests against the action aimed at toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein were held in cities across Libya, Egypt and Lebanon, as well as in Amman, Damascus and the Gaza Strip.
However, there were no reports of protests against the war from the Gulf states, many of whom are host to US military personnel.
Saudi Arabia, however, expressed its "deep concern" and regret over the start of US military operations.
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal spoke of the "kingdom's hope for a quick halt in military action and for the return to peaceful efforts", the state SPA news agency reported.
In Riyadh's first reaction to the start of the against, he also called for Iraq's "unity, internal security and territorial integrity" to be preserved and rejected military occupation.
Lebanese President Emile Lahoud, meanwhile, was more forthright, strongly denouncing Washington's "aggression" and warning that it could have repercussions beyond the borders of the pariah state.
We have warned against the marginalisation of the United Nations ... and we see this aggression today plunging the world into a tunnel where one cannot see the end," he said in a statement.
For these reasons, we judge that it is necessary that the forces of peace and those who believe in right and justice take the necessary and rapid steps to halt this dangerous slide into war against Iraq which will result in heavy human and material losses."
The Palestinian Authority also condemned Thursday's early morning missile strikes on Iraq, and warned Israel not to exploit the conflict.
We Palestinians are against the war and we totally condemn this war in the Middle East.
A solution must be found to this problem through diplomatic means, with the international community," local authorities minister Saeb Erakat said.
We are warning Israel not to exploit this war against Iraq to carry out more attacks against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and destroy the Palestinian Authority and the peace process," he said.
The radical Palestinian movement Islamic Jihad warned that "the war against Iraq is a war against the whole region", while Hamas issued a chilling warning against those taking part in the war against Iraq.
The aggression by the vile Americans and the war against Iraq signifies a war against all Arabs and Muslims around the world," said Hamas senior official Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi.
The war "shows the impotence of all Arab states.
We call on all Arab states to act immediately to defend Iraq and counter the US war," he said.
I don't think America will win this war, as our jihad (holy war) and our resistance will teach the Americans and British a lesson they will never forget," he said.
State radio in Syria accused the United States and its allies of wanting to get their "hands on Iraq's oil and wealth and impose their hegemony on the world".
In the Egyptian capital, 10 demonstrators and at least four policeman were injured in clashes after several thousand demonstrators took to the streets near the US and British embassies.
Riot police intervened after the protestors, who included hundreds of students from the American University in Cairo, rallied on the city's central Tahrir Square, close to both the university campus and the US embassy.
More than 1,000 people also gathered at Cairo's Al-Azhar Islamic University, where they burned an American flag and demanded the expulsion of the ambassadors of the United States, Britain, Spain and Israel.
Demonstrations also took place in the northern Egyptian cities of Alexandria, Tanta and Kafr el-Sheikh.
In Amman, three protestors were hospitalised after some 500 Jordanian lawyers staged a sit-in at the main court house after being forcibly blocked by riot police from marching towards the Iraqi embassy to show their solidarity.
In Lebanon, hundreds of students gathered on the campuses of the Arab University of Beirut and the American University of Beirut calling for the assassination of US President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
South of the capital in Sidon, some 1,500 schoolboys denounced "the Bush assassin" and the "silence of the Arab leaders who sold out Iraq".
Fifteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded Wednesday as a suicide bomber blew himself up on a student bus in the northern town of Haifa, the first bombing in Israel in exactly two months.
Several hours later, dozens of Israeli tanks advanced into the northern Gaza Strip backed by helicopters which fired at least three rockets in the Jabaliya area, Palestinian security sources said.
Palestinian medical sources said 60-year-old Mohammed al-Biyari was killed in his home near Jabaliya refugee camp by the rocket fire and another wounded.
A second rocket landed in farmlands and the other hit a house inside the refugee camp, but without causing further casualties, Palestinian security sources said.
Two 13-year-old children were among those killed in the Haifa bus bombing, Israeli public radio said, adding that most of the victims were youngsters.
The army said two soldiers were also among the dead.
The bus was ripped to shreds while travelling between a residential area and Haifa university.
Of the 33 injured still in hospital late Wednesday, two were in intensive care and six others in serious condition, the radio said.
Israel's night-time raid in Gaza involving around 40 tanks and armoured vehicles came after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened his security cabinet to discuss a response to the bomb attack.
Israeli media said the retaliation was unlikely to be on a scale that would risk disrupting US preparations for war on Iraq.
The Palestinian suicide bomber on the Haifa bus came from the southern West Bank town of Hebron, public radio said, naming him as 20-year-old Mahmoud Hamadan Salim Qawasmi.
Apart from his ID card, also found in the wreckage were the remains of a letter allegedly outlining his plan to carry out a suicide attack and praising the September 2001 destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, it said.
Israeli police were not immediately available for comment, but Palestinian sources in Hebron said Mahmoud Qawasmi was a 21-year-old student with links to the Islamic radical group Hamas.
Israeli forces moved into Hebron's Al-Sheikh district where his family lived and arrested Qawasmi's brother and father after the bombing, they said.
Without claiming responsibility, Hamas and another hardline group, Islamic Jihad, said the blast was revenge for a string of bloody Israeli army raids into the Gaza Strip in recent weeks.
But the Palestinian Authority condemned the attack, saying it would divert international sympathy away from the far higher Palestinian civilian death toll.
We condemn all attacks against civilians including today's attack in Haifa," said information minister Yasser Abed Rabbo.
The Palestinian leadership said the attack would serve as "a pretext for Israel's government and occupation army to step up its deadly campaign which caused the deaths of 77 Palestinians in February".
It was the first bomb attack inside Israel since January 5, and came just days after the hawkish Sharon appointed the most right-wing government in Israel's history on a pledge to get tough on security.
In the January attack, two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up in central Tel Aviv, killing 23 other people.
Israeli government spokesman Avi Pazner called the latest deadly blast a "very grave attack" and said the Jewish state would take "vigorous action against the terrorist organisations".
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been dealing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks when the Haifa bus was blown up.
US President George W. Bush condemned the "attack on innocents in Israel," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, adding that "his message to the terrorists is: Their efforts will not be succcessful.
He will continue to pursue the path to peace in the Middle East."
EU foreign policy supremo Javier Solana likewise slammed the attack, although he also took a jab at Israel, saying, "There have been too many civilians killed in the last weeks and the last days."
In London, a spokesman for the British prime minister said Tony Blair "condemns absolutely what has happened".
The spokesman added that he "would obviously call on all sides to do what they can to break the cycle of violence, because it is only through engagement that we can realise the vision everyone wants to see.
There needs to be dialogue in order for this to be resolved."
The bus attack came just two days after Israeli forces staged a bloody raid into a refugee camp in central Gaza targeting a founding member of Hamas, which has spearheaded suicide bombings against the Jewish state.
Hamas vowed to continue its attacks, while the Palestinian Authority accused Israel of trying to disrupt top-level Palestinian meetings to discuss reforms of Arafat's administration.
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said international intervention was needed to break the cycle of violence.
Eight people, including a pregnant woman and a 13-year-old child were killed in Monday's Gaza raid, provoking US-led international calls for Israeli restraint.
And on Tuesday, Israeli troops shot dead an elderly Palestinian shepherd outside a Jewish settlement on the edge of Gaza City.
In the West Bank, an eight-year-old Palestinian boy as well as his brother and a sister were wounded late Wednesday by Israeli gunfire in a village north of the town of Ramallah, their elder sister said.
Thousands of fresh US troops headed for Iraq Thursday as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and US President George W. Bush discussed the effort to oust Saddam Hussein, which some senior US military officials warn could last months.
About 1,000 soldiers from the US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into an airfield in a Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq, establishing a base through which to bring in more troops and tanks, Pentagon officials said.
And some 12,000 soldiers from the US Army's 4th Infantry Division, which was supposed to have gone into northern Iraq through Turkey, began flying out of Fort Hood, Texas, Thursday to the region, a military fort spokeswoman told AFP.
The soldiers are to meet up with ships transporting their equipment, which is arriving in Kuwait from the Mediterranean, where it had been idling for weeks on navy ships awaiting Turkey's decision.
The war in Iraq could last months and require considerable US military reinforcements to assure a victory, the Washington Post reported Thursday, quoting senior US military officials.
Sandstorms, dangerously long supply lines and a recalcitrant enemy "has led to abroad reassessment by some top generals of US military expectations and timelines," the Post reports.
Tell me how this ends," one senior officer asked the Post.
Most US army commanders believe it is critical to pause the breakneck advance towards Baghdad to secure the supply lines and make sure weapons are operable and troops resupplied after days of powerful sandstorms and damage inflicted by Iraqi attacks, the Post reports.
The Post also quoted Central Intelligence Agency and Pentagon intelligence analysts complaining that Bush officials largely ignored their warning that Iraqi irregular forces would use guerrilla tactics and offer significant resistance.
Publicly US officials have insisted that the war is going according to plan, and the most advanced US forces are currently some 100 kilometers (60 miles) outside of Baghdad.
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed worries that there were insufficient forces in the Gulf region if the battle for Baghdad goes wrong.
After briefing US senators on the war, Rumsfeld told reporters that the number of forces "has been increasing and it will continue to do so until it is finished."
Meanwhile Blair arrived in Washington late Wednesday for two days of talks with Bush at the Camp David presidential retreat.
Talks were to focus on how to run a post-Saddam Iraq, with Washington resisting a large United Nations role.
Blair faces an uphill battle to win Bush over to giving the UN oversight of a post-Saddam administration, as Washington officials are still angry at Germany, Russia, and especially France, over the failure to secure UN Security Council approval for military action.
Blair and Bush were to hold a joint press conference at 1600 GMT Thursday.
Britain has deployed some 45,000 troops to fight with the more than 250,000 US soldiers lined up against Iraqi troops.
Bush gave a new, stronger warning that the war could become drawn out.
As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime," Bush told cheering military personnel Wednesday at the Florida headquarters of Central Command, which is running the campaign.
We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you -- and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq -- there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near," he said.
At the last minute, Bush withdrew a phrase in his speech saying the campaign was "ahead of schedule."
A senior administration official said the president had decided to be cautious.
Bush pointedly paid tribute to the 48-nation "coalition of the willing" -- particularly Britain -- that is publicly backing the campaign.
Separately, US Secretary of State Colin Powell emphasized US determination to pursue the military campaign despite the diplomatic pressure Washington faces at the United Nations.
We are interested in concluding this conflict, not having a pause right now or stopping right now, but concluding this as quickly as possible so we can get on with the rebuilding of Iraq and putting in place a better system of governance,Powell said in an interview with the Al-Jazeera Arab television network.
Powell, the most moderate member of the Bush cabinet, said he fully agreed with the president's policy on Iraq and had no plans to leave.
Personally, I'm very much in sync with the president and he values my services," he said in an interview with National Public Radio.
Meanwhile the Wall Street Journal reported that several British and US oil companies have quietly advised US and British forces on how oil fields operate so they could safeguard the fields in Iraq.
The companies, including Britain's BP PLC and the Texas-based Boots and Coots International Well Control Inc., were not paid for their consultations, but allied military engineers said their advice was critical.
Some 2,500 mainly university students formed a human chain in Japanese characters spelling out "No War" in Osaka on Sunday to protest against the ongoing US-led military campaign in Iraq.
We cannot forgive this war, Miyako Fuji, 20, one of the rally's organisers told Jiji news agency.
I want to join together the feelings of each of us as individuals who oppose the war."
Protesters, who exceeded the 2,000 expected to show up at the park at Osaka Castle in the city's downtown neighbourhood, carried placards that read "Stop war" and "Love and Peace" while forming the human chain after 3:00 pm (0600 GMT).
The protest follows a string of others involving tens of thousands of peace activists across Japan since January.
According to a poll by Kyodo news agency released Saturday, 78 of 100 people surveyed opposed the military action in Iraq.
A separate poll of 1,846 adults by the leading Yomiuri newspaper published Tuesday showed 64 percent felt Japan had "no choice" but to back the United States, with only 12 percent saying Japan had "every reason" to back the war.
British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown on Tuesday named the current head of the country's energy regulator as the new chairman of finance watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA)
Former senior banker Callum McCarthy begins what is one of the most important jobs in London's financial world in September, when incumbent Howard Davies steps down.
Davies is leaving to become chairman of the London School of Economics, one of the best-known parts of the University of London.
Brown said McCarthy would bring to the FSA "an unrivalled combination of experience of the public sector, experience as a senior practitioner in the financial services industry, and chairman of a highly successful regulator."
McCarthy currently heads the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, or Ofgem, which regulates Britain's privatised energy industry.
As well as previously holding senior positions at Barclays Bank, BZW and Kleinwort Benson, McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.
Under Davies's watch, the FSA became Britain's sole regulatory body for financial services in November 2001, taking on the various functions of nine separate agencies.
At least three members of a family in Indias northeastern state of Tripura were hacked to death by a tribal mob for allegedly practicing witchcraft, police said Thursday.
A spokesman said a group of 25 to 30 armed men Wednesday attacked a house belonging to a village quack doctor in Tultuli, 60 kilometers (38 miles) south of Tripuras state capital Agartala.
The mob dragged out three members of a family and (killed) them with machetes and spears before fleeing the area," the spokesman said by telephone from Agartala.
The dead included the quack doctor, 55-year-old Nityalila Naotia, his teenaged son and another member of the family, whom he did not identify.
It was believed Naotia was a practicing sorcerer and through his black magic he had cast evil spells on villagers, prompting a group within the village to eliminate them," the spokesman said.
Police have arrested four people in connection with the killings.
Superstitious beliefs, black magic and demonology are integral to the tribal custom in parts of Tripura and other northeast Indian states.
Many tribes practice faiths believed to be a mix of black magic and superstition.
A Pakistani court in central Punjab province has sentenced a Christian man to life imprisonment for a blasphemy conviction, police said Sunday.
Judge Shahid Rafiq, of the district court in the industrial city of Faisalabad, found Ranjha Masih guilty of defiling Koranic verses during a protest rally by the minority Christian community in 1998.
In a verdict handed down on Saturday, the judge also ordered Ranjha to pay a fine of 50,000 rupees (about 870 US dollars), they said.
Ranjha was accused of tearing down a billboard carrying verses from the Koran in Faisalabad during a Christian demonstration after the city's bishop committed suicide over the 1985 blasphemy law.
Faisalabad's Catholic Bishop John Joseph, who had been campaigning against the law, shot himself in the head outside a court in Sahiwal district when the judge convicted Christian Ayub Masih under the law in 1998.
Ayub Masih was charged in 1996 with blasphemy for allegedly defending British author Salman Rushdie, whose novel "The Satanic Verses" infuriated radical Mulsim clerics who accused the author of defaming Islam.
The Pakistani supreme court last year aquitted Ayub Masih, who had denied uttering any word against Islam or the Prophet Mohammad.
Blasphemy is punishable by death under the Pakistan Penal Code.
However, no blasphemy convict has ever been executed in the country.
Christian rights activists campaigning against the laws, introduced by late military dictator General Zia-ul Haq, say they are mainly used to persecute Christians or to settle feuds over land.
Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Wednesday stressed Qatar's role in the Middle East peace process during talks with his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani in Paris.
Shalom told a joint press conference that the tiny Gulf state's strong relationship with the recently appointed Palestinian prime minister, Mahmud Abbas, could be a boost for peace.
We discussed the Middle East peace process.
Over an hour of talks, we asserted the will of both parties (Israel and the Arab world) to do everything to return to the negotiating table," Shalom said.
Qatar is a very important country on this issue.
I know the special relationship that the Qatari foreign minister has with Abu Mazen," he said, using Abbas's alternative name.
The meeting was Shalom's first encounter with an Arab counterpart since he took office as Israel's foreign minister on February 27.
Qatar has economic links with Israel without maintaining diplomatic relations, in the face of criticism from other Arab countries.
Afterwards Shalom was to fly on to London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw.
US President George W. Bush told Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien by telephone Monday that he looked forward to seeing him at the upcoming summit of major industrialized nations and Russia, the White House said Tuesday.
The two leaders discussed the upcoming G-8 meeting, US-Canada (relations) and other international issues of concern," Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said days before the June 1-3 summit, to be held in France.
Both said they look forward to seeing each other in Evian.
They also touched on Afghanistan, the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the global economy," said Fleischer.
On Monday, Chretien told reporters that he and Bush, who had not spoken since late February, discussed a wide range of issues, including Iraq, the upcoming summit of the Group of Eight industrial powers and aid to Africa.
We've always been on good terms.
A provincial chief from India’s main opposition congress party has told an election rally that India is suffering nature’s "curse" because both the president and prime minister and bachelors, a report said Saturday.
We just disagree on one item," the Canadian leader said.
The Times of India newspaper quoted Digvijay Singh, chief minister of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, as saying that Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and President Abdul Kalam had off ended the Hindu rain God Varuna by remaining bachelors.
The country is being ruled by a bachelor president and an unmarried prime minister.
Not just Prime Minister Vajpayee but president Kalam’s bachelor status is making the country dry, arid and infertile," he added.
The general secretary of Vajpayee’s ruling Bharatiya Janata party, pramod Mahajan, retorted that Singh’s statement was "beneath contempt."
India’s has been reeling under a heat wave since mid-may which has killed 1,403 people.
This according to the Hindu shastras (books) is very inauspicious and that is the reason there is a widespread heat wave and drought, "said Singh.
The skeleton of a second baby has been found at a rural Wisconsin home where a 22-year-old woman's dead infant was discovered in a blue plastic container June 8, officials said Monday.
The country’s western desert state of Rajasthan is also bracing for its fifth straight year of drought.
Kristin Scott, the mother, told police she gave birth secretly to both babies at her parents' home in Byrds Creek, Richland County, one of unknown sex in April 2001 and the other, a fullterm girl, January 14.
Police arrested her in Abilene, Texas, Saturday where she had moved with a friend June 2.
She is being held on 50,000 dollars bail on a charge of first-degree reckless homicide and hiding a corpse in the death of the infant born in January.
Scott told police she did not tend to the baby, and it died after 30 minutes.
She said the baby had to die, according to the criminal complaint.
The woman's parents, William and Nancy Scott, found the decomposing body of the first baby in her closet after they went looking for the source of a foul odor in their house.
Scott told investigators she had moved that body around before she moved to Texas, sometimes in the closet at the Byrds Creek house, in the trunk of her car and in the closet of her apartment in Richland Center, the complaint said.
The sheriff released no other details about the second baby.
Palestinian security forces returned Monday to the positions they held in the Gaza Strip before the outbreak of the 33-month Palestinian uprising as Israel removed all major checkpoints in the coastal territory, a Palestinian security source said.
Police officers took up their positions across the Gaza Strip, enjoying a freedom of movement they have not known since the intifada exploded in September 2000, the source said.
Palestinian police have taken over all the posts and positions they held before September 28, 2000.
It is the first time they have had freedom of movement with cars and weapons since the start of the intifada," the source said.
The move marked a huge step forward in carrying out the US-backed Middle East "roadmap", which aims to end the months of bloodshed and create a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the northern town of Beit Hanoun late Sunday, police took up positions there and in the neighbouring town of Beit Lahiya, he said.
They also deployed along the border with Israel.
The handover is a credibility test for the Palestinian Authority, which must show it means business when it comes to reining in hardline groups plotting attacks on the Jewish state.
In another first in the almost three-year intifada, the Israeli army allowed Palestinians free circulation on the trans-Gaza highway as troops abandoned three major checkpoints across the coastal territory.
Traffic was flowing freely through the Netzarim junction, just south of Gaza City, the Kissufim junction by Deir al-Balah in the central Gaza Strip, and the Guest House junction just south of Deir al-Balah after the army withdrew.
The three military checkpoints on the highway, which runs the entire length of the Gaza Strip, had transformed the trip from north to south, ordinarily a 30-minute ride, into a grinding two or three-hour ordeal and came to symbolise the horrors of occupation.
Israel has implemented most of the agreement except for a few issues," the source said, pointing out that Israel had still not removed two military observation posts at the Kissufim junction and the Guest House junction.
Although there was free movement along the trans-Gaza highway, several other roads remained temporarily closed, he said.
The Karni-Netzarim road, which runs east-to-west across the route, was still closed as was the section of the highway passing close by Kfar Darom settlement, just south of the Guest House junction, he said, adding both were likely to be opened in the coming weeks.
Another road, leading from the southern border town of Rafah to Khan Yunis, would be opened within 10 days, he said.
Adressing Palestinian complaints, an Israeli military source confirmed troops had installed a gate at the Netzarim crossing and at the southern Guest House junction but said that they were only there for when Jewish settlers needed to use the road.
A ban on Palestinian men under the age of 35 being allowed to move freely was still in force but that was expected to be lifted later on Monday or early Tuesday.
The army also handed over control of Rafah border crossing between the Gaza Strip and Egypt to the Palestinians, security sources said.
Six Palestinian police officers were allowed to return to the Palestinian section of the border crossing, which had been taken over by Israeli troops shortly after the start of the uprising.
Under the 1993 Oslo accords, which granted a measure of autonomy to the Palestinians, the Rafah border crossing with Egypt was to be jointly managed by both Israel and the Palestinians, although Israel had final control over the zone.
Although the crossing has, in principle, been open for movement between the two territories -- while being frequently closed by Israeli for reasons rarely explained -- the Palestinian section has been manned by Israel for more than two years.
I wish I could have been at a Pub, or wherever these people convene, to see the reactions from all the Britons who read the Telegraph this morning (emphasis added): Britain's gun laws are aimed at the wrong target, curbing and criminalising legal ownership while failing to tackle huge rises in shooting offences over the past few years, according to an international firearms legislation expert.
Prof Gary Mauser said that Britain was making the same mistake as Canada and Australia in focusing on legal owners - a section of the law-abiding community where gun crimes, such as the Dunblane massacre, were aberrations.
The Home Office and police chiefs should instead tackle the possession of guns in criminal hands, said Prof Mauser, a member of the independent Fraser Institute in Canada.
He has given evidence to select committees of the House of Commons and the Canadian Senate and predicted the escalation of gun crime on Britain's streets.
His warning comes as gun crime incidents are averaging about 29 a day in England and Wales, more than twice the level of when the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
In the past two years, there have been cases of schoolchildren and a baby, killed or injured by guns.
I believe that factors of political correctness are at work," he said.
Police crackdowns, Home Office initiatives and over-regulation of legally held weapons create froth and they may even fool the police themselves into believing they are doing something about gun crime."
Prof Mauser added: "The sad truth is that while the police officers are inspecting farmers' gun cabinets to see if they comply with regulations somewhere in the UK, someone, who has not filled in a firearms certificate form, will be smuggling a gun into the country or selling one to an inner city youth."
Recorded gun crime rose by three per cent to 10,590 incidents in the year to June.
Two-thirds of gun crime takes place in London, Birmingham and Manchester.
It doesn't matter to these people that crime has skyrocketed since the irrational ban on private gun possession went into effect in Great Britain.
Just as long as it's there, they feel safe.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld took part in a Q&A with the troops today that was anything but cozy.
Disgruntled soldiers complained to Rumsfeld about long deployments and a lack of armored vehicles and other equipment.
From the Associated Press : "You go to war with the Army you have," Rumsfeld replied, "not the Army you might want or wish to have."
Spc. Thomas Wilson had asked the defense secretary, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?"
Shouts of approval and applause arose from the estimated 2,300 soldiers who had assembled to see Rumsfeld.
We do not have proper armored vehicles to carry with us north," Wilson, 31, of Nashville, Tenn., concluded after asking again.
Wilson, an airplane mechanic whose unit, the 278th Regimental Combat Team of the Tennessee Army National Guard, is about to drive north into Iraq for a one-year tour of duty, put his finger on a problem that has bedeviled the Pentagon for more than a year.
Rarely, though, is it put so bluntly in a public forum.
Rumsfeld said the Army was sparing no expense or effort to acquire as many Humvees and other vehicles with extra armor as it can.
What is more, he said, armor is not the savior some think it is.
You can have all the armor in the world on a tank and a tank can (still) be blown up," he said.
Can't say that's the most comforting answer.
From the Associated Press : City residents will vote next year on a proposed weapons ban that would deny handguns to everyone except law enforcement officers, members of the military and security guards.
If passed next November, residents would have 90 days to give up firearms they keep in their homes or businesses.
The proposal was immediately dismissed as illegal by a gun owners group.
Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else "actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment," according to the measure.
Gun Owners of California, a Sacramento-based lobbying group, quickly called the ban illegal.
Sam Paredes, the group's executive director, said state law bars local governments from usurping the state's authority to regulate firearms.
The amazing thing is they are going to turn San Francisco into ground zero for every criminal who wants to profit at their chosen profession," Paredes said.
Washington, D.C., is the only major American city that currently bans handgun possession by private citizens.
Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for the National Rifle Association, said San Francisco would be remiss to use that city as a model.
If gun control worked, Washington, D.C., would be the beacon.
However, it's the murder capital of the United States,he said.
If approved, the weapons ban would take effect in January 2006.
Quote of the day: "Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment."
So preserving property or life within the scope of self-defense and protection of the home is not allowed.
No thanks.
If the people vote for this measure it will be hard to sympathize with them when robbery and rape rates skyrocket, because burgulars will know homes are not guarded, and rapists will know the only thing stopping them from the victim they desire is their own inhibitions.
From the Associated Press : A baby girl who had been cut out of her mother's womb was found after a frantic search, and authorities arrested the woman they say strangled the mother and stole the child.
The baby was in good condition Saturday.
Lisa M. Montgomery, 36, of Melvern, Kan., was arrested later Friday and charged with kidnapping resulting in death.
Bobbie Jo Stinnett, 23, was found Thursday in a pool of blood inside her small white home in Skidmore, a town in northwest Missouri.
Stinnett, who was eight months pregnant, had earlier been talking with her mother on the phone, and hung up saying a woman she had chatted with online had just arrived at her door, authorities said.
U.S. Attorney Todd Graves said Montgomery contacted Stinnett through an online message board, and authorities zeroed in on her using computer forensics.
Montgomery was seeking to buy a dog from Stinnett, who raised rat terriers, he said.
According to the criminal complaint, Montgomery traveled about 40 miles to Topeka, Kan., on Thursday to go shopping.
Her husband received a call from her saying she had gone into labor and given birth.
The next day, authorities say, Montgomery confessed that she strangled Stinnett from behind, cut her open, removed the baby and cut her umbilical cord.
I don't understand how we can call this fetus-thing that was ripped from a mother's womb a "child" or "girl" in a society that sanctions partial-birth abortion.
If you can't charge someone for killing a fetus via abortion during the eighth month, then surely you can't make a big deal about a woman who kidnapped a fetus that survived the knifing.
On a less-sarcastic note, I pray for the family of the 23-year-old woman.
No one should have to die because some crazy nut wanted a child and decided to kill for it.
If there's any good news in this story, it's that Victoria Jo will live on and carry her mother's memory.
Question for the pro-choicers: Being that it isn't yet the ninth month, can we still charge the killer with kidnapping?
Feminists have a reason to celebrate today as an appeals court just threw out the convictions of their martyr, Andrea Yates, by ruling that one of the prosecutor's expert witnesses gave false testimony at her trial.
Yates, in case you have forgotten, is the women from Texas who heinously drowned her five kids, aged 6 months to 7 years, one by one, in her bathtub.
Liberal feminist organizations rushed to Yates' defense, most notably the National Organization for Women, which provided money for her defense fund and held candlelight vigils.
No such ceremonies were held for her five dead children.
In 2002 a jury sentenced Yates to life in prison for the deaths of three of her children.
She was not tried in the deaths of the other two.
Today the 1st Court of Appeals overturned the convictions and ordered a new trial.
We can only hope for the same verdict.
The blood red nation of China is trying to curb the effects of a devastating 20-year-old policy that outlawed women from having more than one child.
As a result, only about 100 girls are born for every 119 boys, because couples traditionally favor males.
Beijing has set a goal of reversing the imbalance by 2010, and to do this they will outlaw the selective abortion of female fetuses to correct an imbalance in the ratio of boys to girls.
So now by killing the males they can hopefully narrow the gender gap.
What a country!
From Reuters : Sex-selective abortion is already banned but technologies such as ultrasound have made it easier to know a baby's gender in advance, increasing the chances for aborting girls.
Despite a desire to curb the sex imbalance and a relaxation in recent years that allows rural families to have two children if the first is a girl, China has shown no sign of abandoning the one-child policy and cracks down on those who advocate against it.
One such activist is Mao Hengfeng, who was dismissed in 1988 from her job at a Shanghai soap factory after becoming pregnant a second time.
Last April, the Shanghai public security bureau sentenced her to 18 months in a labor camp for campaigning against the one-child policy.
In other news: feminists still believe they're second-class citizens in the United States.
A CNN poll asks readers to rate the president's State of the Union speech last night.
After 90,000 votes Mr. Bush has a 'C-C+' grade across the board, meaning 45,000 Republicans gave him an 'A' and 45,000 liberals failed him.
But a new CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggests more people side with the president.
70 percent of respondents said Bush's policies on health care were positive, while 66 percent approved of the president's plan for Social Security.
78 percent said U.S. policy in Iraq is hading in the right direction, a 12 percentage point increase over pre-speech polling.
Overall, 77 percent of respondents said Bush is taking the country in the right direction after the speech compared to 67 percent beforehand.
And who wasn't moved by the embrace of mother of a soldier killed in Iraq and the daughter of a man killed by Saddam Hussein's regime?
It was a beautiful moment last night that resulted in the longest standing ovation of the evening.
Today the parents of Marine Corps Sgt. Byron Norwood said the Iraqi woman, Safia Taleb al-Suhail, had turned and introduced herself just before the speech.
"She thanked us for our son's sacrifice and made sure we knew the people in Iraq were grateful for the sacrifices that were made not just by our son, but by all of them," Janet Norwood said.
It was an uplifting moment suggesting that maybe we're doing the right thing.
I talked to a friend currently serving in Iraq last night and he says morale is up and the presence of troops is a positive thing.
They just can't pack up and leave.
Not just yet.
We must be patient.
We've all lived next to some pretty undesirable people at one point or another, but I can't imagine anyone being worse than this.
A Colorado judge ordered two teen-age girls to pay about $900 for the distress a neighbor said they caused by giving her home-made cookies adorned with paper hearts.
The pair were ordered to pay $871.70 plus $39 in court costs after neighbor Wanita Renea Young, 49, filed a lawsuit complaining that the unsolicited cookies, left at her house after the girls knocked on her door, had triggered an anxiety attack that sent her to the hospital the next day.
Taylor Ostergaard, then 17, and Lindsey Jo Zellitte, 18, paid the judgment on Thursday after a small claims court ruling by La Plata County Court Judge Doug Walker, a court clerk said on Friday.
The girls baked cookies as a surprise for several of their rural Colorado neighbors on July 31 and dropped off small batches on their porches, accompanied by red or pink paper hearts and the message: "Have a great night."
The Denver Post newspaper reported on Friday that the girls had decided to stay home and bake the cookies rather than go to a dance where there might be cursing and drinking.
Zebra Report has a picture of the good-intentioned girls.
Maybe delinquency does pay off better.
From the Associated Press : A lone gunman opened fire with an assault rifle Sunday inside a crowded mall in upstate New York, wounding one person before running out of ammunition and being subdued by employees, authorities said.
The gunman began shooting inside the Hudson Valley Mall shortly after 3 p.m. in Kingston, nearly 90 miles north of New York City.
The 24-year-old gunman went into a Best Buy store and started firing.
When he ran out of ammunition, he was captured by mall employees, police said.
Ulster Town Supervisor Fred Wadnola identified the gunman's weapon as an AK-47 assault rifle.
Everyone was running and screaming.
Then I heard the shots,witness Heather Craig told Fox News.
Whoa!
You're telling me someone was able to take an AK-47 "assault rifle" into a mall and injure people?!
But it's New York.
They have gun laws!
And because New York has such strict gun laws - meaning citizens are prohibited from concealing weapons - a gunner can use bag-toting shoppers as target practice because guns laws keep mall shoppers at his mercy.
Had an armed civilian been inside the mall, perhaps he could have intervened before the suspect began injuring people before he ran out of ammo.
But not in New York.
Because there people like me who have never had so much as a traffic ticket in life cannot conceal weapons, unlike in Florida, where you walk past us everyday without even knowing it.
From the St. Pete Times : Some Florida legislators want to give people the right to shoot an attacker in a public place.
A House committee voted Wednesday to allow people to shoot to kill in self-defense if they are attacked "in any other place where he or she has a right to be."
Sponsored by Rep. Dennis Baxley, an Ocala Republican, the bill (HB 249) passed 13-0.
State law defines deadly force as that which is likely to cause "death or great bodily harm," such as firing a gun at a person or a vehicle.
Florida courts consider deadly force a last resort and have held that a person being attacked has the "duty to use every reasonable means to avoid the danger, including retreat, prior to using deadly force."
But this legislation says a person who is under attack in a public place "has no duty to retreat."
"Law-abiding people should not be told that if they are attacked, they should turn around and run," NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer told lawmakers.
"This bill gives back rights that have been eroded and taken away by a judicial system that at times appears to give preferential treatment to criminals."
Baxley held up a stack of more than 800 e-mails from Floridians who he said have written him to support the bill.
He said 62 House members, a majority, have endorsed his bill, and supporters include Attorney General Charlie Crist and groups representing Florida sheriffs, police chiefs and police officers.
Rep. Jeff Kottkamp, R-Cape Coral, said the bill reminded him of a sign he saw on a constituent's house while campaigning door-to-door.
Kottkamp said the sign, next to a doorbell, showed a smoking .44-Magnum handgun and the words: "We don't dial 911."
This is great news for Florida gun carriers because now to defend yourself you don't have to first make sure a "duty to retreat" is impossible.
Currently, if one's life is threatened he/she must make sure it is impossible to escape before using deadly force on an attacker.
Slobodan Milosevic's wife will go on trial next week on charges of mismanaging state property during the former president's rule, a court said Thursday.
Mirjana Markovic, the power behind the scenes during Milosevic's 13-year reign, is accused of illegally providing their grandson's nanny with a state-owned luxury apartment in Belgrade in 2000.
The Belgrade district court said that Markovic will be tried along with 10 other Milosevic-era officials who face similar charges of ``inappropriate use of state property'' that carry a sentence of up to five years in jail.
The trial will start on March 13, the court said.
Milosevic and his wife wielded enormous power in Yugoslavia for more than a decade before he was swept out of power after a popular revolt in October 2000.
The post-Milosevic government later extradited him to the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the Netherlands.
Since then, many of Milosevic's political and business allies as well as his two children have been accused of crimes.
Markovic, the leader of the neo-communist Yugoslav Left party, lost her parliamentary immunity from prosecution after she failed to become a deputy in the parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, the country that last month succeeded Yugoslavia.
The charismatic leader of Turkey's governing party was named prime minister Tuesday, a step that probably boosts chances that the United States will get permission to deploy troops in the country along Iraq's northern border.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who favors the deployment, hinted that he will reshuffle the Cabinet, but gave no indication if he would purge officials who opposed letting in the troops as analysts have suggested he might do.
Erdogan is extremely popular in Turkey and is likely be one of the few leaders with enough clout to unite his party and gain public support for allowing in the U.S. troops.
Turks overwhelmingly oppose a war -- by 94 percent, according to some polls.
Earlier this month, the Turkish parliament shocked the United States by rejecting the deployment by just four votes.
Erdogan has hinted that he will resubmit the resolution for approval, which could take another week.
The United States is pressing Turkey to act quickly.
Ships carrying equipment for U.S. troops are already waiting off the Turkish coast.
In Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States would ``have a northern option whether or not Turkey fully supports all our requests.
``I'm not going to talk about the operational ways of doing it, but just be assured there will be a northern option,'' he said.
Also in Washington, Turkish Ambassador Farouk Logoglu told The Associated Press that the U.S. and Turkish militaries were holding informal discussions on the use of Turkish airspace.
The troop-basing resolution would allow the United States to use Turkish airspace.
If the resolution is not passed, Washington would likely want to use the airspace for strikes against Iraq and for airlifting troops to northern Iraq.
Refusing access to the troop deployment would mean Turkey would lose a US$15 billion U.S. aid package that Washington has offered to help cushion the country's economy if there is war.
It would also threaten Turkey's possible role in the future of Iraq.
Turkey, which fears northern Iraqi Kurds may declare independence in the aftermath of a war, has been pressing for a say if Saddam Hussein is ousted.
Secession by Iraqi Kurds could inspire Turkey's rebel Kurds, who for 15 years have been fighting for autonomy.
After he was elected, Erdogan said Turkey wanted assurances from the United States on its role in Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday there had been talks that Turkish troops could be deployed ``a short distance from their border to try to avoid refugee infiltration.''
Iraqi Kurds fear that Turkish troops could move deep into the autonomous enclave in northern Iraq and have threatened clashes.
Rumsfeld also said that like Turkey, the United States doesn't want to see a breakaway state: ``Our interest, needless to say, is to see that Iraq remains a single country,'' he said at the Pentagon news conference.
Prime Minister Abdullah Gul resigned earlier Tuesday to make way for Erdogan, who won a parliamentary seat in by-elections Sunday.
Gul will remain as a caretaker prime minister until President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approves Erdogan's Cabinet, a move that could happen as early as Wednesday.
Erdogan said he would submit his Cabinet list to the president ``as soon as possible,'' and leaders of Erdogan's Justice and Development Party met Tuesday evening.
When asked about possible changes in the Cabinet, Erdogan said: ``Perhaps there will be a small amount of change, a certain number of revisions.''
Gul's resignation had been long expected.
Erdogan heads the party but was constitutionally barred from running in November elections because he was jailed in 1999 for anti-secular activities.
The Justice party changed the constitution after taking power in the elections.
Erdogan, a leader of Turkey's pro-Islamic movement when he was jailed, said he moderated his policies in prison.
His party considers itself conservative and no longer uses the word 'Islamic' in its literature.
He now also advocates letting in U.S. troops for a war against Iraq even though it is a fellow Muslim state.
Unlike the soft-spoken Gul, Erdogan has a reputation as a fighter.
Erdogan will be willing to engage in a bruising confrontation in a way that Gul was not willing to,'' said Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
If Erdogan decides that for his own reasons, and not U.S. pressure, he wants this, he will push it through.''
Tensions over the basing agreement spilled over into parliament Tuesday when opposition deputy Ufuk Ozkan shouted ``You are all American lackeys!'' at members of Erdogan's party, the Anatolia news agency reported.
A furious Justice party member, Fehmi Husrev Kutlu, rushed toward Ozkan, bumping into him and sending his eyeglasses flying, Anatolia reported.
Other legislators surrounded the two to head off a brawl.
U.S. and British troops were moving on the strategic southern port city of Basra Saturday after a massive aerial assault pounded Baghdad at dawn.
Thousands of beleaguered Iraqi soldiers in the south surrendered in the face of the major push.
The battle for Basra, an oil hub of some 1.3 million people, was underway by midday, with coalition troops trying to surround Iraqi positions and force a surrender.
U.S. aircraft bombed Iraqi tanks holding bridges close to the city.
Iraqi forces responded with artillery fire.
Earlier Saturday, Baghdad was again targeted, one day after a massive U.S. aerial bombardment in which more than 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on the capital.
The nine-story Security Headquarters in the Iraqi capital took a direct hit, strewing bricks, masonry and glass across the street in the al-Salhiya neighborhood of central Baghdad.
As coalition troops advanced, an entire Iraqi army division gave itself up, U.S. military officials said.
The division -- the 51st Infantry Division, with 8,000 men and as many as 200 tanks, a key unit in the defense of Basra -- was the largest defection in a day when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's forces showed signs of crumbling.
Allied successes were marred by the collision of two Royal Navy helicopters over the Persian Gulf in which all six British crew members and one American were killed.
Saturday morning, American Marines and British troops rumbled along the main road from the Kuwaiti border to Basra, Highway 80, nicknamed the ``Highway of Death'' during the 1991 Gulf War, when U.S. airstrikes wiped out an Iraqi military convoy along it.
American units advancing west of Basra have already secured the Rumeila oil field, whose daily output of 1.3 million barrels makes it Iraq's most productive.
Until Basra, U.S. and British troops had encountered little resistance, even when they seized nearby Umm Qasr, and moved to secure key oil fields.
Iraqis mostly fought back with small arms, pistols, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
Regular Iraqi forces had withdrawn from Basra but elements of Saddam's security forces are continuing to resist, British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon said Saturday.
Other units moved into airfield complexes in western Iraq believed to have Scud missiles capable of reaching Israel, and possibly weapons of mass destruction.
Early Saturday, more units were waiting in Kuwait to smash through any Iraqi resistance.
Hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, Humvees and trucks were lined up in parallel columns waiting in single-file to cross the Iraqi-Kuwait border.
By early next week, U.S. ground forces led by the Army's 3rd Infantry Division are likely to be at the outskirts of Baghdad, where they could face greater danger from the Republican Guard, some commanders said.
After weeks of delay, Turkey relented and agreed to let combat aircraft fly over its territory.
At the same time, however, Turkey sent 1,000 troops into northern Iraq, and the government said it would send more to prevent Iraqi Kurds from creating an independent state.
The United States strongly opposes any unilateral move by Turkey into northern Iraq.
A Turkish military spokesman on Saturday denied Turkish troops had crossed into Iraq.
The United States and Britain suffered their first casualties Thursday and Friday as they pushed into Iraq, with two U.S. Marines killed in combat and another eight British and four American Marines dying in a helicopter crash that appeared to be accidental.
There was no clear figure of Iraqi casualties.
Australian commandos, who have been operating deep in Iraq, destroyed a command and control post and killed a number of soldiers, according to the country's defense chief, Gen. Peter Cosgrove.
In an address Saturday, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf told Iraqis that fighting had been ``fierce.''
He said most of those captured by allied forces were civilians, not soldiers.
He claimed Iraqi troops had destroyed five tanks.
He said more than 200 Iraqis had been injured, including women, children and other civilians who were being treated at five hospitals in Baghdad.
Hoon said Saddam's regime was crumbling under the pressure of a huge air assault.
As last night's dramatic television coverage showed, the lights stayed on in Baghdad, but the instruments of tyranny are collapsing,'' he said.
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan, speaking on Iraqi Radio, was quoted by the British Broadcasting Corp.'s monitoring service as accusing Britain and the United States of working to ``eliminate'' the state of Iraq.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ramadan said, ``It is also regrettable and deplorable that the (U.N.) General Secretariat has not issued any statement or reaction that condemns or deplores this aggression.''
Despite the heavy bombing, which the U.S. Central Command said targeted military command and control installations, the Iraqi regime gave no sign of quitting.
Bombers have also hit targets in the northern cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
The Iraqi government released a video of Saddam, in uniform, meeting with his son Qusai, the commander of the Republican Guard, and the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmad.
It was unclear when the video was made.
U.S. intelligence officials said the Iraqi command and control system was in disarray, and U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said, ``The regime is starting to lose control of their country.''
Kurdish militiamen and U.S. special operations troops linked up with more than 1,000 U.S. Army paratroopers Thursday to secure the area around a strategic air strip, as the first large coalition ground force in northern Iraq began opening another front against Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade , including elite Army Rangers, jumped out of low-flying C-17 transport planes under cover of darkness Wednesday and secured a snow-dusted airfield, which will be used to bring in supplies and support personnel.
The airdrop one of the biggest paratroop drops in decades -- was a dramatic entry for ground troops into a region where only small groups of U.S. special forces have been operating.
Coalition airstrikes have been hitting Iraqi military forces and other strategic targets in the north.
This tightens the noose against Saddam's forces battling coalition forces to the south,'' Brig. Gen. James Parker, commander of U.S. forces in the north.
And it may also serve as a warning to Turkish forces.''
Giving cover for the deployment, U.S. warplanes struck Iraqi ground troops and bunkers in northern Iraq.
Three waves of combat planes from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt hit ``ground troops, command and control bunkers, artillery positions and ... a surface to air missile battery,'' said Lt. John Oliveira, the ship's public affair officer.
Around dawn Thursday, strikes resumed, with a massive explosion just outside the Kurdish zone close to the village of Kalak.
Warplanes pounded forward Iraqi positions in the hills overlooking Chamchamal, 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of the key oil city of Kirkuk.
Later Thursday, Kurdish troops in Chamchamal advanced their positions between government-controlled and rebel-controlled areas, taking over a Iraqi check point on their front with no fighting at this point, witnesses said.
Early Thursday, Kurdish fighters closed off a highway and roads near the airstrip where troops were said to be arriving, outside the town of Bashur, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) northeast of the Kurd-controlled city of Irbil and 30 miles (50 kilometers) south of the Turkish border.
From the highway, dusted from a recent snow, a flashing light from the airstrip's control tower was visible in the distance, and three helicopters could be seen landing, flying with nearly all their lights extinguished.
Future airlifts into the area will include supplies and support personnel for the 173rd's fighters, defense officials said.
The airfield's 6,700-foot (2,042-meter) runway is long enough to land C-17s and other U.S. military cargo planes.
Lt. Col. Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the U.S. Army's Southern European Task Force, refused to say whether the paratroopers deployed directly from Italy into Iraq or had taken a different route.
The matter immediately sparked controversy in Italy, where there is a strong anti-war movement.
The country's parliament voted this month to allow U.S.-led coalition forces to use Italian air space and military bases -- but not for directs attacks on Iraq.
Pentagon officials have said for weeks they would have U.S. forces in northern Iraq to open another front against Saddam's forces.
The vast majority of the coalition ground troops in Iraq are moving toward Baghdad from the south after entering from Kuwait.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the Army's 4th Infantry Division invade Iraq from the north, but Turkey balked at allowing up to 62,000 U.S. troops on its soil to prepare for that option.
The use of the 173rd shows the military has shifted to a smaller, lighter force.
Military officials say they would have liked to have secured key oil fields around the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk -- and perhaps the cities themselves -- by now.
Though no hostilities were expected during the deployment, the 173rd decided to parachute in rather then ferry troops in by plane so that a significant combat force could mass almost immediately to protect itself, officers said, according to a U.S. reporter traveling with the 173rd.
``Kirkuk is key.
The Iraqi's want it, the Kurds want it, the Turks want it and various other ethnic groups also want it,'' Maj. Mike Hastings said.
``What this drop means is that we can secure it until we are relieved by other forces.''
Besides Mosul and Kirkuk, another key target in northern Iraq is Tikrit, Saddam's hometown and the tribal center for most of his inner circle.
Most of the Adnan Division of the Republican Guard relocated from the Mosul area to the Tikrit area shortly before the war began.
Another key mission for the 173rd could be to keep order in northern Iraq, which is controlled by two semi-autonomous Kurdish factions but also includes several splinter groups and a base for the al-Qaida-linked Ansar al-Islam.
Turkey has said it may send more troops into northern Iraq to prevent refugees from moving north, while U.S. officials have said they advised Turkey against sending large additional forces into northern Iraq.
Former Danish international Stig Toefting dropped his appeal of an assault conviction and will serve a four-month jail sentence, Denmark's TV2 reported Monday.
Toefting was convicted in October 2002 of assaulting a pair of restaurant workers during a night out with national squad teammates in the capital, Copenhagen.
He was sentenced to four months in prison, but appealed.
The hearing was scheduled for April 10.
TV2, quoting Toefting's lawyer Anders Nemeth, reported that that 33-year-old midfielder was ready to serve his sentence immediately.
Neither Toefting or Nemeth were immediately available for comment.
Earlier this month, Toefting said English Premier League club Bolton let him go so he could prepare for the appeal.
It was unclear whether Toefting would return to Bolton after serving his sentence.
The club said it wasn't aware of Toefting's decision to drop his appeal.
Toefting transferred to Bolton in February 2002 from German club Hamburg.
Toefting has been convicted before.
In 1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence for assaulting a fan who berated him for playing with German club Duisburg.
The popular player -- known for his temperament and the words ``No Regret'' tattooed across his chest -- retired from Denmark's national team after it was knocked out in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.
Toefting joined the Danish squad in 1993 and has 41 caps.
U.S. soldiers moved to capture Baghdad's Saddam International Airport early Friday and fought running battles with Iraqi defenders along the city's southern fringes.
A vise is closing on the regime,'' U.S. President George W. Bush said.
Some frontline units went on heightened alert against the threat of chemical weapons, ordered to wear rubber boots and suits despite temperatures that soared into the 90s.
There was fierce fighting in Kut, to the south of Baghdad, where desperate Iraqis armed with rifles charged tanks in a suicide raid.
We mowed down'' the attackers, said Lt. Col. B.P. McCoy.
Despite declarations that more tough fighting lies ahead, the top U.S. military official indicated there may not be an all-out battle for Baghdad.
Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested isolating members of the old regime in the capital -- cut off from the rest of the country -- while an ``interim administration'' is put in place to begin work on a postwar government.
A meeting to organize an interim government could be held in Iraq within a week, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday night.
For the first time in the war, large parts of Baghdad lost electricity.
The cause was not known.
Myers told reporters at a Pentagon briefing that Americans had not targeted the power grid.
Tracer rounds lit the night sky and artillery boomed near the airport a few kilometers (miles) from the heart of President Saddam Hussein's capital of 5 million people.
At one stage, it appeared that U.S. forces had taken control of the airport, ``and then it got more confusing with continued fighting, Myers said Thursday night.
Capture of the airport would give American and British troops a facility for airlifting equipment and troops to Baghdad.
Along the city's southern edge, U.S. tanks and Bradley vehicles destroyed at least seven Iraqi armored personnel carriers and more than 15 Iraqi tanks in fighting that went on for more than four hours.
Two weeks into the war, American commanders reported a string of successes -- on the battlefield and within an Iraqi population initially reluctant about embracing invading troops.
Kurdish fighters in the north chipped in, when a top leader suggested they may agree not to seek control of the northern city of Kirkuk.
There were battlefield setbacks, as well.
Two Marines were killed and one injured in the close-quarters fighting in Kut.
And an Army soldier investigating a destroyed tank in central Iraq was killed by friendly fire when he was mistaken for an Iraqi, the military said.
U.S. defense officials also were investigating whether a Navy Hornet jet that crashed Wednesday was shot down by a U.S. Patriot missile.
The Navy was searching for the pilot Thursday.
The overall toll of American troops dead passed 50, and Bush visited a Marine camp, which has lost 13 -- more than any other installation.
He's in heaven, the commander in chief told the family of one fallen Marine in a private moment.
To the cheers of thousands earlier in a speech, he vowed victory, and said, ``A vise is closing on the regime.''
Iraqi officials issued the latest in a series of exhortations in Saddam's name.
Fight them with your hands.
God will disgrace them,'' they said, referring to invading American and British troops.
But the daily urgings seemed increasingly at odds with the military situation across the country, and Myers said Saddam had lost control of 45 percent of Iraq's territory.
As conventional units fought their way to the outskirts of the capital, officials said special forces had raided the Tharthar presidential palace near Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
Documents were seized at the site north of Baghdad, said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks at U.S. Central Command in the Persian Gulf, but no ranking members of the regime were found.
That's all right, he added, ``there's other operations ongoing.''
To the far north, U.S. special forces and Kurdish militiamen captured the town of Bardarash and a nearby bridge, one of few routes into the city of Mosul near government-held oil fields.
Iraqis had held the town for 13 years.
In the country's southern region, British forces penetrated closer to the center of Basra, and warplanes dropped 500-pound (225-kilogram) and 1,000-pound (450-kilogram) laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi intelligence complex.
Die-hard defenders have held out for days inside the city of 1.3 million.
American officials cited continuing examples of Iraqis cooperating with invading troops.
In Najaf, they said a prominent cleric under house arrest by the Iraqi government had urged the population not to interfere with the operations of American or British forces.
A small group of Iraqi defenders has been holding out inside the city in a mosque, considered a Shiite holy site, and local clerics said one religious leader had recently arrived in hopes of arranging for their safe passage out of the shrine.
Ground forces closed in on Baghdad from separate southern approaches, the Army from the southeast and Marines from the southwest, in advances begun Tuesday night.
American and British helicopters and planes bombed positions in Kut, and Marines and Iraqis lobbed grenades at close quarters.
Between 10 and 15 Iraqis armed only with rifles charged Marine tanks in the suicide charge.
Two U.S. Marines died in the fighting -- and a medic who tried to save one of them sorrowfully buried his resuscitation equipment on the spot.
Army forces rolled past dozens of dead Iraqi soldiers and bombed-out hulks of Iraqi military equipment as they made their way toward Baghdad from the area around Karbala.
Many more Iraqi soldiers surrendered to the overwhelming force of the Americans, and were shuttled to the rear.
At the same time they worried about chemical weapons attacks, Brooks disclosed that a special operations force in the southwestern desert had found a number of bottles ``marked in strange ways.''
He said an investigation was under way.
Toyota Motor Corp. said Tuesday it will promote Akio Toyoda, a grandson of the company's founder who is widely viewed as a candidate to some day head Japan's largest automaker.
Managing director Toyoda, 46, grandson of Kiichiro Toyoda and the eldest son of Toyota honorary chairman Shoichiro Toyoda, will become one of 14 senior managing directors under a streamlined management system set to be introduced after a shareholders' meeting in June, the company said in a statement.
Toyoda, who joined Toyota, based in Toyota city, central Japan, in 1984, spearheaded the automaker's Internet and telematics business -- a technology that puts wireless communications into vehicles.
Considered a candidate for future Toyota president, Toyoda oversees its China business, a critical market for the automaker.
Toyoda has been on the star track for years.
When he joined the board in 2000, he was its youngest member.
Under a reform led by President Fujio Cho, the membership of Toyota's board of directors will be slashed to 27 from 58.
Executive vice presidents will be reduced to seven from nine.
The new system is designed to ``speed up decision-making and operations,'' Toyota spokesman Shigeru Hayakawa said.
Toyota's top posts held by Cho and Chairman Hiroshi Okuda remain unchanged.
Kiichiro Toyoda founded the automaker in 1937, transforming the loom manufacturer started by his father into an automaker.
U.S. forces tightened their grip throughout Baghdad, entering the city for the first time from the north, seizing a military airport and battling snipers and Republican Guard fighters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military faced sharp criticism over assaults that killed three foreign journalists.
Pentagon officials said Tuesday they didn't know whether Iraqi President Saddam Hussein died in the U.S. airstrike on a Baghdad neighborhood the day before.
The strike destroyed three nearby houses and killed at least two people.
U.S. Marines battled snipers as they fought deeper into the capital from the east.
They seized the Rasheed Airport and captured enough ammunition for an estimated 3,000 troops.
Ominously, they also took a prison where they found U.S. Army uniforms and chemical weapons suits possibly belonging to American POWs.
Some army units routed Iraqi fighters from a Republican Guard headquarters inside the capital.
Others discovered a 12-room complex inside a cave, complete with white marble floors and fluorescent lighting.
Members of the U.S. Army's V Corps opened up a new front by entering Baghdad from the north.
The toll on Iraqi civilians four days after Americans first penetrated the Baghdad outskirts is unknown.
But the World Health Organization said Baghdad's hospitals were running out of supplies to treat the burns, shrapnel wounds and spinal injuries caused by the fighting.
Iraqi officials, however, remained defiant, saying Iraq's forces would never surrender to American forces: ``They will be burnt,'' said Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf.
In central Baghdad, a Reuters cameraman and a cameraman for Spain's Telecinco died when an American tank fired on the Palestine Hotel.
The incident raises questions about the judgment of the advancing U.S. troops who have known all along that this hotel is the main base for almost all foreign journalists in Baghdad,'' Reuters Editor-in-Chief Geert Linnebank said.
Tareq Ayyoub, a journalist with Al-Jazeera, died when a U.S. warplane bombed the Arab-language satellite television's office.
An Abu Dhabi TV office in Baghdad also was hit.
Al-Jazeera categorically denied that its Baghdad bureau had been used by Iraqi forces to fire on U.S. troops.
U.S. Central Command said it fired on the TV office and the hotel after U.S. forces came under ``significant'' fire from those buildings.
Associated Press photographer Jerome Delay said he watched from the top floor of the hotel as American tanks took up positions on the bridge.
All the shooting was concentrated on the bridge and across the river,'' where U.S. forces were located, he said.
It was not clear whether any Iraqi leader had been killed in the airstrike targeting Saddam in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood.
Iraqi rescue workers pulled two bodies from the rubble but said the toll could be as high as 14.
I don't know whether he survived,'' U.S President George W. Bush said of Saddam at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
The only thing I know is that he's losing power.''
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said Tuesday he believes that Saddam is alive, although al-Douri acknowledged he has not communicated with Baghdad.
Bush and Blair sought to minimize their differences over who should govern and rebuild Iraq.
Blair favors a stronger U.N. role than Bush.
There will be a vital role for the U.N. in the reconstruction of Iraq,'' Blair said.
But the key is that Iraq in the end will be run by the Iraqi people.''
In northern Iraq, Kurdish forces tightened their ring around Kirkuk on Tuesday, following heavy coalition airstrikes on Iraqi fronts.
Kurdish militia took control of Sekamian plateau, about 10 kilometers (six miles) north of Kirkuk, Kurdish media reported.
The area affords a commanding view of the city and the vast oil fields of Iraq's No. 2 oil region.
The U.S. military said two planes had been lost.
An A-10 ``Warthog'' warplane was shot down near Baghdad, believed to be the first fixed-wing aircraft downed by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile since the war began.
U.S. Central Command said the pilot ejected, was recovered by ground forces and was in good condition.
A U.S. F-15E jet fighter also went down early Monday and a search was under way for its two-man crew, the military announced Tuesday.
Officials did not say whether the plane was shot down or crashed accidentally.
British forces in southern Iraq worked to restore order in the heavily looted streets of Basra, as desperate citizens swarmed water tanker trucks the day after British soldiers claimed Iraq's second largest city.
British forces also began establishing the country's first postwar administration Tuesday, granting a local sheik power to set up an administrative committee representing the groups in the region.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri, the first Iraqi official to concede defeat in the U.S.-led war, met privately with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but refused to talk about rumors that he was planning to leave New York.
I am sorry,'' he said.
No Answer.''
No comment at all.
This is my last word to you,'' he told hordes of journalists who chased him Thursday at his New York residence and U.N. headquarters seeking comment on his talks with the secretary-general, his future and the war.
Asked who should govern Iraq, Al-Douri said: ``I have nothing to do with that.''
Annan also declined to comment on Thursday's meeting with Al-Douri.
With the fall of Baghdad Wednesday, Al-Douri declared ``the game is over'' and expressed hope that the Iraqi people will now be able to live in peace.
He said he had not been in touch with Baghdad.
Beside meeting with Annan, Al-Douri spent several hours during the late morning and afternoon meeting with ambassadors and diplomats in the Delegate's Lounge.
I wished him good luck but I don't know what he said to the secretary-general and what will be his next steps,'' said Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, who talked with Al-Douri before his own meeting with Annan.
In an interview with The Associated Press Wednesday night, Al-Douri said he will continue to work at the United Nations and had no intention of defecting.
Defecting from who?'' he asked.
I think the government has already defected.
There is no more Iraqi government to be defected from.''
Annan said early Thursday -- before meeting Al-Douri -- that in talks with the envoy Monday, ``he didn't ask for an asylum or protection ... (and) he didn't ask me for help with his status.''
We did talk about what happens, depending on the evolution of things on the ground,'' Annan said.
The ambassador had vehemently defended his country for months as the United States and its allies sought U.N. backing for war on Iraq.
Privately, many U.N. diplomats see him as a respectable colleague.
I sympathize with his need to create a new life for himself,'' said Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.
Al-Douri taught international law at Baghdad University for over 30 years before becoming a diplomat in 1999, first at the United Nations in Geneva and since early 2001 at U.N. headquarters in New York.
He said in the AP interview he would love to return to teaching but for now he plans to remain at the United Nations.
Things will be crystalized one day,'' he said.
What I worried about is that things are settled in the country ... so in the future the Iraqi people will live in peace without sanctions, without wars, without suffering.
This is my message.''
Separately, lawyers who claim that Iraq helped plan the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people asked a judge at a federal court in New York to force Al-Douri to testify in the case and hold the envoy in contempt, saying they worry that he would flee the country.
But U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Al-Douri still has diplomatic immunity as Iraq's ambassador.
Under U.N. rules, a new Iraqi government would have to ask to represent the country, which the General Assembly would then consider.
He is still Iraq's ambassador at the United Nations,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said in Washington.
Legally, that is the way it works at the U.N.''
Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, which represent 14 survivors and victims' relatives who have filed a $1.5 billion federal lawsuit against Iraq in Washington, said his organization had served a subpoena on Al-Douri twice, on March 26 and March 28, but said he has not responded.
U.S. District Judge John S. Martin did not immediately rule but scheduled a hearing for next week.
The April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building was the deadliest terrorist strike on American soil at the time.
The suit claims Iraqi officials provided money and training to convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh and conspirator Terry Nichols.
McVeigh was executed in 2001, and Nichols is serving a life sentence.
The dictator Suharto has fallen, the constitution has changed, the media was unshackled, democratic elections held, and East Timor freed.
After Sept. 11, 2001, Indonesia was quick to sign onto U.S. President George W. Bush's global war on terror.
Yet, Washington maintains a 12-year ban on arms sales to the world's most populous Muslim nation with the aim of curbing human rights abuses still happening despite momentous political change.
Frustrated, Jakarta's generals are looking elsewhere to replace antiquated arsenals.
Later this month Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri travels to Moscow to seek the Kremlin's help in modernizing her increasingly obsolete 300,000-member armed forces.
She is also likely to open the way for Russian companies to vie for lucrative deals in the oil and gas sector, long dominated by American and British resource giants.
Although opposite ends of the Earth, Indonesia and Russia have some basic things in common.
Both are geographically sprawling with massive multiethnic populations.
Both are struggling to preserve national unity as they fight separatism and build democracy after the collapse of decades of authoritarian rule.
Both are resource-rich, but face huge economic problems made worse by endemic corruption.
And, currently, both have opposed the U.S.- led war on Iraq.
Indonesia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Marty Natalegawa says Megawati's meeting with Russian President Putin slated for April 21 will touch on the Iraq crisis.
But other diplomats say that issue will serve primarily to bring the two closer together on bottom-line issues such as trade and arms sales.
Analysts worry that Indonesia's military is now so degraded it can no longer control the borders of the far-flung archipelago, allowing for easy infiltration by extremists.
Last year's Bali bombings, which killed 202 people, illustrated the threat of terrorism in Indonesia.
And, broad opposition to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq threatens to lead to a backlash by militant Islamists.
Nearly everybody in Indonesia sees this Iraq war as completely unnecessary and there is widespread public opposition to U.S. policies,'' said Jusuf Wanadi of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
Close ties between Moscow and Jakarta are not unprecedented.
Indonesia relied on Soviet military assistance in the 1950s under Megawati's father and founding President Sukarno, but these were severed after the anti-communist Gen. Suharto seized power in 1965.
The United States quickly became the Southeast Asian country's main weapons supplier, and annual arms sales peaked at US$400 million in the 1980s.
In 1991, however, the U.S. Congress banned this after Indonesian troops killed hundreds of civilians in East Timor.
In 1999, East Timor became free, but only after Indonesian forces laid waste to it as they withdrew after a pro-independence referendum.
The shocking level of destruction prompted U.S. lawmakers to expand the ban to cover almost all military ties with Indonesia.
Since then some in the Bush administration -- particularly Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Jakarta and a prime architect of the Iraq war -- have pushed for the ban to be repealed.
So far, U.S. lawmakers have reinstated only a limited officer training program.
But that's far from enough for Indonesia's generals.
I think the Indonesian military has finally decided that restrictions and conditionalities from Washington are just not worth it,'' said Juwono Sudarsono, a former defense minister.
So they want to look for alternative sources for planes, helicopters and other hardware.''
Moscow has already had some success in wooing Indonesia as a customer.
Jakarta has recently purchased some Russian weapons, including 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles, a squadron of naval Mil-2 helicopters and a dozen BTR-80A amphibious carriers for its marines.
Currently, Indonesia uses short-range Rapier missiles purchased 30 years ago to protect its vital oil and natural gas fields in Sumatra, Borneo and Papua from air attack.
Replenishing them has been a big problem,'' Sudarsono said.
Air defense commanders want to augment the Rapiers with Russia's impressive long-range S-300 missiles, or shorter-range systems such as the SA-15 Gauntlet or shoulder-fired Igla.
The Air Force is reportedly considering purchasing several squadrons of Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors, considered the world's premier dogfighters.
Previously, Indonesian Air Force commanders preferred Western jets that were compatible with the U.S.-made F-16 fighter-bombers already in the Indonesian inventory.
But neighboring Malaysia's success in integrating Russian MiG-29s and American F/A-18 Hornets persuaded them otherwise, Sudarsono said.
If Megawati does stiff-arm the United States on the weapons issue, it is unlikely relations with Washington will be permanently damaged.
Whatever happens, Indonesia, a mainly Muslim but politically secular state, is natural ally in the struggle against terrorism and religious militancy.
What could be more worrying for Washington is Russia's economic ambitions.
Trade between Indonesia and Russia increased by dlrs 36.2 million to dlrs 203.5 million in 2001 -- the last year for which statistics are available.
Analysts say this can only grow.
The real concerns, though, are in the petroleum sector.
Megawati and Putin are expected to sign agreements to give Russian companies a toehold in Indonesia's oil and gas industry, long dominated by American and British giants such as Exxon Mobil and BP.
A U.S.-sponsored forum that brought Iraqi opposition leaders together to shape the country's postwar government began Tuesday with a U.S. promise not to rule Iraq and concluded with an agreement to meet again in 10 days.
Meeting in the biblical birthplace of the prophet Abraham, delegates from Iraq's many factions discussed the role of religion in the future government and ways to rebuild the country.
But some Shiite Muslim groups boycotted the meeting and thousands protested nearby.
A 13-point statement released after the meeting stressed the need to work toward a democratic Iraq built on the rule of law and equality.
It also called for dissolving Saddam's Baath Party but left open the question of separating church from the state.
Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner, who will head the U.S.-led interim administration in Iraq, opened the conference under a golden-colored tent in the shadows of the 4,000-year-old ziggurat at Ur, a terraced temple platform of the ancient Sumerians.
What better birthday can a man have than to begin it not only where civilization began but where a free Iraq and a democratic Iraq will begin today?'' said Garner, who turned 65 Tuesday and wore a twin American and Iraqi flag pin on his blue shirt.
White House envoy Zalmay Khalilzad told delegates that the United States has ``no interest, absolutely no interest, in ruling Iraq.''
We want you to establish your own democratic system based on Iraqi traditions and values,'' Khalilzad said.
I urge you to take this opportunity to cooperate with each other.''
Participants included Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites from inside the country and others who spent years in exile.
U.S. officials invited the groups, which picked their own representatives.
Many Iraqis boycotted the meeting in opposition to U.S. plans to install Garner atop an interim administration.
Thousands of Shiites -- who constitute Iraq's most populous religious group but were repressed under Saddam Hussein -- demonstrated in nearby Nasiriyah, chanting ``No to America and no to Saddam!''
Iraq needs an Iraqi interim government.
Anything other than this tramples the rights of the Iraqi people and will be a return to the era of colonization,'' said Abdul Aziz Hakim, a leader of the largest Iraqi Shiite group, the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
U.S. officials hope more Iraqis join the process and stressed that this was just the first of many such meetings in Iraq.
The meeting concluded with the delegates voting by show of hands to meet again in 10 days.
A national conference is planned to select the interim administration, perhaps within weeks, a senior U.S. official said on condition of anonymity.
The interim administration could begin handing power back to Iraqi officials within three to six months, but forming a government will take longer, said Maj. Gen. Tim Cross, the top British member of Garner's team.
One has to go through the process of building from the bottom up, allowing the leadership to establish itself, and then the election process to go through and so forth,'' Cross said.
That full electoral process may well take longer.''
Garner's Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance is charged with coordinating humanitarian assistance, rebuilding infrastructure shattered by years of war and U.N. sanctions, and gradually handing back power to Iraqis leading a democratically elected government.
Tuesday's meeting was the first step toward that goal after the ouster of Saddam.
Sheik Ayad Jamal Al Din, a Shiite religious leader from Nasiriyah, urged the delegates to craft a secular government, according to a pool report.
But Nassar Hussein Musawi, a schoolteacher, disagreed: ``Those who would like to separate religion from the state are simply dreaming,'' he said.
Iraqi exile Hatem Mukhliss quoted President John F. Kennedy's exhortation, ``Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,'' and called on Iraqis to write a constitution, establish a legal system and consider what role the army should play.
He asked coalition representatives to address problems of security, electricity and water in Iraq and help rebuild destroyed and looted hospitals.
Saddam reduced the country to such a state that it was necessary for people to sell off personal possessions,'' Mukhliss said.
Now it's time to take our country back.''
There are already tensions between the United States and some Iraqi factions.
Kurdish groups appear unwilling to compromise on their demand to expand the border of their autonomous area to include the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and Kurdish parts of the city of Mosul.
That could pose a problem for the United States, because Turkey worries that Kurdish control of Kirkuk could lead to aspirations for independence and in turn encourage separatist Kurds in Turkey.
Iraqi opposition leaders fear the United States is trying to force Ahmed Chalabi, head of the London-based umbrella Iraqi National Congress, on them as leader of a new Iraqi administration.
Chalabi was the first top Iraqi opposition leader to be airlifted by the U.S. military into southern Iraq as the fighting wound down, and he and other top members of his group plan to meet soon in Baghdad.
U.S. officials said Chalabi was brought in because he offered forces to the coalition.
Neither Chalabi nor many other leaders of anti-Saddam groups attended Tuesday's meeting, but they sent delegates.
Iraqis protesting the conference said it did not represent their interests.
The protesters held banners written in English and Arabic saying the ``Hawza,'' or the Shiite religious seminary in Najaf, represents them.
Even some of those at the meeting said they did not want Garner leading the interim administration.
We will press for any Iraqi civilian administration regardless of what the Americans say.
An administration by Garner is not acceptable,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an Iraqi physician and opposition activist.
He said American officials have outlined what Garner's administration would look like: Each ministry would be headed by an American, either military or civilian.
Each minister would have two American deputies and eight American advisers, plus four Iraqi advisers from inside the country and four Iraqi exiles.
Associated Press writer Patrick McDowell in Kuwait City contributed to this report.
The lawyer for a Russian military journalist convicted of treason filed an appeal Wednesday in an effort to overturn the guilty verdict against his client, who was released on parole earlier this year, news agencies reported.
He asked the court to invalidate the verdict and throw out the criminal case against Pasko.
Pasko was sentenced to four years in prison in December 2001 for illegally attending a meeting of top military commanders and taking notes there.
A military court said he intended to pass the notes to Japanese media with which he had worked.
Pasko, whose sentence included time served, was released in January for good behavior after serving more than two-thirds of the sentence.
He has maintained his innocence, saying the military was punishing him for exposing environmental abuses by the Russian navy, including the dumping of radioactive waste into the sea.
Reznik said an initial appeal he lodged the day Pasko was freed never reached the presidium of the Supreme Court, according to Interfax.
The lawyer said the court's military board had refused to launch proceedings on the appeal.
Reznik said he addressed the new appeal directly to Supreme Court Chairman Vyacheslav Lebedev and asked that it not be considered by military judges ``because the military justice system has adopted a biased attitude against Pasko,'' Interfax reported.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasia said Tuesday that the U.S. government won't be involved in choosing subcontractors for American companies named to help rebuild Iraq.
The way it works is that there have been an initial set of contracts let to US companies, since it's U.S. money.
Those companies can subcontract to any company they want,'' Elizabeth Jones said.
She made the statements after a meeting with the speaker of the Portuguese parliament, Joao Mota Amaral.
The U.S. government has done what it is going to do: it has opened up the process to international companies.
We can't direct commerce, Jones said.
Once it's a commercial proposition, then international bidding processes come into effect.''
Jones met with Defense Minister Paulo Portas on Tuesday and will meet Foreign Minister Antonio Martins da Cruz before leaving Portugal Wednesday.
About 50 Portuguese companies - mostly in the construction sector -- are applying for subcontracts to help rebuild Iraq, Portuguese media reported.
Many are hoping to reap benefits from Portuguese government support of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein.
Also, Portugal hosted a last ditch pre-war summit in the Azores islands for leaders of the United States, Britain and Spain.
Rudolph Giuliani will wed his companion, Judith Nathan, on May 24 in the ex-mayor's old home, Gracie Mansion.
The news was announced Thursday by Giuliani spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.
His successor, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, will perform the ceremony.
Giuliani, 58, proposed to Nathan, a former nurse, during a November business trip to Paris -- five months after he finalized his divorce from Donna Hanover after 20 years of marriage.
In interviews last year, Giuliani said Nathan gave him ``tremendous emotional support'' through his treatment for prostate cancer and as he led the city during the aftermath of the Sept.
11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
We were close already, Giuliani said.
And then we went through hell together.''
Giuliani and Nathan began appearing in public together in May 2000.
Soon after, he announced that he and Hanover were moving toward legal separation.
During the legal proceedings leading up to the divorce, a judge ruled that Nathan could not visit Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence, as long as Giuliani's children lived there.
Giuliani and Hanover have two teenage children, Andrew and Caroline.
The divorce settlement called for Giuliani to pay Hanover more than $6.8 million.
Hanover, 53, is host of a syndicated television show, ``Famous Homes and Hideaways.''
Last month, she and her fiance an old high school sweetheart -- invited the press along as they went shopping for wedding bands, saying they are planning a wedding in the New York City area this summer.
Giuliani's first marriage to his second cousin, Regina Peruggi, lasted about 14 years.
It was annulled by the Catholic Church because the couple had not obtained a church dispensation required when second cousins marry.
Nathan divorced wallpaper salesman Bruce Nathan in 1992.
They have a teenage daughter.
The Giuliani-Nathan nuptials will be a first for Bloomberg, who is making an exception from his policy of not performing weddings, said Bloomberg spokesman Ed Skyler.
Giuliani regularly officiated at weddings while in office.
The mayor is honored by their request,'' Skyler said.
The United States and Britain are preparing a resolution that would give the United Nations a role in humanitarian relief but not peacekeeping in Iraq, a senior official in U.S. President George W. Bush's administration said Friday.
Separately, the United States has decided to divide the military and humanitarian relief mission in Iraq into three parts under American, British and Polish command, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Six European countries have agreed to contribute troops to the British and Polish sectors to create an international stability force, the official said.
The draft resolution would limit the U.N. role to helping with refugees and displaced people, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance, the official said.
The United States and Britain agree on all but a few of the fine details of the resolution, the official said, though there is no timetable on when it would be introduced.
U.N. officials are already in Iraq providing humanitarian relief.
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan said this week that the body has no interest in policing a postwar Iraq, although it could contribute to the political resuscitation of the country.
Take the question of security.
I don't think the U.N. would want to take on that,'' Annan said.
There has been a suggestion that the U.N. wanted to take over the whole Iraq and run it, which was also not the case.''
What the United Nations could contribute beyond humanitarian assistance was ``political facilitation,'' Annan said.
The proposed draft resolution would probably face resistance from other U.N. Security Council members who have favored a U.N.-convened conference of the kind that helped establish Afghanistan's post-Taliban government.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld discussed the resolution with Prime Minister Tony Blair and Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon on Friday as Rumsfeld returned from a tour of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf region.
Rumsfeld said afterward he hoped the U.N. would play a role but did not publicly discuss the draft resolution outlining that role.
Hoon, who joined Rumsfeld in a news conference at Heathrow airport, also did not mention the draft resolution.
We are right to be optimistic about the way forward'' in Iraq, Hoon said.
International stability forces will be sent to Iraq as soon as possible, the U.S. official said, though it was unclear when that would be.
Those troops will work to restore and maintain order and supervise humanitarian projects such as the restoration of water and electricity and delivery of food and medical aid.
The six nations contributing troops are Italy, Spain, Ukraine, Denmark, the Netherlands and Bulgaria, the official said.
Representatives of those countries will meet with British officials May 7 and Polish officials May 22 to determine what forces each country will contribute and whether they will be put under British or Polish command.
The U.S. part of the stability force will be comprised of American troops.
While that portion is likely to consist of a military division -- about 20,000 -- the troop strength of the other two sectors has yet to be determined, the official said.
The international stabilization force would be under the U.S. war commander, Gen. Tommy Franks.
At least initially, the coalition stability forces will augment rather than replace the 135,000 American troops inside Iraq, the official said.
The stability forces will focus on providing security and humanitarian relief while other U.S. troops focus on rooting out leftover members of Saddam Hussein's government and other armed elements in Iraq.
Rumsfeld said, however, that the more troops other countries contribute to the stability effort, the fewer U.S. troops will be needed inside Iraq.
Planning for both the U.N. resolution and the international security force left out France, Germany and Russia, three U.S. allies that vehemently opposed the war in Iraq.
Some of the NATO members who agreed to send troops may want NATO authorization for that action, the official said.
Requests for such authorization will be routed through the alliance's defense planning committee, which does not include France, the official said.
The outlines for the international stability force were decided at a conference Hoon hosted Wednesday with representatives from 16 countries, mostly NATO members.
Other countries including the Philippines, South Korea, Qatar and Australia agreed to send other help such as field hospitals, engineers, explosive ordnance disposal teams or nuclear, biological and chemical weapons experts.
The U.S., British and Polish sectors will be drawn to take into account ethnic, religious, tribal and political factions within Iraq, the official said.
For example, although ethnic Kurds are the majority in large parts of northern Iraq, there are also large numbers of Kurds within Baghdad.
Some Arab countries also want to play a role in the stability operation in Iraq but are reluctant to send troops because of political, religious and ethnic considerations, the official said.
Countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council have offered to donate money for the effort.
Rumsfeld also met Friday with King Abdullah of Jordan, an American ally in the Middle East.
Defense officials say Jordan provided key help in the Iraq war, acting as a staging area for U.S. special operations raids into western Iraq to prevent missiles from being fired at Jordan or Israel.
Rumsfeld did not say what the two discussed.
Police intercepted 33 African immigrants who came ashore Thursday in southern Spain aboard an overcrowded boat, including several pregnant women and other travelers suffering from hypothermia, police said.
Spanish media showed dramatic photos of police struggling to carry women on the verge of fainting after they were found wandering through Tarifa, Spain's windswept southern tip, Civil Guard officials told Spanish news agencies.
Police also arrested two Moroccan men suspected of trafficking in human beings and navigating the Zodiac boat across from Africa, Efe said.
Twenty-six of the would-be immigrants were from sub-Saharan Africa, six of them women, and the other seven were males from North African countries, police said.
Red Cross officials administered first aid on the scene, and the detainees were taken to a processing center for the government to begin expulsion proceedings.
Tens of thousands of destitute Africans try to enter Spain illegally each year by crossing the perilous Strait of Gibraltar to reach the southern mainland or by sailing northwest to the Canary Islands out in the Atlantic.
They seek a better life doing menial jobs in Spain or hope to use the country as a stepping stone to other points in Europe.
Most are caught trying to sneak in and some die in the attempt.
North Korea's military may have fired a laser at a U.S. helicopter in March, a U.S. official said Tuesday, as the communist state ditched its last legal obligation to keep itself free of nuclear weapons.
The aircraft's censors detected the unknown type of laser while it was flying near the heavily fortified frontier that divides the two Koreas, the U.S. military official said on condition of anonymity.
No one was injured and no equipment was damaged in the incident.
North Korea said Tuesday that a 1992 agreement with South Korea not to deploy nuclear arms on the Korean Peninsula was nullified, accusing the United States of derailing the deal.
The inter-Korean declaration on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was thus reduced to a dead document due to the U.S. vicious hostile policy to stifle the DPRK with nukes,'' said the North's official news agency, KCNA.
DPRK stands for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's official name.
The announcement came as U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun were about to meet Wednesday in Washington to discuss North Korea's nuclear programs.
The accord was the last remaining legal obligation under which North Korea was banned from developing atomic arms.
In January this year, North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a global accord to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
A U.S. military official in Seoul, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday North Korea is believed to have exported US$580 million worth of missiles to Iran, Pakistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Yemen and the United Arab Emirates in 2001.
In December, a shipment of North Korean missiles bound for Yemen was briefly stopped in the Arabian Sea.
North Korea accuses the United States of planning to attack the communist country, which Bush has branded part of an ``axis of evil'' along with Iran and Iraq.
It also revived its claim that the U.S. military keeps many nuclear weapons in South Korea, turning the country into ``the biggest nuclear advance base in the Far East.''
Washington says it wants to use dialogue to resolve the nuclear crisis, although U.S. officials have not ruled out a military option.
North Korea ``keenly felt that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would only remain as a daydream unless the U.S. drops its hostile policy toward the DPRK,'' KCNA said.
It said the U.S. invasion of Iraq taught it that ``a war can be averted and the sovereignty of the country and the security of the nation can be protected only when a country has ... a strong military deterrent force capable of decisively repelling any attack to be made by any types of sophisticated weapons.''
In New York, South Korean President Roh said he will never condone North Korea's nuclear development, but Seoul and Washington agree the nuclear standoff with the North must be solved peacefully ``by all means.''
It is incumbent upon Pyongyang to give up its nuclear project and come forward as a responsible member of the international community,'' he said.
When the North takes this route, the Republic of Korea and the international community will extend the necessary support and cooperation.''
Julianne Lee, a Roh spokeswoman, said the North Korean statement might be a negotiating ploy in the wake of talks last month with U.S. officials in Beijing.
During the talks in Beijing, U.S. officials said North Korea claimed it already possesses nuclear weapons, and that it had reprocessed 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods -- a move that could yield several atomic bombs within months.
North Korea offered to drop its nuclear and missile programs in exchange for security guarantees and economic aid, according to U.S. officials.
The nuclear crisis flared in October, when Washington said North Korea admitted having a secret nuclear program in violation of a 1994 treaty with Washington.
Australia will keep open its embassy in Saudi Arabia despite decisions by the United States, Britain and Germany to close their diplomatic outposts in the country amid growing terror fears.
On the eve of a visit to the Saudi capital, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said security at the Australian embassy appeared to be sufficient.
We have quite a substantial security presence at the Australian embassy in Riyadh and the ambassador thinks that that security presence is sufficient,'' Downer told the Australian Broadcasting Corp.
Australia is one of Washington's staunchest allies.
Canberra sent troops to fight in the war on terror in Afghanistan and alongside U.S. and British forces in Iraq.
New Zealand also has no immediate plans to close its Saudi embassy.
On Tuesday, Saudi security officials said three suspected al-Qaida militants were arrested in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, in sweeps following the near-simultaneous suicide attacks on three residential compounds on the outskirts of Riyadh on May 12.
The bombings killed 34 people -- including nine attackers, eight Americans and two Britons -- and wounded nearly 200 others.
Earlier this week, Saudi and U.S. officials said they had new intelligence pointing to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group possibly launching fresh attacks in the United States or against American interests overseas.
Israeli troops shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and critically injured two children, ages 7 and 9, during conflicts in the West Bank that erupted Tuesday as Israeli and Palestinian leaders moved toward talks on a new Mideast peace plan.
The shootings -- which the Israeli army said came in response to attacks by Palestinians throwing stones and molotov cocktails -- came a day after Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that Israel's occupation in the West Bank must end, stunning both dovish opponents and hardline allies.
Sharon's remarks and Israel's conditional acceptance Sunday of the so-called ``road map'' to peace were expected to jump-start stalled Mideast peace negotiations.
A summit between Sharon and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, had been planned for Wednesday but was postponed, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials, who blamed each other for the delay.
The officials said no new date had been set; Israel Radio said the meeting would take place Thursday.
A three-way summit with U.S. President George W. Bush could take place as early as next week, possibly in Jordan.
Israeli soldiers shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and wounded a 7-year-old boy after opening fire at stone throwers in the Tulkarem refugee camp in the West Bank on Tuesday, Palestinian hospital officials said.
The army said troops fired, and hit a boy, after a Palestinian youth threw a molotov cocktail.
In a village near the West Bank city of Nablus on Tuesday, Israeli troops opened fire on youths throwing stones, hitting a 9-year-old Palestinian boy in the head and critically wounding him, and hitting two 12-year-old boys in the legs, lightly wounding them, Palestinian hospital officials said.
A 10-year-old boy was struck in the leg by a rubber bullet, but was not seriously hurt, the officials said.
Military sources said troops were trying to break up stone-throwing protests, but did not use live fire.
The army was not aware of any injuries.
Five Palestinian children, a Palestinian woman and a police officer, were injured Tuesday after accidentally detonating explosives in the West Bank city of Hebron, Palestinian security officials said.
The children found the explosives in two plastic bags under a tree and accidentally detonated the first bag.
After a police officer arrived, the second bag exploded, seriously injuring him, the officials said.
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager Monday and another surrendered after infiltrating from Gaza, the military said.
They were unarmed and apparently looking for work.
In a village near the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was killed during an exchange of gunfire.
Also Monday, Israeli soldiers fired on four diplomatic vehicles in the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, diplomats said.
There were no injuries from the incident.
Peter Lundberg, an official from the Swedish Consulate in Jerusalem, said that two bullets hit the windshield of the Swiss Consulate's armored car, and that small-arms fire also was directed at other cars from Sweden, Denmark and the European Union.
Military sources said the Israeli army had established roadblocks at the entrance to Beit Hanoun to prevent Palestinians militants from leaving the area.
The sources said shots had been fired in the air when vehicles tried to skirt the roadblocks.
The violence erupted after Sharon endured withering criticism Monday from members of his own Likud Party over his Cabinet's acceptance of the U.S.-backed ``road map'' peace plan.
Sharon indicated a 180-degree turnaround after decades of warning that an Israeli withdrawal from even small parts of the West Bank could endanger Israel's existence.
Skeptics, however, wondered whether Sharon's conversion was a shrewd effort to deflect U.S. pressure in the hopes the road map would fail before Israel had to make tough concessions.
To keep 3.5 million people under occupation is bad for us and them,'' Sharon said in remarks broadcast on Israel Radio.
The term occupation is anathema to the Israeli right, which believes Israel has a legitimate claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip for religious and security reasons.
Palestinians and their dovish Israeli allies routinely use the word ``occupation'' when demanding that Israel leave the West Bank and Gaza and dismantle Jewish settlements.
Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and Gaza for a state.
On Sunday, Sharon's Cabinet conditionally approved the ``road map,'' a three-phase plan that begins with a halt to violence and envisages a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 2005.
Sharon told party critics he was committed to finding a political solution to the conflict, including an Israeli withdrawal from West Bank population centers.
This can't continue endlessly.
Do you want to remain forever in Ramallah, Jenin, Nablus?'' he asked.
Likud lawmakers charged that the road map was slanted in favor of the Palestinians and endangers Israel.
In his remarks Monday, Sharon left himself an out.
What will happen if Palestinian terror continues?
Nothing.
Nothing will happen.
The Palestinians will get nothing,'' he said.
Critics have said Sharon's long-held condition that all violence must stop before peace moves is unrealistic and guarantees failure of any peace initiative, including the road map, thus releasing him from the necessity of following through on his remarks.
Liberal lawmaker Yossi Sarid argued Sharon was trying to keep his intentions murky to persuade the U.S. government that he was committed to the plan, while his hawkish allies could assume he was just making a tactical move to end U.S. pressure.
Ariel Sharon likes to walk in the fog, because then no one knows where he is headed,'' Sarid wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily.
A retired navy officer facing life in prison over a failed effort to protect Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, told a court Thursday he felt remorse for his part in the 1999 plot.
I have a guilty conscience, Andonis Naxakis said during his two-hour testimony.
Naxakis is one of 13 people on trial for bringing the fugitive guerrilla leader to Greece.
Ocalan was moved by the government to its embassy compound in Kenya, where he was captured by Turkish commandos.
The retired Greek officer said he had been trying to get Ocalan to The Netherlands, home to a large Kurdish community.
He claimed he had been manipulated by the government.
I believe I was unwittingly used as bait for its disgraceful plan ... an organized move by the government to hand Ocalan over to Turkey,'' he said.
Naxakis and two of Ocalan's Kurdish associates are being tried on criminal charges of endangering national security.
Ocalan, being tried in absentia, was indicted for entering the country illegally, a misdemeanor.
Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, is serving a life sentence in Turkey for leading a 15-year insurgency against the country that left 37,000 people dead.
He is being tried in Greece in absentia.
Five of the U.S. sailors killed in the attack on the destroyer "USS Cole" are now home.
A military transport plane brought the flag-draped caskets from Germany where they were taken yesterday.
An honor guard removed them to a hangar at Dover Air Force base for a short memorial service for close family members.
They requested privacy for today's proceedings.
The bodies of two other sailors recovered from the ship are in Bahrain and will be returned later.
More than 100 FBI agents and explosives experts are expected in Yemen by the end of the weekend to investigate the suspected terrorist attack.
A team of special Naval engineers will work on recovering the bodies of ten sailors listed as missing and presumed dead.
Officials suspect a suicide bombing caused the blast, which tore a 40 foot hole in the hull of the destroyer.
Pentagon sources say an early examination finds 400 to 500 pounds of explosives may have been used.
There are no confirmed suspects yet, but officials say several Middle East groups are expected to be investigated.
The summit is coinciding with more unrest in several areas of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Hundreds of stone-throwing Palestinians stormed the Israeli-controlled section of Hebron, breaking a curfew imposed since the outbreak of the unrest last month.
Witnesses said Israeli soldiers fired live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, wounding at least seven people.
Thousands of Palestinian demonstrators marched in the area to protest against a renewal of contacts with Israel.
The nuclear submarine "Kursk" could become a permanent underwater grave for 118 Russian sailors.
Russia's top admiral says he may scrap efforts to recover the bodies if experts decide the mission would endanger deep sea divers.
All those aboard the "Kursk" were killed in August when the sub sank after being damaged by an explosion in the Barents Sea.
The cause of the disaster has not been determined.
An international salvage team is due to arrive at the scene of the accident tomorrow.
A U.S. businessman accused of spying says he has no chance of getting a fair trial in Russia.
Edmond Pope appeared in a Moscow courtroom today and read from a 40-page statement, denying charges of espionage, and protesting his treatment by the court.
Russian prosecutors say Pope tried to buy secret blueprints for a high-speed torpedo used by the Russian military.
Pope's supporters say he was seeking information on an old Russian underwater propulsion system.
President Clinton says he's willing to meet separately with Israeli and Palestinian leaders if both sides work to end the Mideast violence.
The president proposed the talks in a call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Mr. Clinton says he wants to see Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak abide by promises to end the bloodshed made at last week's emergency summit in Egypt.
A White House spokesman says Arafat is reviewing the offer.
Meanwhile, some 30,000 anti-Israeli protesters clashed with police in Jordan.
Demonstrators from across the country traveled to a west bank border town to call for the return of Palestinian refugees.
The number of police and protesters who were injured is still not known.
A note from a doomed sailor raises new questions about Russian efforts to save the crew of the submarine "Kursk."
The note was found in the pocket of a sailor whose body was recovered yesterday.
It was written after explosions sent the "Kursk" to the bottom of the sea.
It confirms 23 sailors survived.
For days, teams tried without success to open the escape hatch.
It was pried open by divers from Norway who found no one left alive.
Relatives have complained some sailors might have been rescued had Russia sought help immediately.
The widow of the sailor who wrote the note wept today as she was interviewed on Russian television.
I came here after I heard the official announcement on TV.
I love him very much.
I want to see him and I want to read his letter.
While the cause of the "Kursk" disaster remains unknown, Russian officials say the sub may have collided with a World War II mine or there may have been an internal malfunction.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres is expected to meet soon with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in an attempt to quell Mideast violence.
The meeting comes amid fresh clashes between the two sides.
Fighting broke out in Ramallah, Hebron and at the border crossings between Israel and Gaza today.
Three Palestinians were killed, at least 49 people wounded.
Overnight, Israeli gunships attacked three headquarters of Fatah, the political party allied with Arafat.
Israel calls it a response to Palestinian guerrilla warfare.
Arafat is condemning the attacks.
A verdict handed down three years ago today brought debate from both sides of the Atlantic.
In this edition of "Headliners," Bob Glascoff has the story of British au pair Louise Woodward and finds out what she's doing now.
October 1997.
Louise Woodward is sentenced to life in prison on charges she murdered an infant boy.
Woodward, then a 19-year-old au pair from Britain, was accused of killing 8-month-old Matthew Eappen by shaking him and slamming his head.
The case attracted widespread attention in England, where many thought she was innocent.
Woodward had been living with the Eappen family taking care of their two young sons.
Despite receiving a life sentence, her charges were reduced two weeks later from second-degree murder to manslaughter.
She was sentenced to time served and released.
Woodward returned to Britain in 1998 to another controversy.
Her parents were accused of defrauding her defense fund.
They went on trial this year and were acquitted.
Today, Woodward is studying to be a lawyer.
With Headliners, I'm Bob Glascoff.
An Oregon girl missing for 15 years has been reunited with her family.
The mother says her daughter was taken by her baby-sitter when she was just 3 years old.
The alleged abduction of Fallon Marie Hodges was never reported to police.
Authorities say the girl contacted law enforcement in Nevada last Friday saying she needed help in finding her identity.
She says she was abandoned by her surrogate parents, one of whom was her alleged kidnapper.
The name Father Frost may not be familiar to you, but to Russian children, Christmas wouldn't be the same without him.
Denise Dillon reports.
Santa Claus visited the northern Russian city of Veliki Ustyug to meet with his Russian counterpart, Father Frost.
It's believed Veliki Ustyug, which is about 600 miles north of Moscow, is the hometown of Father Frost, one of the main characters of Russian Christmas stories.
The 50,000 residents here have a deep respect for the history of their town, and it seemed as though all of them bundled up against the cold and came out to welcome Santa and Father Frost as they rode into the town's central square on a horse-drawn carriage.
People who live here hope this is the beginning of a long tradition that others around the world will celebrate with them.
A new great holiday came to our town.
This is how new traditions are generated.
And I hope this holiday will become nationwide soon.
As for us, we are always happy to see guests in our town.
When Santa arrived, the temperature was 16 degrees below 0, but that did not stop the Russian folk singers and dancers from performing traditional dances.
Later, Santa visited Father Frost's home, where they met with all the good little boys and girls.
When you believe in Santa Claus, then you are good people and good children.
Then your dreams can come true.
Children around the world believe that Santa Claus or Father Frost will bring them good luck, and presents, for the holidays.
Denise Dillon, Headline News.
A woman whose husband was killed in last month's crash of a Singapore Airlines plane has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the carrier.
Investigators say the Boeing 747 hit a barrier and a crane on the runway and exploded during takeoff.
82 people were killed.
The lawsuit filed in Federal court says negligence and reckless misconduct contributed to the crash.
A spokesman for Singapore Airlines declined to comment.
The Navy now says it will cost about $240 million to get the "USS Cole" up and running again.
Officials originally estimated it would cost $150 million to repair the gaping hole in the ship's midsection.
But a Naval official says that does not include the cost of replacing equipment and weapons damaged in the attack carried out by suicide bombers in Yemen.
The ship is scheduled to arrive in Mississippi in about ten days.
Russia's Presidential Clemency Commission is advising president Vladimir Putin to release convicted American spy Edmund Pope on humanitarian grounds.
A top Putin aide says Pope could be home by Christmas.
However, according to Russian law, Putin cannot issue a pardon any earlier than December.
Pope was convicted of espionage Wednesday in Moscow and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He suffers from a rare form of bone cancer and has asked Putin to let him return to the U.S. to receive medical care.
Ousted Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is heading to exile in Saudi Arabia.
He left Pakistan yesterday, after being pardoned by the president.
Sharif had been in jail since his ouster in a military coup last year.
He was convicted of kidnapping and corruption.
Saudi Arabia offered to accept Sharif and more than a dozen members of his family on humanitarian grounds.
Will winter storms affect the weather where you are?
Let's check the "Headline News" extended forecast.
Another round of winter weather is expected today as another major winter storm will be spreading from the southern plains through the Ohio River valley and eventually into the Northeast.
Cities like Springfield, Missouri, back towards St. Louis and Indianapolis and Columbus will pick up the heaviest snowfall.
Over six inches is expected by tomorrow morning, and then moving in towards the northeast, where we expect even some ice in some of the suburbs to the northwestern areas of New York City.
Here's a look at the forecast weather map -- slow pressure is moving in towards the Ohio River valley and eventually into the northeast by late tomorrow.
It's moving rather quickly, too, so the precipitation will be ending through the Midwest as high pressure builds in tomorrow.
Look for the snow to continue into New England tomorrow.
Friday, rain into the southeast.
There will be some showers in the Northwest.
Temperature-wise, it remains cold over the northern tier.
It begins to warm up over parts of the south.
A wet day on Saturday over much of the East and Southeast.
There'll be some snows, though, back into the Midwest.
Forecast highs are still on the cold side.
And as we check out Sunday's weather, snow through the great lakes and rain into the Northeast with forecast highs mainly in the over the northeastern U.S.
I'm meteorologist Dave Hennen.
For more weather information, login to cnn.com.
The damaged "USS Cole" comes home today.
It's due to arrive in Pascagoula, Mississippi, this morning.
The destroyer was christened there five years ago.
Repairs are expected to cost about $240 million.
Yemeni and U.S. authorities are still investigating the October bombing.
17 sailors were killed.
Yemen's Prime Minister says at least three Yemenis will go on trial next month in connection with the attack.
They're suspected of belonging to an international terrorist network.
Edmund Pope, the U.S. businessman convicted of espionage in Russia, is offering the first details of his eight-month stay in a Moscow prison.
Speaking from a U.S. military hospital in Germany, Pope says he was treated well by prison guards, but suffered from mental anguish and depression.
Today, Pope is undergoing an extensive medical checkup, to see if there is any recurrence of bone cancer.
He's undergoing tests for skin cancer as well.
He will wait for the results before returning home to the U.S.
Pope was pardoned yesterday by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
U.S. and Yemeni officials have released a photo of one of the suicide bombers killed in the attack on the "USS Cole" in the port of Aden October.
17 U.S. sailors were killed and 39 others hurt.
The officials say Yemeni national Hussan Saeed Awad Al-Khamri was described by a boy as having launched the boat used in the attack.
Six possible suspects are still being held in Yemen pending a trial that could start as early as next month.
Investigators say they're still looking for other key suspects.
Many people in North America will be able to experience a partial solar eclipse tomorrow.
But scientists say it won't block much Christmas sunlight in most places.
As always, eclipse fans are being warned not to look directly at the Sun because that can cause permanent eye damage.
The eclipse will occur at around 12 P.M. Eastern Time.
The best view will be in the Northeast.
Welcome all to my new site.
I've decided to incorporate my old work blog into a general blog, the work diary is up on the right titled "my work diary".
EFF YEAH!
BUSH WON!
OK then.
My next thought.
The world is a much better place now that the terrorist Yassar Arafat is dead.
Here is a good one minute video on his great legacy Here.
This guy was one of the early innovators of terrorism in this century and he is protrayed by the Main Stream Media (MSM for short) as a "freedom fighter".
Because of him millions of palestinians chose "jihad" over peace with Isreal.
He innovated suicide bombers and plane hijacking plus he embezzelled hundreds of millions of dollars from aid funds.
and this guy got a nobel peace prize, what a disgrace.
UPDATE 1 - Drudge is reporting that Arafat has been skimming 2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories.
MAG: Arafat Skimmed $2 Million a Month From the Gas Trade Sun Nov 14 2004 09:53:40 ETNew York.
Last year auditors discovered Arafat was guilty of skimming $2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories, TIME reports.
In August 2002 international donors forced Arafat to sign over his investments to the Palestine Investment Fund, which was audited by U.S. accountants and managed by Palestinian Finance Minister Salam Fayyad, a former International Monetary Fund official.
After scouring corporations throughout the Arab world and bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg, the auditors identified $800 million, which has been made a part of the Palestinian Authority's official budget.
It's the most successful financial reform in the Arab world, -- Jim Prince, president of the Los Angeles-based Democracy Council and head of the audit team, tells TIME.
People close to Fayyad's investigation told TIME of Arafat's skimming from the gas trade.
Breaking the gasoline smuggling and corruption boosted the Palestinian Authority's official treasury by $10 million a month and cut gas prices for ordinary Palestinians.
"Arafat's death means his followers may never know just how much more they may be owed, "writes TIME's Matt Rees in "Where's Arafat's Money?"
In the mid-1990s, Arafat controlled a financial empire worth at least $3 billion.
By the time of his death, he was down to his last $1 billion, according to Israeli-intelligence estimates.
Arafat wife Suha's outburst that his successors were "trying to bury [him] alive" came after she learned that Arafat had signed over at least $800 million to the government of the Palestinian Authority two years ago, TIME reports.
Top Palestinian officials say Suha wants the new chief of the P.L.O., Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei to give her money out of the P.L.O.'s party coffers.
But a senior P.L.O. official tells TIME, "they'll pay her a pension, and that's it."
People familiar with Arafat's finances say the Palestinian leader sent Suha $200,000 a month out of the Palestinian Authority's budget for the Office of the President.
French authorities are investigating transfers of $15 million from Swiss banks to Paris accounts in Suha's name at the Arab Bank and at BNP Paribas Bank, a French bank, TIME reports.
Senior Palestinian security officials tell TIME that Arafat also shipped money to the gunmen of the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Developing.
Sure sounds like a Nobel Prize winner to me.
Time is reporting today that a al-Qaeda operative was captured and is spitting out that they have plans in the work to smuggle nukes into the US from Mexico, see the article here.
Thank god Bush is still our president, although I strongly disagree with him on his new immigration policy.
This policy would just make it easier for the enemy to get within our borders.
Just reported from AP that Condi Rice has been chosen by President Bush to become the new Secretary of State for his second term.
I agree with his choice and think she will make a much better Secretary then Powell did.
Her views are much more in step with the President then Powell, although he was a true soldier and carried the message.
Plus, any lady who works out to Led Zeppelin and is a Football nut is alright in my book.
Thanks to Captain Ed for bringing this up.
Apparently James Baker, former Secretary of State and current envoy for the Bush Administration, has asked the Isreali government to release a scumbag terrorist to promote "peace".
There is now ... in an Israeli prison a man named Marwan Barghouti, who is one of the young guard of Palestinians, and if the Palestinians are going to make this work against the really hard-line elements, the Islamists and some of the people of Hamas, they're going to have to have a coalition of the young guard and the old guard.
Gotta say that this shocked me, I've always thought Mr. Baker was a upstanding guy but this is just plain good old fashioned bullcrap.
Here are some of the fine achievements of the terrorist Marwan Barghouti Marwan Barghouti (born June 6, 1958) is a Palestinian leader from the West Bank and a leader of the Fatah movement that forms the backbone of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
On June 6, 2004, he was sentenced to five life sentences for five murders of Israeli civilians and 40 years imprisonment for attempted murders in terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians.
Barghouti was one of the major leaders of the First Intifada in 1987, leading Palestinians in a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of the West Bank.
During the uprising, he was arrested by Israel and deported to Jordan, where he stayed for seven years until he was permitted to return under the terms of the Oslo Accords in 1994.
In 1996, he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council, in which he advocated peace with Israel, sometimes coming in conflict with Yasser Arafat.
The formal position occupied by Barghouti was the General Secretary of Fatah in the West Bank.
By the summer of 2000, Barghouti and Arafat had grown increasingly at odds with each other, with Barghouti accusing Arafat's administration of corruption and his security services of human rights violations, and Arafat was planning to fire him shortly.
However, as the Second Intifada began, Barghouti became increasingly popular as a leader of the Fatah Tanzim militia.
This was perhaps due to the transformation of Tanzim into an organization more resembling militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, responsible for dozens of civilian deaths in drive-by shootings.
Under Barghouti, the Tanzim has also carried out suicide bombings in Israel under the name al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.
What is he thinking?
Release a known terrorist to run the PLO and that will bring about peace, give me a effin break.
Chris Matthews, that idiot talking head over at MSNBC, said yesterday about the terrorists we fought in Fallujah "a rival, I mean they're not bad guys especially, just people who just disagree with us".
this just amazes me, the complete idiocy of this waste of human sperm.
These are the same terrorists blowing up families, chopping off heads of civilians, and the complete disregard for any human life and they just disagree with us?
Tell that to the family of Margaret Hassan, the school teacher who was brutally tortured and then slaughtered by these same guys, they ain't so bad are they Chris Matthews?
This women who was known for her 30 years of work in Iraq, distributing medicine, food and supplies to Iraqis suffering under the sanctions of the 1990s.
British officials say they believe Hassan was a blindfolded woman seen being shot in the head by a hooded militant on a video obtained but not aired by the Arab television station Al-Jazeera.
She would be the first foreign woman to die in the wave of kidnappings in Iraq.
No group has claimed responsibility.
On Sunday, Marines found the mutilated body of what they believe was a Western woman on a street in Fallujah during the U.S. assault on the insurgent stronghold.
The body, clothed in what appeared to be a purple, velour dress, was wrapped in a blanket, with a blood-soaked black cloth nearby.
As of Tuesday night, the U.S. command said the body had not been identified.
These are the reasons that none of these mothereffers should ever see the light of day.
they need to be all lined up and shot.
Torturing this poor women for what?
WHAT?
And we should treat them as enemy soldiers under the Geneva Convention.
Last I remember the convention applies to countries that signed the document and the two countries must have standing armies with uniforms.
the Iraqi military is at our side, the terrorists are not.
Since when are terrorists soldiers?
They are lower then dogs.
Finally there is this written by a student of Mrs. Hassan She was my English teacher.
In the memory of my teacher and a fellow aid worker colleague Mrs. M. Hassan.
Mrs. Hassan was my English teacher in The British Council in Baghdad in Al-Wazirya district, I remember her years ago with her Irish accent telling me it's not Important how many words I must learn but the pronunciation of the words I already knew must be perfected.
Mrs. Hassan speak s perfect Arabic and she has a heart of gold, she's been killed by (men in pajamas), turn Iraq upside down and find them.
The Marines will find them, and when they do they shall die.
2Slick pointed me to a article at In Iraq For 365.
This is a great blog and I encourage you all to read it regularly.
On Sunday he wrote of two Iraqi soldiers who didn't see us as conquerors but as allies when the Mosul bombing occurred.
The suicide bomb sprayed bb-like fragments throughout the Marez dining facility.
One piece of shrapnel sliced through the femoral artery of a U.S. soldier and his only chance for survival was in the hands of these two Iraqis.
Recalling the medical classes they'd received from the special forces, the Iraqis reacted calmly, fastening a belt above the wound, creating a tourniquet, which stopped the gushing stream of red.
They moved the soldier to a MEDVAC vehicle via two-man litter carry.
After they hoisted the soldier in the truck, the two Iraqis -- one an officer, the other an NCO -- ran back to the facility and began treating the other wounded without regard for their safety.
When the dust settled and the mess tent had been evacuated, everybody who could talk was questioned about their health.
When the medics came to the two Iraqis, the ING soldiers only wanted to know how everybody else was.
When asked why did they do it, they simply stated, "this was our duty; we are a team, and we take care of each other."
Even the Americans.
No matter what the MSM tries to tell you, there are Iraqi's who will help the allies, who will fight alongside them and put their lives at risk to make sure Democracy succeeds in their country.
This brings to mind a speech Prime Minister Tony Blair gave recently while visiting Iraq.
When I meet the people working alongside the United Nations--Iraqis in fear of their life every day, because they are trying to bring freedom and democracy to their people--when I see their courage and their determination and know that they speak for the vast majority of people in Iraq who want that democracy and freedom, then I know that we are doing the right thing.
And I will also say this to you: There are people dying in Iraq, but the reason people are dying is because of the terrorism and the intimidation and the people who are deliberately killing anyone trying to make this country better.
Now what should our response be as an international community?
Our response should be to stand alongside the democrats--the people who've got the courage to see this thing through--and help them see it through.
I've got no doubt at all that that is the right thing for us to do.
Sometimes when I see some of the reporting of what's happening in Iraq in the rest of the world, I just feel that people should understand how precious what has been created here is.
And those people from that electoral commission that I described as the heroes of the new Iraq--every day ... a lot of them aren't living in the Green Zone, they've got to travel in from outside.
They do not know at any point in time whether they're going to be subject to brutality or intimidation, even death, and yet they carry on doing it.
Now what a magnificent example of the human spirit--that's the side we should be on.
This recent news story is troubling in many different ways.
When I first heard of the story I figured it was some wackjob playing with a new toy but now we find out there have been 7 incidents since Christmas from the West to East coast.
The FBI, concerned that terrorists could use lasers as weapons, is investigating why laser beams were directed into the cockpits of seven airplanes in flight since Christmas.
Laser beams can temporarily blind or disorient pilots and possibly cause a plane to crash.
The FBI is looking into two incidents in Colorado Springs, Colo., and one each in Cleveland, Washington, Houston, Teterboro, N.J., and Medford, Ore., according to federal and local law enforcement and transportation officials, some of whom spoke only on condition of anonymity.
A federal law enforcement official, who declined to be identified by name, said Thursday there is no evidence of a plot or terrorist activity.
But pilots are troubled by the incidents, and the FBI earlier this month warned of the possibility that terrorists might use the devices as weapons.
It's not some kid,said Paul Rancatore, a pilot who serves as deputy chairman of the security committee for the Allied Pilots Association.
It's too organized.
Loren Thompson, who teaches military technology at Georgetown University, called it a "rather worrisome development,though he said experts would be more puzzled than alarmed.
What we're talking about is a fairly powerful visible light laser that has the ability to lock onto a fast-moving aircraft Thompson said.
That's not the sort of thing you pick up at a military surplus store.
Thompson said a piece of equipment that could do the things the FBI suspects would be "fairly expensive and fairly sophisticated."
It sounds like an organized effort to cause airline accidents, Thompson said.
Michelle Malkin has a post about this today where some outlets have stopped selling lasers.
Lots of people think that these indeed might be loonies playing with new Christmas toys but I disagree.
These are incidents where the Airplanes were tracked , some as high as 8500 feet.
To track a fast moving plane at that altitude would not be some toy you can get from the local wal-mart.
In my opinion this is quite alarming.
This Isn't Writing, It's Typing has a great post out with a ton of info, some of it quite scary A more frightening scenario is that terrorists may have obtained a Chinese-produced ZM-87 laser blinder which is specifically designed to blind eyesight.
The Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo--which launched the infamous Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995--was discovered to have experimented with the use of lasers as weapons.
According to The Asian Pacific Post, "Cult members apparently obtained laser design information from Russian institutes they visited and built a laser weapon mounted on a truck.
They had planned to use the laser against Tokyo policemen, but the plan failed when the laser malfunctioned during the testing stage."
PoliticAlex also has some info on this story also.
I found the following report that was presented to Congress recently about the shoulder launched missle threat to airliners, which this might very well be a precursor to: Recent events have focused attention on the threat that terrorists with shoulder fired surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), referred to as Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), pose to commercial airliners.
Most believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate this threat.
Instead, a menu of options may be considered, including installing infrared (IR) countermeasures on aircraft; modifying flight operations and air traffic control procedures; improving airport and regional security; and strengthening missile non-proliferation efforts.
Equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems can protect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground-based security measures are unavailable or infeasible to implement.
However, this option has a relatively high cost, between $1 million and $3 million per aircraft, and the time needed for implementation does not allow for immediate response to the existing terrorist threat.
Procedural improvements such as specific flight crew training, altering air traffic procedures to minimize exposure to the threat, and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasures and could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks.
However, these techniques by themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protect U.S. airliners flying to and from foreign airports.
Legislation introduced in the 108th Congress (H.R. 580, S. 311) calls for the installation of missile defense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service.
While this legislation is still under consideration, Homeland Security appropriations designated $60 million in FY2004 and $61 million in FY2005 to fund a program to develop and test prototype missile countermeasure systems for commercial aircraft based on existing military technology.
It is anticipated that at the conclusion of this program, in January 2006, the Department of Homeland Security will be able to provide a detailed analysis of the suitability of such systems for use to protect commercial passenger aircraft.
American Future has a link up to a article written in yesterdays Houston Chronicle.
It describes how the European Governments look to be changing their tune in regards to President Bush.
Why you ask?
But there is arguably more to this sea change than just a grumpy acceptance of the status quo.
From a European perspective, three things are making it easier to warm to the Bush White House.
One is the death of Yasser Arafat.
No issue divides Europe and the United States more keenly than the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
For the last few years, Europeans have criticized Bush for failing to put enough pressure on Israel to get out of the occupied territories and for refusing to deal with Arafat.
That another reason why I respect Bush so much, his refusal to acknowledge that windbag terrorist Arafat.
May he rot in hell.
But since Arafat's death, Europeans and Americans have been able to find common ground: supporting Ariel Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza, putting pressure on Israel to let the Palestinians hold elections and, covertly, backing Mahmoud Abbas to become the next Palestinian leader.
A second reason is Europe's growing worries about Islamic terrorism.
The murder in November of Theo van Gogh, a provocative Dutch filmmaker, at the hands of an Islamic militant has been called Europe's 9/11.
Though the two events are obviously not fully comparable, it is certainly true that American conservatives, such as Francis Fukuyama and Bernard Lewis, have found a wider audience recently for the idea that radical Islam is inimical to European traditions of tolerance.
You mean those radical muslims can be kinda nasty sometimes?
Get outta here.
Keep doing business like the cowards in Spain and they will more then likely have their very own 9/11 to cry about.
The third force is the reappearance, albeit in a milder form, of the threat that kept the trans-Atlantic alliance together for half a century.
The Russian bear is growling again.
The Ukrainian election complete with its KGB-style poisoning of the opposition leader and heavy-handed electoral fraud -- has reminded European diplomats of Vladimir V. Putin's determination to control his "near abroad."
They should be very worried about this item, I believe Putin is slowly sliding Russia back to what it once was.
Hopefully our Government isn't asleep at the wheel with this situation either.
There is a personal edge to all this.
Just as the snooty continentals eventually came to admire the gormless Hollywood actor, there is a grudging willingness to rethink some prejudices about the inarticulate Texan.
Many European leaders once swallowed the Michael Moore version of history: that Bush was an ignorant interloper who stole the White House.
His thumping re-election, however, shows that he represents a large body of conservative American opinion.
In short, Europeans are getting used to the idea that it is not Bush who is the exception, but the U.S. itself that is exceptional --- and that if they want to deal with this exceptional superpower they need to humor it rather than rile it.
Strangely enough, this has been Tony Blair's strategy all along; it is rapidly becoming the Continent's strategy, too.
Couldn't of ended that article any better myself.
Get used to it France, we ain't going nowhere.
Nicolae Mischie, authoritarian leader of a district organization of the main opposition party, has been jailed.
Romania voted in the last December, ousting the so-called socialist party PSD (Social-Democratic Party).
PSD managed to keep a stronghold in poor rural areas, with the help of people like Mischie.
They combined blackmail, using their right of decision regarding the public funds for local leaders opposing PSD, and strong seduction of the uneducated masses, in a marvelous way.
E.g., Mischie, who talks like an idiot, got a PhD in history.
His paper was on a political personality of the 19th century and Mischie bought the house where his paper's subject lived.
Maybe he tried to invest in his paper, maybe he believed sincerely in his admiration for the poor innocent dead guy and his ability of earning PhDs, but using a big car and living in a big house are signs for the masses that the man is an invaluable and irreplaceable leader.
Another misleading sign was his position as a University professor - he was teaching mostly at private universities, which are still ways to buy diplomas here in Romania.
Local leaders did their jobs, but national leaders, pressuring TV stations to lie, associating with old communist ex-president Ion Iliescu, failed to win in big cities.
PSD is building a strategy for the 4 years to come and they are going to elect a leader.
It is known that communist leaders die in office (as judges of the U.S. Supreme Court) and Ion Iliescu won't be different.
All the leaders that expressed different points of view will be excluded from the party, that's the untold truth that Romanian media seem to hide or not conceive yet.
Mischie was right to criticize the national leaders, because PSD got a good share in the elections in his area.
But Mischie was wrong, because he did that while in vacation in Switzerland, where you can't go if you earn 20K $ a year.
The new power had nothing to do, but let the policemen do what they should be doing years ago.
Iliescu and Nastase, ex-president and ex-prime minister, are now left only with the leadership of the party and holding this illusory authority.
If Mischie wouldn't take his chance on them, he would still be free, with the help of the weak and weakening strings Iliescu might still pull.
The interim government declared a state of emergency in Iraq excluding the Kurdish region for 60 days, according to the National Security Law introduced last August which states that emergency laws can be declared in the country for a period no more than 60 days provided a serious threat against Iraqi national security is recognised by the interim government.
Obviously, this is a necessary step that should have been taken at least two months ago.
Suicide bombings and guerrilla attacks carried out by insurgents and foreign terrorists based around Baghdad have escalated to alarming levels particularly during Ramadan.
Deputy governor of Diyala along with several council members from Ba'quba were ambushed and killed in Latifiya south of Baghdad, an area which has supposedly been 'cleared' from insurgents a couple of weeks ago.
Four suicide attacks in Samarra, also a recently 'liberated' area, against National Guard units and the governorate building.
Zarqawi's group claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Three police stations in Haditha, a small town west of Ramadi, were assaulted by groups of insurgents.
Some 30 policemen were captured, tied up and executed in cold blood against the walls following a confrontation which lasted two hours.
Zarqawi's group, again, claiming responsibility.
A full-scale military operation against Fallujah, which is apparently underway already, seems to be the government's 'final solution'.
I'm not optimistic to the outcome, especially when significant civilian casualties are unavoidable.
Note, that I'm not suggesting a peaceful or political solution would work either in these areas.
Insurgents west of Baghdad have quite obstinately made it clear that nothing but full control of the country, or at least the Anbar governorate, will satisfy them.
They have refused to participate in the political process, they have repeatedly announced their intentions to boycott the elections and to disrupt them in other areas, and they do not recognise the government or any other authority in the country beside themselves.
The demands of the Fallujah negotiants from the government weeks ago were obscene and they clearly reflect the overt sectarianism and regionalism of the armed groups in the area.
The demands were not released to the Iraqi public at the time for unkown reasons but they have leaked out days ago.
Here are just a few of them:
A clear timetable for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces.
fair enough.
Immediate withdrawal of US and Iraqi security forces from the Anbar governorate and the handover of security responsibilities to former army officers from Anbar.
The appointment of ministers from the Anbar governorate to the ministries of Interior, Defense, Oil and Finance.
The removal of certain officials (most of them from Shi'ite Islamic parties such as Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari) from governmental positions.
The complete return of Ba'athists, army officers, Republican Guards, Mukhabarat, intelligence and security personnel to their former positions.
The removal of Shi'ite Edhan (call for prayers) from official television and radio programs.
Incomes of Shi'ite sacred shrines should be returned under the control of the Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.
These last two demands have been allegedly added by Sheikh Harith Al-Dhari (head of the Association of Muslim Scholars) and are said to have been a major reason behind the failure of negotiations with the government.
Iraqis here in the south were shocked to hear of these demands and sectarian tensions are on the rise.
It scares me to see the reaction of people around me whenever Fallujah is mentioned.
The director of a primary health care clinic was remarking the other day that "Fallujah should be burnt upon its residents and then razed to the ground.
They are the sons of Mu'awiya, may Allah curse them all."
Sidenote: Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan was the governor of Syria during the 7th century and he fought Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (Muhammed's son-in-law) over the Caliphate after the assassination of Caliph Othman.
He became the first Ummayid Caliph and two decades later, under the Caliphate of his son Yazid, Imam Hussein bin Ali (grandson of Muhammed) was killed by his armies at present day Karbala.
Someone hushed the director and pointed out to him that I'm Sunni.
He was a bit embarrassed and tried to explain that he was referring to Wahhabis and foreign fighters.
It was a bit uncomfortable and I could feel that people were giving me furtive glances.
Refugees have been pouring out of Fallujah over the last few days into Baghdad and the surrounding areas.
The military operation will undoubtly aggravate the humanitarian situation inside the city since there are definitely thousands of families with no place to go.
Refugees in Baghdad have confirmed the rumours that the 'Mujahideen' are forcing men from 15-50 years old to stay and that they were threatened with execution if they refuse to carry arms in defense of the town.
Majlis Shura Al-Mujahideen (The Mujahideen Advisory Council) are in control of Fallujah and they have distributed a statement inviting Arab and foreign (including American) media reporters to enter the town and cover the battles.
The statement carried the insignia of Zarqawi's group Qa'idat Al-Jihad.
Everyone is closely watching what the next few days will bring, hoping the violence doesn't spread to the streets of Baghdad or other areas.
I'm still holed up in Basrah but I'll try to be on the road as soon as possible.
Gazprom, the main Russian gas company, has been denied a $10 billion credit line due to the political situation in Russia.
The company intended to use the cash to pay an artificially low price for Yukos assets (hence that firm's bankruptcy filing a few days ago -- you know it's bad when you have to use US courts to protect your own assets from appropriation by your home country).
It's starting to look like Putin's goal is a sort of judicial nationalization -- taking control of key assets through court, rather than executive, fiat.
But the markets have caught on, and Russia may be deprived of the capital it needs to grow.
Don't expect any of the Russian leadership to reverse course; given the current trends there, they'll just Blame the West when their screwy plan screws them over.
One of the rules of thumb that has guided my (limited) business career from the beginning is that China is never as lucrative as it looks.
This assumption is based on about 150 years of economic history, including several booms in interest and investment in China.
Their biggest problem: There's usually a 200-to-1 ratio of Nearly Starving Peasant Laborers to Absurdly Well-Off Government Employees.
And now it's an iffier 100-to-1, since there are also rich private sector employees and the labor force isn't quite so expendable.
What they've been missing for years was the real driver behind any consumer economy: Consumers.
Specifically, they didn't have a real middle class.
That's changed in the last twenty years, as increasing social mobility and a burst in foreign demand has finally made China a genuine, rather than theoretical, contender.
And they've even supplied proof of their economic viability, announcing that they've beaten Japan for exports to the US.
If only I'd figured this out in early 2002, when their stock market was by some stretch of the imagination cheap.
I dunno if you want anything to do with their stock market.
For one, its perforance last year was pretty dismal.
More importantly, its a structural nuthouse.
Unfortunately, minority shareholder rights are virtually non-existent, and excluding the dodgy financial statements listed on the exchange, lots of times companies are more interested in generating cash from an IPO then actually bothering with shareholder value.
This Economist article (not sure if registration is required, sorry):
Finally, the Shanghai Composite on July, 1997 was trading at 1189.76.
As of January 27, 2005 it's sitting at 1225.89.
That's an annualized return of roughly 0.4%.
The 5 year return is even worse
You haven't missed much :).
Apparently Yuganskneftegaz, which was sold to an independent buyer who turned out to be an apparatus of the state (yes, the same state that 1) forced Yukos to do the auction, and 2) ran the auction, not that 3) this is suspicious or anything), and which was then being bought with foreign assistance, is not being bought with foreign assistance.
As of this morning, at least.
Anyway, it looks like they're denying Chinese involvement to avoid a lawsuit , which is funny -- you'd think they might know someone in the Russian judiciary who could help them out.
Apparently Carly made a lot of journalistic enemies during her six hears at HP.
Not only was the catalyst for her fall from grace a Fortune article by Carol Loomis (who as far as I know is immortal -- she's been writing for Fortune since 1954), but the anti-Carly brigades are out in full force at Salon.com.
This is getting a little harsh; she might have messed up at HP (I refuse to call it by the new name, for now), but she wasn't actively trying to destroy a great company and wreck the shareholders.
It just, well, happened.
So, right, Carly was a bad manager, and she eventually got what she deserved, but she isn't evil incarnate.
I was hoping for another incredibly drawn-out story, full of antitrust drama, lurking potential bidders, and contentious confrontations between executives.
And then MCI just sort of accepted a Verizon deal without really bothering anybody.
Clearly, their corporate culture has suffered -- 25 years ago, MCI was the brawling upstart in the telecom industry, constantly challenging AT&T's right to exist, much less to monopolize the phone system.
And now, they're swallowed by Just Another Monolith.
I expected better -- meaner and tougher, sure, but better nonetheless.
Read this report on the U.S.-Russia Technology Symposium.
It's a great summary of the paradoxes of the Russian economy: They have a huge untapped supply of valuable IT labor, but their IT exports are only a tenth of their military exports (and only a thirtieth of India's IT exports).
They develop lots of new technology, but nobody can tell who owns what.
And, of course, their securities laws and property rights are even flimsier than China's -- after the Putin administration mugged Yukos on the grounds that it was too attractive a target to leave alone, they lost a lot of trust.
Still, they have an unbelieveable amount of untapped potential.
The following a grim story out of Russia tonight where there's proof some of the sailors on board that Russian nuclear submarine the Kursk initially survived the explosion that sank the sub, only to be trapped later.
One of the sailors wrote a letter during those terrible final hours.
Today, 10 weeks after a mysterious accident sent the Kursk to the bottom of the Barents sea, a grisly discovery.
In the pocket of one of the crew, a handwritten note, dying words of a sailor trapped alive in the sunken sub.
He is this lieutenant captain, seen here three years ago aboard the Kursk.
His last words tell a chilling tail -- tale of a desperate but future ill attempt to escape.
It now appears 23 survived -- survived the initial explosion.
The 23 frantically scrambled to the rear of the sub.
They find the escape hatch flooded and seal themselves in compartment nine.
Realizing he will die, he begins to write.
He addressed the letter to his wife, Olga.
He is my dear, dear beloved.
I want to see him again, read his letter.
The chilling account raises new questions and criticisms of the Russian navy, which waited several days before attempting to launch any rescue mission
But navy officials here at the Pentagon say any rescue attempt would have failed, that there really was no hope for the 23 survivors.
It's believed they would have frozen to death in hours, long before they ran out of air.
That may be little consolation for the families.
NBC News correspondent Jim Miklaszweski, the pentagon.
Program note here.
Coming up tonight at 10:00 p.m. eastern, a closer look at the Kursk and similar disasters that have taken place at sea.
An investigation is under way into a fatal airliner accident in Mexico last night.
It happened as the DC-9 was trying to land during a rainstorm.
The Aero Mexico jet skidded off a runway and into a neighborhood in the town of Reynosa, about 50 miles from Brownsville, Texas.
Four people on the ground were killed.
But the 83 people aboard the plane escaped with only scrapes and bruises.
We have been here so many times before the threat of a wider war in the middle east.
There has been impressive progress but a lasting past remains elusive.
President Clinton today considered flying to the middle east for an emergency summit meeting, but he backed away.
How did it come to this so swiftly?
Here's Andrea Mitchell.
Reporter:
The president returns to Washington today, hoping to salvage something from eight years of Middle East diplomacy.
What went wrong?
To many peace seemed so close at Camp David in July.
How did it all fall apart?
First, Palestinian resentment.
On the street, people see no economic rewards, aren't any better off after years of peace talks, and they resent the U.S. for blaming Arafat when the summit collapses while praising Israel's prime minister Barak.
The prime minister moved forward more from his initial position than chairman Arafat, particularly surrounding the questions of Jerusalem.
It's quite clear the Palestinians do not accept the various proposals put forward to divide Jerusalem.
Reporter:
Arafat appears weak, and radical groups like Hamas gain strength.
A weakened Arafat emboldens a great deal of forces that does not want peace.
Reporter:
Second, Israeli frustration.
Many Israelis feel Barak goes too far by offering Arafat partial control of the holy sites, gets nothing in return.
I think Barak was very forthcoming at Camp David.
The intransigence or failure of Arafat to come forward with any counterproposal I think frustrated the prime minister and frustrated the Israelis.
Reporter:
Finally, the summit raises false hopes, is not well prepared by Washington.
The U.S. rushes ahead, eager for a breakthrough before the end of Clinton's term.
Other Arab leaders like Mubarak of Egypt and Fahd of Saudi Arabia are not sold on the deal, tell Arafat to hold out.
If a concerted effort was put together to consult with these people and bring them on board, then probably Arafat would have been able to cut a deal.
I think the United States did not prepare adequately for Camp David.
They should have been much more careful in the preparation and more assured of getting some kind of an agreement.
Reporter:
With most observers saying that Camp David only made a bad situation worse, questions tonight as to why the president would even consider going to another summit with even less hope of a solution.
Washington.
With the presidential debate tonight in St. Louis, the candidates will be in the middle of a hot political issue that's not getting much national attention -- what to do about the Missouri river, the fabled waterway of Lewis and Clark that joins the Mississippi in St. Louis.
It's a far different river now than it once was, and the question is -- should it be allowed to return to its true form?
NBC's national correspondent is Jim Avila.
Reporter:
The wide Missouri, pioneers called it  -- too thick to drink, too thin to plow.
A shallow, slow moving, swampy river that birds and fish loved in its natural state.
The ebb and flow in a river like the Missouri provides the basis for life itself.
Reporter:
But the Missouri is no longer wild, tamed by dams and dredging.
Now a shipping highway the government says endangers the very existence of three critical river species -- the 100 million-year-old Pallid Sturgeon, the shore-wading the Least Tern.
The Missouri's natural rhythm destroyed, say the experts, by six dams in a system from north central Montana to the Mississippi River.
A transformation turning the meandering river into essentially a deep water ditch.
Without providing the higher flow in the spring and the lower flow in the summer that Missouri river species are adapted to, they're going to disappear.
Today's sturgeon can't reproduce in the river any more, only in man-made hatcheries and sand bars, homes to wading birds are being washed away by deep water.
So to save fish and birds and improve recreational use in up-river states, where tourism is a major source of income, the government wants to alter 50 years of steady water flow.
Re-creating the original river by releasing more water in spring, less in summer -- fighting words for downriver farmers and barge operators.
Try explaining that times have changed, nonsense to the people who live along the Missouri river and don't want to go back to the spring floods.
Reporter:
It's about the water and who controls it.
The Missouri, second longest river in the country.
7 states, 2,500 miles long and now according to conservationists, second on the list of rivers in danger.
Farmers say it's the planting season that's in danger if the Missouri isn't controlled in spring.
And barge owners say two dry months in the summer will ruin business.
What this proposal does is double the cost of operation on the Missouri river and will cause those companies to move off the river.
Reporter:
But according to figures from the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the four grain producing states along the Missouri, producing nearly 5 billion bushels of grain each year, ship very little by barge now.
16.7 million bushels.
That's .3%.
The barge companies do not own the Missouri river.
The flood plain farmers do not own the Missouri river.
Everybody owns it.
We have to find a way to share the Missouri.
Reporter
And say environmentalists save three threatened  species and a leisure economy dependent upon a wide, untamed Missouri.
Jim Avila, NBC news, Bismarck, North Dakota.
Grief engulfed Austria, one day after a fire in a cable car filled with skiers killed at least 155 people.
It happened inside a tunnel high in the Austrian Alps.
Here's NBC's Ron Allen.
As helicopters carried emergency crews to the scene of the disaster nearly 100 Americans headed home to military bases in Germany, without eight members of their ski clubs who never came back.
Major Drew Stathis and his 8-year-old daughter say they might have been trapped, but they were just five minutes behind the group.
In the Army you kind of expect, prepare yourself.
But not on a family vacation.
That's where the tragedy is.
Lieutenant Mike Coe got tired of waiting for a train and left a family of four Americans who died, standing in line.
It is horrifying what happened to them.
And it is horrifying how close I was to -- I mean, I guess I'm a good, impatient American who did not want to wait in line.
Today this Alpine resort town came to an abrupt halt as more than 150 victims were all but positively identified.
Friends and relatives who'd been waiting and hoping were taken to a private memorial service.
Up the mountain the usually packed ski areas were completely deserted.
Investigators still haven't figured out what caused this disaster.
Several eyewitnesses have told them they saw flames coming from the train as it headed up the mountain, before it entered the tunnel.
One official here said, by the time the driver noticed the fire, it already was too late.
The main concern now is to remove and identify the victims.
These Americans ended a holiday weekend burdened by a deep sense of loss.
Nobody is looking forward to the long bus ride with our friends missing.
It's going to be hard.
Hard for this entire nation mourning the worst disaster here that anyone can remember.
Ron Allen, NBC News, Kaprun, Austria.
It's now been almost two months since the worst terror attack on a U.S. Navy ship, the destroyer "Cole," and tonight, sources tell NBC News that an American Muslim militant, a prime suspect in planning the attack, is now in custody in Jordan.
His name is Jaed Hijazi, and NBC News has learned he's got direct high-level ties to the terrorist Osama bin Laden.
He's reportedly told U.S. investigators of additional plans, to attack U.S. military aircraft in the Persian Gulf and Middle East.
I can't for the life of me figure out why anyone would invest in the airline industry.
Please, someone tell me a group companies facing more serious problems than the legacy airline carriers (Delta, US Airways, Continental, American, Northwestern, United).
High fuel costs, insane pension obligations, and a highly paid, specialized workforce.
To this list of woes, we add a whole slew of competitors with much lower cost structures.
I admit I've already taken advantage of the lower fares announced last week to book a business trip but these next few years are not going to be pretty for some of these companies.
Unfortunately, the pain is not limited to these companies.
Pittsburgh, one of US Airway's hubs, built up its airport complete with a sprawling retail complex in the terminal.
Now US Airways has reduced flights out of Pittsburgh by 28% since January of 2004 and is in real danger of folding completely.
These shiny new airports are usually financed by long-term bonds that still have to paid off.
but not by the airlines.
This is an industry looking for a sustainable strategy.
Southwest and JetBlue were the only major airlines to earn a profit in 2004 but who knows what will be happening in another five years.
So I will thankfully accept the low fares, bemoan the loss of food on flights, and watch these companies parade in and out of bankruptcy.
BusinessWeek Online has some other commentary about the fare cuts here and about US Airway's woes here.
Thousands of people in Botswana have lined up to view the remains of an African man whose body was stuffed and exhibited in a Spanish museum for nearly a century.
The man was returned to Africa after complaints from the UN and other organizations that displaying his body was racist and offensive.
The man will be buried at a funeral service tomorrow.
You are listening to BBC news for The World.
I'm Gregor Craigy.
An apparent attack on a US warship has left at least six American sailors dead and about 35 injured.
The explosion came as the guided-missile destroyer USS Cole was refueling at a port in Yemen.
NPR's Chad Pergram reports.
Both the White House and the Pentagon said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism.
President Clinton immediately whisked to the region investigative teams from the FBI, the Pentagon and the State Department.
The attack comes as US forces in the Middle East have been placed on a heightened state of alert after days of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians.
Defense Secretary William Cohen said the US would continue to protect its interests around the globe.
No one should doubt our resolve to remain a force for peace and for stability and no one should assume that they can force us to retreat.
No one should assume they can attack us with impunity.
The Cole had just arrived in the harbor for a refueling stop.
Officials say men aboard this small boat had been assisting the Cole with mooring lines just before the blast.
Chad Pergram ,NPR News, Washington.
The bodies of 2 more American sailors were recovered today from the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden.
US officials are on the scene and continuing their investigations into the explosion that killed 17 crewmembers on board the Cole last Thursday.
Today there are reports that police in Aden questioned the landlord of an apartment where bomb-making equipment was found and whose occupants may have carried out the suicide attack against the warship.
Also today at the Cole's homeport in Norfolk, Virginia, President Clinton led a memorial service for those who died aboard the Cole.
The service began with the playing of the national anthem.
The President asked all Americans to take a moment to thank the men and women of the military.
Today we honor our finest young people, fallen soldiers who rose to freedom's challenge.
We mourn their loss, celebrate their lives, and offer the love and prayers of a grateful nation to their families.
Mr. Clinton mentioned the name of each of the 17 victims and praised the courage and character of the men and women who serve in the armed forces.
And he delivered this clear message for those who carry out attacks on members of US military.
For those who attacked them we say you will not found the safe harbor.
We will find you and justice will prevail.
America will not stop standing guard for peace, or freedom, or stability in the Middle East and around the world.
At the end of the somber ceremony, President Clinton asked everyone to join him in a moment of silence followed by the Navy Hymn and Taps.
Britain's going to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea.
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made the announcement on his arrival in the South Korean capital, Seoul.
But Cook says establishing ties with North Korea doesn't mean London will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in the country.
We have diplomatic relations around the world, we are going to find out who is a human rights breaker, we have very deep and very real concerns.
The advantage of having diplomatic relations is that we can have a direct dialogue in which we can raise these concerns and express our deep anxiety for the need of improvement in them.
Cook says the South Korean leadership is keen on international help in bringing its northern neighbor in from the cold.
Britain said today that it is normalizing relations with North Korea.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair called the decision a historic breakthrough.
It comes  just days ahead of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's trip to the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
Britain's foreign minister Robin Cook, who made the announcement, said opening diplomatic links could help ease tensions between North and South Korea, technically the two countries are still at war.
Germany said today that it also plans to normalize relations with Pyongyang,
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation in Washington DC.
Mr. Harrison, Britain, Italy, prior to that Australia, the Philippines now and apparently Germany all bringing the most secretive state into the fold.
How about the United States, where does that leave us?
Well, I think President Clinton will get some good political cover.
From what Britain has done, if he goes to Pyongyang, as is now being discussed, Secretary Albright is going to go, the number two man in North Korea was in Washington last week.
Things are moving, what's particularly important is that Britain has not attached any conditions.
The United States has imposed a number of conditions on normalizing with North Korea.
The most important of them is that it renounce its missile program and its nuclear weapons program, or rather reach agreements on limiting and possibly ending them both, and as of now we are not in a position to normalize relations with North Korea just like that.
We will want negotiations on some of these contested issues.
Well let me ask you more about America's interest now and Britain's move, I mean how do you make sense of what's happening, especially if Britain was involved in a war with North Korea as obviously was the United States, and until recently North Korea was considered by the US a rogue nation.
It is still shrouded in secrecy, as we said, including in its nuclear weapons program.
Are you trusting of these newly forced alliances, do you consider what Britain is doing either reckless or ill advanced?
No.
And I don't think it is an alliance really, it is just conducting diplomatic interchange with them.
It is not even clear how soon Britain is going to have a mission in Pyongyang.
And so I think it certainly isn't reckless to establish diplomatic relations, and I think indeed it is a very healthy thing because the present leadership of Kim Jong Il, son of the late General You  , he has been trying to open up to the outside world.
He doesn't want to reform his internal economic system or political controls.
On the other hand he needs western capital, he needs supportive international agencies to deal with tremendous economic problems that North Korea has had since the end of the cold war, when they lost their Russian and Chinese economic subsidies.
So that trend of North Korea opening up to the outside, it seems to be, it should be encouraged.
So then as North Korea opens up more and more, what are the possible repercussions down the road for the nearly 40,000 American troops who remain in South Korea?
Well, North Korea's attitude has been that if the United States and North Korea are friends and the North Koreans don't feel threatened, they wont object to some US forces remaining in the Korean peninsula in a new role.
That is to say, if they are going to be there as allies of South Korea against North Korea, then the North Koreans don't want them there, they will keep putting on the pressure for the US to get the forces out.
The North Koreans are certainly not going to end their missile program, if the US continues to maintain some aspects of its military presence in the Korean peninsula such as its aircraft.
So I think they are going to ask for military concessions in order to do what we want them to do regarding missiles, but I think that the assumption that this improvement in ties between North and South and between North Korea and other countries is going to lead to the complete withdrawal of the US from Korea in the near future, certainly I don't think at all, are.
Mr. Harrison, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Thank you.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation, speaking to us from Washington DC.
Missouri residents remembered Governor Mel Carnahan today.
He died Monday night in a plane crash while campaigning for the Senate.
Thousands attended a ceremony at the Missouri State capital.
President and Mrs. Clinton were among the mourners.
A former US Army sergeant has pleaded guilty in New York to conspiracy in the bombings of American Embassies in east Africa in 1998.
Ali Mohammed, a native of Egypt, has admitted to five charges of conspiring with a Saudi born dissident Osama bin Laden to attack US targets in the Middle-East.
More than 220 people died in the blasts.
Libyan leader Colonel Gadaffi can be prosecuted in France over the bombing of a French airliner in which a 170 people were killed.
That's the ruling of a court in Paris.
It rejected an appeal that as a serving head of state Gadaffi should be immune from prosecution.
The lawyer representing the victims' families Francoise Rudetski is hailing the decision as a victory.
The victory today is that any people who committed an act of terrorism should know that he can be pursued and could be arrested and there is no immunity for anyone, any leaders in the world.
Relatives of those killed after an explosion on board the plane over Niger in 1989, brought the case against the Libyan leader.
Six Libyans including Colonel Gadaffi's brother-in-law have already been tried in their absence.
This is The World.
I am Lisa Mullins.
Putting aside a half century of acrimony, Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright met today with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang.
Part of the purpose of this historic visit is to lay the groundwork for a possible trip to North Korea by President Clinton before his term ends.
Albright's visit to Pyongyang is the first by a high level US official since the communist state was established in 1948.
Kong Dan Oh is a Korean expert who has just written a book called 'North Korea through the Looking Glass'.
She is now in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
We know that the visit is making big news there in Seoul.
Can you tell us what is being reported about the meeting between the two sides from the South Korean perspective?
Well, when I look at about six major daily newspapers, basically the top news was Madeleine Albright meeting with the Chairman Kim Jong Il.
And basically that indeed this is a very historic event, and some kind of euphoria and very positive upbeat feeling.
But at the same time, the reports are basically telling the importance of this meeting that is that they have to talk about the very critical security matter issues such as missile and nuke.
But nonetheless, the meeting was very crucial, so I think all in all, it was a very positive beginning.
And how much of South Korea as you mentioned is bordering on euphoria, get this new relationship with Pyongyang and at the visit by Secretary of State Albright?
I know that you have taken a more cautious approach, and I wonder if that applies to Secretary Albright's visit in general?
Do you believe that the US is doing the right thing?
Or is perhaps the United States, in your view, moving too quickly to try and patch things up?
I am kind of taking a slightly cautious approach, simply because if Madam Albright is there, without the really thinking down the road some kind of strategic consequences of this meeting, simply because we are interested in seeing this gentleman and maybe before our term is over, let me meet you.
I think that kind of simple approach to be wrong.
But if she understands importance of this meeting and further brings up substance of issue to be resolved between the North Korea and the United States, I think that is very desirable.
What you're saying is that you feel that the part of the impetus of the North is influenced by the fact that the United States has a presidential election just a couple of weeks away.
I think that is a definitely correct statement, provided that maybe the Republican candidate, Mr. Bush to be elected.
North Korea was very, very scared that Mr. Bush would take a much more hawkish and conservative approach.
So before this Clinton administration comes to be over, they would like to lay down the ground rules and kind of create some kind of positive improvement to deal with the United States.
And obviously one of the most important agendas for tomorrow is to discuss the possibilities of President Clinton's next visit sometime in November.
I know that you have concerns about how a potential visit by President Clinton might be portrayed within North Korea itself.
Why is that a concern of yours?
My fundamental belief is that Kim Jong Il has not really made his mind or made a decision to push the reforms, even in the session of 1978 Chinese reform that was taken by Deng Xiaoping.
He is now gambling, he is trying, but he has not really changed his manner or his policy whatsoever.
His economy and his society's politics is really getting in real deep trouble.
He has to show his power and he's been telling his people that I am the true leader and the world is afraid of us.
All the imperialist capitalist is afraid of us.
That we are the center of the universe.
Without the North Korea, the globe is not existing.
Let me show you that I am the true leader and they will come to our country to pay visit, courtesy visit for me.
And so now Putin visited, President Kim visited, Jiang Zemin will visit next year and the President Clinton will go.
Domestic consumption of this visit will be immense, without changing any policy toward the freedom of proliferation  .
Is it really possible with the kind of close watch that the outside world is now going to be invited to give to North Korea, that Kim Jong Il could actually not change a thing in terms of his policies, internally or externally?
I am exactly wondering like you, and I think that there is a maybe the possibility actually is going up.
So I don't object really any of these like U.K. normalization, you know.
I don't have any objection.
But only when the leaders and the elite, the policy elite, is aware of that what they are bringing and what they are negotiating and how they would like to have an impact on North Korean society, I think that's the important key question.
Kong Dan Oh is the author of the book 'North Korea through the Looking Glass', speaking to us from Seoul, South Korea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World service, PRI and WGBH in Boston.
I'm Lisa Mullins.
American spy suspect Edmund Pope took the stand again today in a Moscow courtroom.
The former naval intelligence officer faces charges of stealing secret designs for a high-speed Russian torpedo system.
Pope denies acting illegally and President Clinton and Secretary Of State Madeleine Albright have called for his release on health grounds but Russian prosecutors are pressing ahead as The World's Nenad Sebek reports from Moscow.
The trial was suspended earlier in the week because of Pope's poor health.
Pope has a history of bone cancer but a doctor working for the FSB, the Russian security service, pronounced Pope fit enough to stand trial today.
The proceedings are held behind closed doors and Pope's lawyer said today that his client is still very weak and that he wants a new interpreter, says the current one works for the same agency that has charged Pope.
The lawyer Pavel Astakhov says his client is innocent when it comes to espionage.
The whole case as Astakhov claims is an exercise in politics.
This is the first time in almost 40 years that a foreign national is being tried for espionage.
It's quite blatant.
Officials from the security force, which used to be the KGB, are openly boasting about taking an American citizen to court.
Way back in 1961 US military pilot Garry Powers was tried and sentenced but later on exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.
But Powers was caught red-handed.
His U2 spy plane was brought down by Soviet Air Defenses.
Pope was arrested as he was trying to purchase blue prints for what he says is a 10-year-old underwater propulsion system or as the prosecutions claims ultra modern, secret Russian torpedoes.
Former Russian Army Intelligence Officer, Vitaly Schlykov says Pope could easily have been a victim of the Russian obsession with secrets.
We have of course a secrecy culture in this country for decades and decades and reminisce of it are coming to the surface in this case.
The laws on secrecy are still intact from the times of the Soviet Union.
Guilty or not, Pope is being held under a very harsh regime in the Moscow Lefortovo prison where his wife Sherry visited him last week.
We took two pictures of our grandson and they won't let him keep the pictures and I took a coat and gloves and they wouldn't let him have those, but we did get to embrace and we did get to talk about our family for one hour.
Prison rules say that an inmate can only receive approved gifts on the first and third Thursday in a month.
And Sherry Pope's short-term visa didn't enable her to stay that long.
She says she even appealed to the Russian President.
Ed's mother and I both wrote letters to President to ask him to please take into consideration that Ed is 54 years old and that we want him home.
Military intelligence analyst Vitaly Schlykov says Putin is probably caught between a rock and a hard place when it comes to the American's trail.
I'm sure that it came unexpected for Putin.
He wouldn't have approved on a case like this because politically it is very harmful but he came from the ranks of the FSB himself.
He has to pretend that he is sticking to his guns in this case.
In Schlykov's opinion, Pope is likely to get convicted.
But he believes that immediately after the sentencing Pope is likely to be pardoned by Moscow.
US Congressman John Peterson, who has been championing Pope's cause, says he fears that might be too late for Pope.
The main thing we have been pushing for months is health care.
Earlier we had asked for an American doctor to see him.
When they continued to say no then we found Russian doctors.
The judge delayed the trial for a day and a half so we could furnish her with a list of doctors and hospitals in Moscow and after we provided that information she said no.
Pope's lawyer Pavel Astakhov says that what the authorities here call medical care is a joke.
In Pope's case medical control means everyday testing for his suspected cancer.
What they do here is take his blood pressure and temperature.
The very least they could do is take blood tests and bone marrow tests.
The court has even rejected our demand for medical expertise to establish whether he is fit to stand trial.
As Strakovs says he does not trust the Judge Nina Barkova at all.
He says she has rejected almost every one of his 40 objections and suggestions during the trail so far.
Strakovs is now trying to arrange for fresh witnesses for his defense of Edmund Pope, but is not hopeful that even that will be granted by the court.
For The World, this is Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
In Moscow, today there was a dramatic plot twist in a real life courtroom drama.
A lawyer for US spy suspect, Edmond Pope said that the main prosecution witness has retracted his testimony.
According to Pope's attorney the witness said he provided the evidence under pressure from the Russian Secret Service.
Ever since Pope was arrested 7 months ago, the American businessmen has denied charges that he was gathering secret information on a new high-speed Russian torpedo.
The World's Nenad Sebek is following the trial in Moscow.
Nenad, go back and tell us just how we got here?
Who is Edwin Pope and why is he on trial in Russia?
Well, Edwin Pope is a retired American intelligence officer and that's sort of speaks against him when it comes to the Russian public and certainly the Russian court.
He has claimed that he is now just an innocent businessman, who was dealing with the Russian businesses orbit in the Defense Industry.
He has, however, claimed that he is only dealing with the de-classified military material and that when it comes to these torpedoes that we are talking about, that he was buying an underwater propulsion system, which is 10-years old.
What the Russian prosecution is claiming is that Pope was actually after ultramodern secret high-speed Russian torpedoes.
Okay, so tell us what happened in the trial this morning and bring in this professor from one of Moscow's elite universities who is a key witness?
The big news of today was that Pope's attorney distributed to journalists this morning a letter, which he says was written by Anatoly Babkin, who is a Professor at Moscow's Bauman Technical Institute, who until now was considered to be the main witness for the prosecution.
He says that he gave that evidence under pressure having had a grave heart condition proceeding a heart attack.
Professor Babkin says that he never actually met Edwin Pope face to face, nor has he given him any kind of sensitive information, therefore, his former testimony is to be considered as not corresponding to reality says this letter by Professor Babkin.
However, the court today again, this is what we were told by Pope's lawyer, has decided not to accept this change in testimony.
The court said that Professor Babkin had ample opportunities to appear in the court.
What is not clear at this moment is that whether it will allow a personal appearance by Professor Babkin, in which he could sort of say what he said in this letter.
Then I would assume that the Professor is still ailing.
I mean, is he able to take the stand, is there any indication that he will be asked to?
No he is not able to take the stand at the moment.
He is recuperating after a heart attack, but Pope's lawyer has said that court session could actually take place in the apartment of Professor Babkin.
We still have to wait and see whether the court will accept that.
So how important is this evidence?
I mean how pivotal a figure is he?
Is he providing evidence of no one else can?
Well.
From what we have heard so far, this is supposed to be like a key witness, a very important witness, but then the first reaction came from the FSB, the Federal Security Bureau, which is the former KGB, they are the ones who are prosecuting Pope.
Their spokesman said today that their evidence is far from being based only on Babkin's testimony.
He said that FSB has evidence given by other witnesses and experts, as well as, written documents and videos.
This is not, what would know as a standards of American style trial certainly, first of all of the proceedings are conducted entirely in secret.
What is the defense attorney for Edmond Pope saying about the conduct in the trial?
Well.
He is very unhappy with the main judge.
Pope is not being tried by Jury.
He has been tried by panel of judges headed by judge Nina Barkova and what we have heard from the defense attorney Pavel Astakhov is that she has rejected almost every single one of over 40 objections and suggestions that he has so far submitted during the case.
He is very unhappy with the way she has been conducting the whole case and also with the fact that she has denied Edmund Pope the proper medical attention that he has asked for.
And what has like that it happened should Edmond Pope get convicted.
Would he actually serve time?
Well.
Most of the people I have spoken here believe that that would not be the case, that since the case is already being brought to court that he is most likely to get convicted, but will then afterwards be pardoned either by the president or the parliament, and then sent back home for reasons of ill health, but most people here do expect a conviction at the end of this trial.
It was Nenad Sebek in Moscow talking to us about the espionage trial in Moscow of American Edmond Pope.
Thank you very much Nenad.
You are welcome Lisa.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
A court in Moscow has convicted American businessman Edmund Pope of spying and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Pope, a retired naval officer from Pennsylvania, was accused of illegally obtaining secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
He argued throughout the case that the information he obtained was already available to the public.
The White House denounced the court action calling it unjustified and wrong.
Pope's wife and his lawyers have also called for his release on health grounds, saying that he suffers from a rare form of bone cancer, which may have returned during his eight months in a Russian prison.
Corey Flintoff, NPR News, Washington.
A court in Moscow today sentenced American businessman Edmund Pope to 20 years in jail.
Pope, a former naval officer, was found guilty of collecting secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and he had a powerful ally.
President Clinton had appealed for clemency for Pope on health grounds and had brought the case up with Russian President Vladimir Putin, but Mr. Clinton's pleas apparently fell on deaf ears.
The Russian court today handed down the maximum sentence.
Still, The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow says that Pope has not yet exhausted his legal options.
He has got 7 days to appeal this particular sentence.
There is also the possibility of asking for a presidential pardon, Pope has actually indeed already done that.
It's just that his wife said that she has not heard neither from the President nor his office.
His health is a big issue as well, isn't it?
Yes, Pope has been suffering from a rare bone cancer in the past and he has been consistently complaining about his health ever since last Spring when he was taken in to the Lefortovo prison.
The thing is that he has not been allowed any access to American doctors and even to Russian doctors of his own choosing.
He has been examined by the Russian doctors in the Lefortovo prison but they have just said that his complaints are unfounded and that it might be a case of severe rheumatism or something like that.
They are not sort of allowing the possibility of his bone cancer reoccurring.
One of the things that has been said here is that Mr. Pope may have run afoul of a changing mood in Russia about what kind of military and security information might be made available to the west for business purposes.
That his intentions were innocent to begin with, but the times changed and what he did began to look more and more like espionage.
That is certainly a possibility but we don't know actually precisely because we don't even know what the initial charges are.
The whole trial was held behind closed doors and the details of the accusations against Pope have never been fully released.
We know that the prosecution claimed that he was trying to purchase secret plans for a top-secret high-speed Russian torpedo.
He was claiming all the time, and his lawyer was saying that he was sort of trying to purchase plans that had been actually out in the open but we do not know the precise legals of that.
That is one of the possibilities.
Another thing which is mentioned here is that Pope simply ran afoul of a new trend in Russia which was a trend where the security services were getting the upper hand where they were trying to prove that they are actually doing their job, that they are catching spies, that they are getting convictions.
We have, for example, today's reaction by General Alexander Zdanovich, he is the head of the FSB support programs.
He was very, very brief in his comments after the sentencing.
He said that the court has said that FSB investigators have acted correctly and in accordance with the law and he says, "Russia has its secrets, we will do our best to protect them".
Maybe Pope simply ran afoul of such attempts by the Russian Security Services to show that they are doing their job.
Putin, on the one hand, is certainly trying to show that he is in charge and that no one from the outside is going to get away with anything.
By the same token though he is not eager to run afoul of the United States and the State Department is very upset.
Is there any possibility that Mr. Putin might consider a pardon?
I would say there is a very strong possibility of that.
We know that President Clinton has spoken to Vladimir Putin about this when they met last time, and certainly the Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has brought up the issue a number of times, as has the State Department indeed with the Russian Foreign Ministry.
In a curious way the sentencing of Edmund Pope might be the beginning of an end of this ordeal for him.
Because now that there is a sentence, once the judiciary process is started, once the FSB brought him to trial everybody here expected that the trial will end and that it will end with a conviction.
But now that this judicial process is over there is a very, very strong likelihood, that's the feeling here in Moscow that President Vladimir Putin might pardon Edmund Pope.
There is a good reason for that, his ill health.
So it would be a nice humanitarian gesture and a way of offering a friendly hand to the west and to the United States in particular.
The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
Thanks a lot, Nenad.
You are welcome.
The United States is hoping that Russia's President Vladimir Putin will follow the advice of his special commission and pardon Edmund Pope.
This week the American businessman began serving a 20-year prison sentence in Moscow after being convicted of spying.
Specifically Russian prosecutors charged that Pope had stolen secrets relating to a high-speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and Washington backed him up.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha, did the Presidential Pardons Commission give any reason for their decision?
It gave several reasons.
I am not sure if those were the formal reasons but members of the commission have been interviewed today by various outlets and they say that they were afraid of the spy mania rising in Russia, that they thought it was really suspicious to them that Edmund Pope was sentenced to the maximum term, whereas the article of the law had 10 to 20 years.
He was sentenced to 20, even though according to the members of the Pardon Commission, the evidence that was presented by the prosecution was far from quotient.
They also said this court did not give the lawyers for the defense due procedure.
The court listened to the defense much less than it did to the prosecution.
Much of this sounds less like a pardon and more like a criticism of the number of institutions that Mr. Putin also has to show some support of,  including his court system and his police and his prosecutors.
How is he going to respond to this and when?
I don't think anybody knows and I don't think anybody will know until President Putin has responded.
It is his decision.
According to the Russian law the Pardon Commission, after it has made its decision, sends it to the President and it's up to him whether to endorse it or not to say no.
One last question for you, Marsha.
He does have a lot to balance doesn't he, President Putin?
Not only the institutions I mentioned but the need to keep things somehow free of tension.
Is this case likely to strain US-Russian relations?
I'm afraid it might.
Recently the Russian policy toward the US has fallen into a line where Russia tries to demonstrate force it once had but no longer does.
It wants to put an end to what is regarded by the current Russian government as humiliation of the past years.
There were numerous attempts to be a source of minor troubles even though Russia can no longer be a source of scare to the west and among such instances there were several, there was just recently flying over by Russian military planes over Kitty Hawk, an American warship.
There is also a scandal that erupted over Russia's declaration that it will sell weapons to Iran, contrary to the earlier made agreement.
Such examples are quite a few already, some of them are combined with material profits for Russia but not necessarily.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of the Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha,  thank you very much for speaking with us.
Pleasure.
Edmund Pope tasted freedom today for the first time in more than eight months.
Pope is the American businessman who was convicted last week on spying charges and sentenced to 20 years in a Russian prison.
He denied any wrongdoing.
Russian President Vladimir Putin pardoned him for health reasons.
Pope was flown to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, Germany.
He will spend the next several days at the medical center there before he returns home with his wife Sherry.
Pope was in remission from a rare form of bone cancer when he was arrested in Russia.
Doctors will examine him for signs that the cancer may have come back while he awaiting trial in a Russian jail.
A spokeswoman said that Pope was suffering from malnutrition and high blood pressure.
Congratulations from foreign leaders poured into the governor's mansion in Texas today.
The messages were addressed to President-elect George W. Bush and they all contained words of welcome and optimism.
But truth be told for most international figures, Bush is something of an unknown.
He has traveled little and his diplomatic experience is limited to contacts with Mexican officials during his tenure as governor.
The World's Jeb Sharp has been hunting down clues to the foreign policy of the incoming administration.
A few broad foreign policy themes emerged during the campaign.
Chief among them are debate over the wisdom of US intervention.
Bush clearly favors limiting the use of American force and troops to solve conflicts overseas.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says that view is consistent with the philosophies of two top Bush advisors, Russia expert Condoleezza Rice and retired General Colin Powell.
Certainly, Condoleezza Rice, certainly Colin Powell who I expect, the two of them to be the dominant force in the next administration on foreign policy.
I certainly think they believe they would like to not intervene as much as the Clinton administration or I guess the previous Bush administration did.
In fact, Condoleezza Rice who is slated to become Bush's National Security Advisor has already said she'd like to see US troops pulled home from the Balkans.
But, Robert Kagan says its one thing for Bush's advisors to state a philosophy, its quite another to implement it.
I think they may find the world has a way of intruding itself and that it won't be that easy to pull forces out of the Balkans for instance, without destroying the NATO alliance.
After Rice made some comments about having a new division of labor, I think that was the word she used with regard to NATO and peacekeeping issues, there was a riot in Europe and the real fears that the United States was getting ready to withdraw from the continent and I think they had to walk that back a little bit.
The Balkans is just one example where the Bush administration will have to walk a fine line in delineating a different approach from that of Mr. Clinton.
The foreign policy challenges facing the next President are daunting.
The Mid East peace process is on hold with Israelis and Palestinians practically at war.
The sanctions regime against Iraq has unraveled.
Russia and China are alarmed at the prospect of America beefing up its missile defenses.
India and Pakistan, now nuclear powers are locked in a dangerous standoff.
Stability in East Asia is another pressing concern.
But despite the challenges, Northeast Asia expert Bates Gil of the Brookings Institution is encouraged by what he knows of the Bush foreign team.
One of the most interesting aspects of the new likely team under the Bush administration is first of all, extensive experience in defense and military affairs.
Secondly, it's easy to point to a number of persons who will have leading positions who have had extensive experience in East Asian affairs.
So you have a combination of depth of experience plus an understanding of the region.
Both of which will come in handy if there is a crisis with China over Taiwan or relations with North Korea deteriorate.
In such a crisis, Bush is likely to rely on the advice of government officials who cut their teeth during the cold war.
Some critics like Gore advisor Bruce Jentelson worry that the Bush team will be out of step with today's issues.
Issues related to globalization, global public health, technology, and those challenges.
Yet in my view a truly realistic policy cannot be based only on the old agenda issues, really has to address these new agenda issues as well.
But no matter what sort of expertise Bush's international affairs people bring to the White House, they won't be able to fully control what happens on their watch.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says each President's foreign policy is ultimately shaped by events, not theories.
Really, most of a President's foreign policy comes down to how they respond to specific events.
Bill Clinton did not come in to office intending to send troops to Haiti and the Balkans, and events sort of forced his hand and I think that, you know, the truth is Bush administration comes in with certain kinds of prejudices, but we will have to see how they respond to crises.
And the only thing that I'm confident of is that there will be crises.
President-elect Bush is expected to begin naming his top cabinet picks in the next few days.
Those choices will mean everything when the first crisis rolls around.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
In 1998, the United States voted against the creation of the World's first permanent International War Crimes Court.
President Clinton still has a chance to sign the treaty creating the Court before a final deadline this Sunday.
Advocates are pressing him to do just that, but Conservatives in Congress and Pentagon officials don't want the US to join the treaty.
The World's Jeb Sharp explains why.
Jesse Helms, the Conservative and powerful Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear the Rome's statuette would be dead on arrival if it were brought to Congress for ratification.
But proponents of the permanent International Criminal Court would still like to see President Clinton at least sign the treaty before the New Year's eve deadline.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Clinton's signature would be an important symbolic gesture.
What he will accomplish is making a clear statement that the United States not only in the former Yugoslavia, not only in Rwanda, not only in Cambodia, not only in Sierra Leone, where the administration has supported efforts at justice, but worldwide the United States supports the rule of law and supports holding those accused of genocide to account under the highest standards of due process.
But the opposition here in the United States is intense.
It comes mainly from the Pentagon where US military officials fear the Court will leave Americans vulnerable to politically motivated prosecutions.
Negotiators have tried to include safeguards in the treaty to address those fears, but stop short of exempting US personnel from prosecution.
John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute shares the Pentagon's objections.
I think there is every prospect such a court and its prosecutor would be highly politicized and the principal target of a court like this might well turn out to be the United States or Israel or other countries like that.
Bolton says that almost happened at the War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague, when Chief Prosecutor Carla Delponte briefly contemplated an investigation of NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia in 1999.
But proponents of the court say it's healthy for the United States and its allies to come under the same scrutiny as other countries.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Delponte's handling of the NATO case was exemplary.
Carla Delponte was acting as any responsible prosecutor must when she receives credible allegations of wrongdoing.
She looked into those allegations and then after an appropriate investigation she dismissed them.
Richard Dicker says President Clinton should keep the promise he made to the Rwandan people in 1998 when he told survivors of the genocide there the United States would support the International Court.
But John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute says a Clinton signature in the face of stiff domestic opposition would be meaningless.
I think it's a symbolic act that doesn't achieve much, but I don't think anybody internationally should think that whatever President Clinton does will have the slightest impact on the next administration.
Despite American objections, the International Criminal Court enjoys wide support worldwide and among major US allies.
131 countries have signed the treaty, 7 today and 25 have ratified it.
60 nations in all must ratify the treaty for the International Criminal Court to come into existence.
That's expected to happen, with or without US support, in 2002.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
Got job?
And so, I have rejoined the world of the fully employed.
After Christmas, I got a call from the wife of one of my former bosses (at my last full-time job).
She was looking for a Development Assistant at the retirement community where she works.
I started here 4 weeks ago.
WM is affiliated with, but not run or fully supported by, the denomination I've been a part of all my life (UMC).
My grandmother (who was Baptist) lived here for a few months before she died in 1995, so I have many connections to the job.
Our offices are in one of the patio homes, and I have my own lovely office with a window.
The job's only about 12 miles from home, and I'm going against the bulk of the traffic mornings and afternoons.
It all seems perfect and yet.
Oh, I'm so thankful to be somewhere so nice where I might actually make a difference in people's lives, and I want to keep an open mind and hope it'll last forever, but I have a feeling I'll be restless within a year or so.
My boss is a very nice person, but conservative and resistant to technology, i.e. computers, internet, etc.
We just got new computers a week and half ago, and she's griping about XP (her old OS was Windows 98--mine was 95, so I'm thrilled with the new stuff).
I tell her it'll just take some getting used to.
We'll see.
I'm not making the kind of salary I was hoping to get, but it's the best salary I've gotten thus far.
When I was fulltime in radio I made a little less, but I got quite a few remotes, which make up for not getting a topnotch salary.
I'm still doing my TV announcing and my weekend radio stuff, so that money will help.
I'm going to start actively pursuing more voice work in the next month or so, too.
My plan is to pay off my car early, and then work on the other debts.
I think it's time to go on and fill out the adoption applications.
I'm terrified of more debt, but Mom and Dad will help with the money.
I'm not sure they realize how expensive it all is.
I'm thinking we might lean toward adopting from Guatemala, but we've still not hashed it all out.
It's almost bad making some money now, because while most of me wants to save as much as possible, the other, smaller part is screaming loudly for stuff, stuff, stuff!!!
I've got a trial subscription to XM at work because of the Dell computers, and now I'm lusting to have it all of the time.
G got me a nice office stereo for my birthday and it does have an aux jack, so I could listen to it here.
He asked if I wanted a car stereo, and I said no, but I do.
There are so many things I want.
A garage.
A dining room set.
New stuff for our house.
New clothes.
New everything.
But I want family more.
I think part of the draw of the other stuff is I could get it now.
But I'd be paying for it later.
Money makes the world go round and round and round til I'm just dizzy.
A Moscow court has denied a request by US spy suspect Edmond Pope for a medical examination, despite his rare bone cancer.
Mr. Pope's condition has gone untreated since he was jailed five months ago.
Russia accuses the former US naval intelligence officer of illegally obtaining secrets about a high-tech Russian torpedo.
On Friday the court denied a series of defense motions that also included a request to tape the proceedings and replace the court translator, who works for Russian security.
The trial opened Wednesday and has been suspended until Monday.
Ivory Coast's army has pledged its loyalty to opposition candidate Loran Gbagbo.
The pledge followed a tumultuous 24 hours that ended the rule of the junta, which seized power last December.
Soldiers and civilians took to the streets to celebrate the departure of junta leader General Robert Guei.
In an address on state television, Wednesday, Mr. Gbagbo, leader of the Ivorian Socialist party, said he would be forming a cabinet shortly.
A Russian scientist has told a Moscow City court that the information an American businessman allegedly tried to purchase about a Russian torpedo is commonly available and not a state secret.
The scientist, an expert on the torpedo and a defense witness at the trial of businessman Edmond Pope said he had often used the torpedo information for his research and had spoken openly about it.
A defense lawyer said the testimony would help his client.
In Yemen, a bomb threat has forced the tightening of security at the hotel housing US investigators probing the attack on the USS Cole.
Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters the situation caused the Secretary of Defense to call US field commanders.
The Secretary held a video conference call with all the commanders in chiefs, as well as the service chiefs and the service secretaries and the topic was force protection.
The hotel has been hosting scores of investigators who are looking into the apparent suicide bomb attack on the navy destroyer that killed 17 US sailor two weeks ago.
The US Navy destroyer damaged apparently by a terrorist bomb while refueling at the Red Sea port Aden has begun its journey back to the States for repair.
As Dave Gavlak reports, the USS Cole was towed out of the Aden harbor to awaiting Norwegian transport ship, that will actually carry the damaged destroyer home.
The American national anthem played as four tug boats pulled the USS Cole slowly out of Yemen's Southern port of Aden.
The Cole was badly damaged two weeks ago in an apparent suicide bombing that killed 17 US sailors.
Security was tight as the ship was towed out.
American and Yemeni patrol boats mounted with machine guns escorted the Cole out to open waters while American helicopters flew overhead.
Some Yemenis expressed relief to see the ship leave.
Many locals said they feared the bombing of the ship would serve as an excuse for continued US military presence in the Gulf country.
Diplomats and analysts have commented that a joint investigation into the attack may in fact strengthen ties between the world super power and the poor, but strategic Arab state.
US and Yemeni officials say they believe Islamic militants may have carried out the bombing.
So far two little known Islamic groups have claimed responsibility for the attack.
Yemeni authorities claimed they have detained over 70 people for questioning.
These include some Afghan-Arab volunteers who came to Yemen after fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Dave Gavlak for VOA News, Cairo.
And this is VOA News now.
I'm Tom Crosby.
As we have been reporting, the White House confirms Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are going to meet separately with President Clinton later this week.
Meanwhile, there has been continued trouble in the streets of West Bank and the Gaza Strip with at least two more Palestinians killed, Sunday in clashes with Israeli troops.
Laurie Kassman reports the trouble came despite an impassioned plea from Prime Minister Barak that Mr. Arafat rein in the rioters and return to the negotiating table.
On Saturday, Palestinians reported more than 30 injuries.
But reports of the fighting also talked of a drop in the level of violence, since both sides agreed to a cease-fire late Wednesday night.
More than 170 Palestinians have died and more than 6000 are reported to have been wounded in clashes with the Israeli military.
Several Israeli soldiers and civilians have also been killed.
Shopkeepers in East Jerusalem are being urged to close their doors to protest against the killing of two Palestinian teenagers on Friday, Southeast of Jerusalem.
Both Arab and Israeli businesses are suffering from the latest violence.
A shopkeeper in the Arab town of Jaffa, which is adjacent to Tel Aviv, complains that few Israelis venture into the area since clashes erupted there a few weeks ago.
Jaffa is usually bustling with Israeli and foreign tourists.
All our work is dependent totally on the Jews.
If they are not coming, so really we cannot work.
I mean, what happens that the Arabs here, the 20,000 Arabs in is dependent on the Jews going to their market and the Jews coming here.
So we cannot live, I mean, we are really totally paralyzed right now.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have agreed to meet separately with US President Bill Clinton to see how to ease tensions and get the peace process back on track.
The meetings will take place later in the week after the US presidential vote on Tuesday.
Laurie Kassman, VOA News, Jerusalem.
US Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to nine Middle Eastern Gulf states for meetings with regional leaders.
Mr. Cohen will depart next Tuesday to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Israel, Jordan and Egypt.
The Pentagon says, the Secretary will consult with defense officials in those countries and also visit US troops in the area.
US forces in the Gulf have been on high alert, since last month's apparent terrorist bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors.
An explosion struck the Cole, as it refueled in the Yemeni port of Aden.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair arrives in Russia today for talks with Vladimir Putin on security, foreign policy, and economic issues.
They are also expected to discuss a new Russian proposal for deep cuts in US and Russian long-range missiles.
VOA's Larry James in Moscow.
The highlight of the one-day visit will be three hours of talks on Tuesday, during which Mr. Blair and Mr. Putin will focus on a wide range of issues including Russia's latest call for cutting the number of strategic nuclear warheads to below 1500.
President Clinton has said such a deal is possible, but that it will be first necessary to convince Moscow of the merits of America's proposed Missile Defense System.
The US wants to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty so it can develop such a system.
Russia believes such a move could spark a new arms race and has threatened to tear up existing weapons agreements and stop disarmament talks if the United States goes ahead.
On Sunday Mr. Putin called on the Russian parliament to quickly ratify the amended Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.
That treaty requires Russia to make further non-nuclear weapons reductions in some areas of the country including breakaway Chechnya.
President Putin acknowledged that Russia is still violating its commitment in Chechnya, but he said it is only a temporary situation which has the ultimate aim of cutting armaments in the region.
He also thanked the 29 other signatories to the treaty for their understanding.
He said Russia is fully behind the agreement that, he said, is an efficient instrument of ensuring security in Europe for years to come.
The original treaty was signed in 1990 and led to the destruction of thousands of heavy weapons by NATO and the former Warsaw Pact.
Tony Blair became the first western leader to come to Russia to meet the new President last March even before Mr. Putin was elected.
The Russian leader returned the favor by making London one of his first foreign destinations after taking office.
The two have already met four times this year.
Analysts here in Moscow believe Britain can play a useful role as a bridge to both Europe and the United States.
Trade is also expected to figure significantly in the talks.
Britain ranks as the third largest investor after the United States and Germany with just slightly more than $1 billion invested in Russia.
Larry James, VOA News, Moscow.
More than 50 people are dead in Nigeria, after a leaking oil pipeline burst into flames outside the commercial capital, Lagos.
The blast and resulting fire Thursday, ripped through an area near a fuel-loading depot owned by the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Witnesses report seeing burnt bodies littering the charred grounds while many other victims are being treated for injuries sustained in the blaze.
A spokeswoman for the Petroleum Company says the fire was caused by vandals.
The Voice of America presents differing points of view on a wide variety of issues.
Next, an editorial expressing the policies of the United States government.
For nearly 20 years, the world has faced the challenge posed by AIDS.
Since 1988, the first day of December has been designated by the United Nations as World AIDS Day.
This is the time to disseminate information and faster cooperation in the battle against AIDS, the number one cause of infectious disease in the world.
The picture of the epidemic is bleak.
According to a new UN study, in the past year over five million people have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Since the beginning of the epidemic, about 22 million people have died of the disease.
While infections among adults are decreasing, infections among children are increasing.
Many of these cases are in sub-Saharan Africa where infected mothers are transmitting the virus to their babies during delivery.
Africa accounts for more than four-fifths of the world's AIDS-related deaths.
In some African countries, one out of four adults is infected with HIV.
But Eastern Europe has seen the biggest explosion of new infections.
In Russia, the rate of infection has more than doubled this year to 300,000.
South and Southeast Asia are other high-risk areas with five and three quarter million adults and children now living with HIV or AIDS.
In too many places, discussion of AIDS is taboo and the disease is shrouded in mystery and misinformation.
But as the grim statistics make clear, it is critical that the governments and citizens of those nations most affected by AIDS, do their part to recognize the scope of the epidemic and act decisively to confront it.
As President Bill Clinton said, we must work together to break the silence, to fight the stigmatization and protect the rights of those living with HIV and AIDS, and to help those infected find the care and treatment they need.
We must pledge to stay the course in our crusade until the world is finally freed from the shadow of this devastating epidemic.
Welcome to another hour of news and information on the Voice of America.
I'm David Chadwick, with VOA News now.
The death toll in Colombia from three days of heavy fighting between soldiers and rebels now stands at more than 100.
At least 54 soldiers and 50 guerillas have died in clashes around the northwestern cities of Bagado and Dabeiba.
Nearly all of the buildings, government buildings in those two cities, have been reportedly destroyed.
The clashes began Wednesday, when the rebel revolutionary armed forces of Colombia launched attacks on a number of northwestern towns.
An army helicopter went down close to the border with Panama, killing all 22 soldiers on board.
In South Asia, authorities in Bangladesh's Southwestern port of Mongla have called on the Army to control riots that have left at least four people dead and 58 injured.
Officials say the trouble began when striking dock workers tried to storm the port authority offices and police fired to disperse them.
The demonstrators are demanding that more people be hired to load and unload goods at the port.
Beginning early next year, visitors to Yosemite National Park in California will see some changes.
A new plan is aimed at protecting the giant Sequoia trees, scenic valleys, and waterfalls from the impact of four million tourists a year.
Under the new plan, visitors will have very limited access to the park by car.
The 343 million-dollar plan will create a new shuttle bus system to alleviate traffic congestion.
It will also remove roads from meadows, create more hiking trails, and restore campsites damaged by a 1997 flood.
Yosemite spokesman Scott Gediman says while these measures have been controversial, the preservation effort will not sacrifice visitor enjoyment.
And so we certainly do not want to limit access or will not limit access to the National Park, but we need to design the facilities, design parking areas, design the infrastructure in a way that we can handle these large amounts of people.
Yosemite is not alone in seeking new management strategies to preserve natural areas.
Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is putting in a light rail system.
And Zion National Park in Utah has just established a new shuttle bus system.
With environment briefs, I'm Roseanne Skirble.
President Clinton has urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to order the release on humanitarian grounds of a US businessman convicted of spying.
A White House spokesman says the two leaders spoke by telephone today, after the Russian government's pardon commission recommended the release of Edmond Pope.
Earlier, a senior Russian official said Edmond Pope could be home by Christmas.
The former US naval intelligence officer was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison Wednesday, on charges he illegally obtained a classified information on a Russian torpedo.
Colombia's second largest Marxist rebel army has released forty-two soldiers and police officers.
Government officials say the National Liberation Army freed the captives today in Northern Colombia.
The forty-two prisoners were captured two years ago during clashes with the guerilla group.
Hardly a day passes without news photos of the police dragging limp protesters from some building or thoroughfare in one of our cities.
Of recent note are the activities of the pro- and anti-abortionists, anti-nuclear activists, animal rights protesters, college students concerned about racism, anti-apartheid groups, various self-styled "environmentalists" and those dissatisfied with the pace of the war against AIDS.
Maybe he didn't start it, but Mohandas Gandhi certainly provided a recognizable beginning to non-violent civil disobedience as we know it today.
The Mahatma, or "great souled one," instigated several campaigns of passive resistance against the British government in India.
Unfortunately, according to Webster's Biographical Dictionary, "His policies went beyond his control and resulted . . . in riots and disturbances" and later a renewed campaign of civil disobedience "resulted in rioting and a second imprisonment."
I am not a proponent of everything Gandhi did, but some of his law breaking was justified because India was then under occupation by a foreign power, and Indians were not able to participate fully in decisions that vitally affected them.
It is difficult, however, to justify civil disobedience, non-violent or not, where citizens have full recourse to the ballot box to effect change.
Where truly representative governments are safeguarded by constitutional protections of human rights and an independent judiciary to construe those rights, there is no excuse for breaking the law because some individual or group disagrees with it.
There may be a few cases where the law breaking is well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of others that it is difficult to criticize it.
The case of Rosa Parks, the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes to mind as an illustration.
But most cases of non-violent civil disobedience are not nearly so benign.
The public has a tendency to equate lawful demonstrations with non-violent civil disobedience.
It is true that both are non-violent, but there is a fundamental difference between them.
Lawful demonstrations, such as peaceful picketing and other assemblages that do not disturb the peace or cause a public nuisance or interfere with the rights of others, are rights guaranteed by any truly free system of government.
Civil disobedience, violent or non-violent, is intentional law breaking.
The subject of this discussion is non-violent civil disobedience; but, before we get on with that, let me make just a few tangential remarks about lawful demonstrations.
They are useful to call public attention to grievances, but they have little value in educating anyone about the issues in dispute.
The delight of television in dramatic confrontation encourages overuse of slogans chanted through bullhorns, militant gestures, accusatory signs and other emotionally inspired tactics.
Civilized discourse and an environment where compromise can begin are lost in a hostile posture abetted by superficial media interviews.
At best, demonstrations are overused and boringly uninformative; at worst, they can become the stimuli that lead to law breaking.
Demonstrations are particularly apt to degenerate into criminal conduct when they leave the site of the grievance and become mobile.
Petty criminals and street people looking for excitement attach themselves like remora to the fringes of the crowd and use the protest as an excuse for rock throwing, auto trashing, arson, window breaking, looting, pocket picking and general hooliganism.
Soon the whole purpose of the demonstration is lost in mob mania.
There are better ways to promote a cause.
Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to justify.
Some find no harm in the misdemeanors of trespass, minor property destruction, blocking traffic and the like.
They say these are small prices to pay for galvanizing action for the all-important cause.
The crimes may appear small, but the prices can be huge.
Here are two cases to illustrate.
Assume a neighborhood demonstration to protest speeding on a certain road or a careless accident involving a police car.
The protesters lie down in the street, blocking traffic, and will not move until the authorities carry them away.
Assume that someone caught in the jam has a heart attack.
There is no way to get an ambulance in quickly to move him to a hospital.
He dies.
The demonstration was non-violent and involved only a simple misdemeanor, but its impact on that individual was violent and terminal.
Assume that a TV network is airing a celebrity interview program with a live audience.
The politician appearing is highly controversial and has recently generated a good deal of rancor amid certain groups.
In a planned protest against his appearance, several members of the studio audience chain themselves in front of the TV cameras in such a way that the program cannot continue.
The network must refund money to the advertisers and loses considerable revenue and prestige.
The demonstrators have been non-violent, but the result of their trespasses has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their dispute.
It might be alleged that TV has done more than its share to popularize and promote non-violent civil disobedience, so the second situation hypothesized above would be simply a case of "chickens coming home to roost."
Or maybe the TV network would lose nothing.
Geraldo or Phil would probably pull up another camera and interview the chained protesters.
Let us look for a moment at another type of non-violent civil disobedience that only harms other people indirectly, yet does irreparable damage to the nation as a whole.
I am referring to those young men who chose to disobey their country's call to arms during the Vietnam war and fled to Canada or some other sanctuary to avoid combat.
Their cowardly acts of civil disobedience, which they tried to hide under the cloak of outrage at a war they characterized as "immoral," weakened the national fabric and threw additional burdens on those who served honorably in that conflict.
Even more at fault are those leaders in and out of government who urged and supported their defections, thereby giving great help and comfort to the enemy propagandists.
It is amazing that the ensuing mass executions in Vietnam and Cambodia do not weight more heavily on minds so morally fine-tuned.
Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought and died in Vietnam.
Under the guise of "healing the wounds of the nation," President Carter pardoned thousands of draft evaders, thus giving dignity to their allegations of the war's "immorality."
The precedent having been set, who can complain if future generations called upon to defend the U.S. yield to the temptation to avoid the danger of combat by simply declaring the war immoral and hiding until it is over?
Finally, I think it important to point out the extraordinarily high visibility of non-violent civil disobedience in these days of intensive media coverage.
Give television a chance to cover live any breaking of the law, and no second invitation will be required.
This brings into question the motives of those who lead civil disobedience demonstrations.
Do they want the spotlight for themselves or for their cause?
Here is a good rule of thumb: If the movement produced the leader, the chance that he is sincere is much greater than if the leader produced the movement.
In either case, ask yourself whether you have become better informed on the issues under protest by watching the act of civil disobedience.
If you have not, it is probable that a thorough airing of the dispute by calm and rational debate would have been the better course.
Mr. Agnew was vice president of the U.S. from 1969 until he resigned in 1973.
As the leading candidate for president of his country in next year's election, Mario Vargas Llosa ought to be in an enviable position.
But his country is Peru, where political visibility, especially for a believer in democracy and free enterprise -- a right winger in Latin American eyes -- makes a man a target for assassination.
For almost any Peruvian these days, to show an interest in public office is a heroic gesture; for Mr. Vargas Llosa especially so, since he already has achieved a high position in the world's eyes as a writer.
Published everywhere to universal acclaim, doted on like a movie star in the Hispanic world from Barcelona to Ushuaia, Mr. Vargas Llosa could live comfortably on his royalties and console his political conscience with the thought that Peru is a hopeless mess not of his making and that he already did his best to reform it with his magnificently cinematic novel about the years of military dictatorship of his youth, "Conversation in the Cathedral."
But, after some hesitation, he is back on the stump and also still writing important novels about Peru.
The Storyteller" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $17.95), splendidly translated by Helen Lane, first appeared in Spanish in 1987 before the Peruvian economy had reached its present state of virtual collapse.
And in any case the story takes place a bit earlier than that, when the guerrilla war in the highlands had not yet made internal travel a gamble with destiny.
Even still, the very first sentence of this fable that weaves together Peru's most advanced and most primitive cultural strands speaks of "my unfortunate country."
The narrator may be talking about the depredations of the Shining Path Maoists among the Indians of the Andes, or he may be referring to the plunging inti, Peru's rubber currency, or the corrupting effect of the cocaine trade.
But he is swiftly drawn into a tangle of memories about a less newsworthy and more exotic part of Peru: its corner of the Amazon jungle.
This narrator is a foil for Mr. Vargas Llosa, a cosmopolitan writer with one well-tailored leg in journalism.
He is in Florence to shake himself free of Peru and get some writing done, just as Mr. Vargas Llosa has gone to Paris and now goes frequently to London for the same purpose.
But this narrator happens upon some photographs in a gallery, pictures taken in Peruvian Amazonia of the untamed and nomadic Machiguenga tribe.
And they remind him of his own experiences with that unhappy scattered culture and of his friend at Lima's University of San Marcos, Saul Zuratas.
Saul was a high-strung student of ethnography, a Jew marked doubly as an outsider because of a huge wine-dark birthmark on his face, for which people called him Mascarita, Mask Face.
Saul knew about the Machiguengas from his studies, and through him the narrator became interested in this most recalcitrant and un-Westernizable of all the indigenous peoples who had come under the Spanish yoke.
Saul, meanwhile, came to believe that anthropology, even at its most benign, was as insidious a form of cultural imperialism as the superficially more blatant activities of Christian missionaries.
Saul mysteriously disappears.
This is what we know at the end of the opening section of "The Storyteller."
The next voice we hear sounds like this: "There was no evil, there was no wind, there was no rain.
The women bore pure children.
If Tasurinchi wanted to eat, he dipped his hand into the river and brought out a shad flicking its tail . . ."
And this, Moving, walking.
Keeping on, with or without rain, by land or by water, climbing up the mountain slopes or climbing down the ravines."
The speaker is never identified.
He tells his stories in his majestically simple way, in a "language" all his own.
There are creation myths and cosmologies and hunting stories -- a whole culture is contained within these dreamy narratives.
It is as though Mr. Vargas Llosa had recorded a storytelling session at a Machiguenga campfire.
And this is just the effect he hopes to have on the reader, as he alternates chapters in his "own" voice with chapters somehow "borrowed" from the Machiguenga storyteller.
For most of the book, there is no direct connection between its urban and its Amazonian modes.
But the contrast between them becomes a living thing through the brilliant contrast of narrative styles that Mr. Vargas Llosa creates.
He controls this counterpoint like a novelistic Bach, reaching an audacious extreme in a hilarious chapter in which the "Vargas Llosa" voice relates his adventures as an inept television newsman.
But the joke turns serious when a reportage takes him to Amazonia and he encounters the missionaries who know more than anyone else about the Machiguengas.
By this point, the narrator has become obsessed with finding out about the Machiguenga storytellers, who, he had heard years before, functioned like cultural glue for a tribe split into many small bands in constant motion through the jungle.
The storytellers traveled among the bands, reminding them of their identity.
But why would no Machiguenga the narrator meets during his reportage even admit that there were storytellers?
The narrator eventually deduces the extraordinary answer, which is confirmed in a literally Kafkaesque manner by a storyteller in the next chapter.
I am trying to give away as little as possible, but this is not really a mystery or some kind of jungle thriller.
It will be read for the brilliant clash of styles of narration and the even more brilliant way that they have been tied together into a large metaphor for literature and its function in society.
It was a parent's ultimate nightmare.
As the crippled jet prepared for an emergency landing, Sylvia Tsao wrapped her 23-month-old son, Evan, in blankets and, following cabin-crew orders, placed him on the floor.
She held him down tightly, trying to protect him.
Suddenly, the world seemed to end, she told investigators later.
Crashing into a cornfield, United Airlines' Flight 232 flipped over, and she lost her grip on her son.
I saw for an instant my son's body floating and flying" toward the back of the plane, Ms. Tsao recalled.
When the plane stopped moving, she frantically tried to find him.
But Evan died of smoke inhalation.
July's Sioux City crash has fueled an emotionally charged debate.
Safety advocates and members of Congress, calling babies "the neglected population," are stepping up a campaign for the mandatory use of infant safety seats on all flights.
But the Federal Aviation Administration is reluctant to require separate seats for babies because of the added cost for traveling parents.
Some FAA officials note that few infants have been killed in plane crashes, raising the question of whether safety seats really are needed.
A 1981 Harvard Medical School study that scrutinized accidents in the late 1970s concluded that perhaps three babies would have been saved in a five-year period if safety-seat use had been required.
The National Transportation Safety Board will take a close look at the issue during four days of hearings that begin today on the broader issue of what caused the crash that killed 112 people.
Infants', toddlers' and young children's safety should no longer be ignored as if they don't count," Mrs. Tsao wrote to the board in advocating use of the safety seats.
All 50 states require that small children be strapped into safety seats in cars.
On planes, FAA rules dictate that children two years old and over have their own tickets and be strapped into regular seats, just as adults are.
Babies under two may sit on laps and fly for free.
But it is almost impossible to keep hold of a baby during an air crash, or even in severe turbulence.
During the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson of Cincinnati lost her grip on her baby as the plane lurched and tipped over.
Another passenger heard one-year-old Sabrina's cry and pulled her from an overhead luggage compartment.
The FAA encourages the use of safety seats, but in the past many parents have run into problems trying to use them, even when the plane was only half-full or they had bought an extra ticket especially for the baby.
When Vanessa Merton, an associate dean at Pace University School of Law, decided to take her young son to Europe last spring, she called four carriers to ask about their policies on car seats.
"The people acted like I was transporting heroin," she says.
One reservation agent told her -- incorrectly -- that the airline barred the use of the seats on flights.
After the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson bought a car seat for her daughter for the flight home to Cincinnati.
But on one leg of the trip, she was ordered by a flight attendant to take Sabrina out of the seat and hold her during takeoff and landing -- the most dangerous parts of any flight.
Airlines say that such mistakes are decreasing in the aftermath of Sioux City, but proponents of the safety devices say they still get complaints from parents.
People are told one thing on the phone, another at check in, another at the gate, and another on the plane," says Stephanie Tombrello, executive director of the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association, which petitioned the FAA in June for mandatory use of child-safety seats.
The Association of Flight Attendants, the main flight attendants' union, is strongly backing that request.
The FAA argues that requiring safety seats for all babies might actually diminish, not enhance, safety.
As part of such a rule, officials say, parents would probably be required to buy an extra ticket for the baby.
The increased cost of flying would inevitably encourage some families to drive rather than fly, they say.
Commercial airlines have the lowest accident rate of all transportation modes -- much lower than cars, for example.
Anthony Broderick, the FAA's acting Executive Director for Regulatory Standards and Compliance, contends that the current rule is the best approach because it allows parents to make their own decision on whether to use a safety seat.
But he admits that the agency is in "a very uncomfortable position."
He says the agency soon will propose that airlines be prohibited from denying the use of safety seats.
Most airlines don't prohibit their use.)
He says the agency also will seek public comment on whether the seats should be required.
Walter Coleman, Vice President of Operations for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for the major airlines, describes the call for safety seats as "legitimate" and says the group is studying the issue.
But privately some airline officials fear that if parents must buy extra tickets for babies, whole families will stop flying.
Others worry that the FAA might write a rule forcing airlines to pick up part of the tab for increased infant safety.
Generally, airlines say they welcome the use of a government-approved safety seat and will even allow the restraint to take up a regular seat for free if the flight isn't crowded.
Most car seats made in recent years are certified for use on aircraft and are so marked.)
But space can only be guaranteed if a ticket is purchased.
What the industry really wants is some kind of device that would protect babies without taking up an extra seat.
But no one has come up with anything that is safer in a crash than the current practice of bundling babies up and trying to pin them to the floor.
Parents are advised against holding the infants, for fear that in an accident the babies could be crushed by the adult's weight.
Proponents of safety seats are turning up the heat on the FAA.
Yesterday, Rep. James Lightfoot, an Iowa Republican, sent FAA Administrator James Busey a letter signed by 56 House members urging the agency to require infant safety seats.
If the FAA refuses, Rep. Lightfoot says, he will push legislation to require the change.
It is a peaceful time in this part of western India.
The summer crop is harvested, winter sowing has yet to begin.
Farmers in loose turbans and fancy earrings spend their afternoons laughing and gossiping at the markets.
One could imagine such a lull in the lives of the Arabs before the quadrupling of oil prices.
For just as the Arabs were in the 1960s, the farmers of Sidhpur are on the brink of global power and fame.
The Arabs had merely oil.
These farmers may have a grip on the world's very heart.
Or, at least, its heart disease.
That is because Sidhpur has a near-monopoly on the world's supply of flea seed, also known as flea wort or, in Western parlance, psyllium: a tiny, tasteless, obscure seed that, according to early research, may reduce cholesterol levels in the blood.
Ever since the link to cholesterol was disclosed, Americans have begun scarfing up psyllium in their breakfast cereals.
If further research proves the seed's benefits, this dusty farm district could become the epicenter of a health-food fad to rival all fads since cod-liver oil.
This seed's not grown anywhere else in India, or anywhere else in the world, says T.V. Krishnamurthy, a vice president of Procter & Gamble India Ltd., a major psyllium buyer and promoter.
The proper climatic conditions don't exist in many places in the world.
Arvind Patel, a processor and exporter of the seed, raves: If psyllium takes the place of oat bran, it will be huge."
Whether psyllium makes Sidhpur's fortune depends on cholesterol-fearing Americans, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and, of course, the outcome of further research.
Only one thing is certain here: Pysllium is likely to remain solely an export item from Sidhpur for a long time.
Local farmers say it is as good a cash crop as mustard or fenugreek, a legume.
But they have no desire to eat a bowl of psyllium each morning, and, perhaps, little need: lean, frugal vegetarians, the farmers are innocents in the clogged, treacherous world of cholesterol.
Psyllium is an annual herb, Plantago ovata, that has been used for centuries by folk doctors here, mainly as a laxative and anti-diarrheal.
As such, the soluble fiber has an almost fanatic following in northern India.
I can assure you, attests a 25-year-old lawyer in New Delhi, with a meaningfully raised eyebrow, "from personal experience, it works."
A prominent businessman in Bombay gives a similar testimonial: "I have been taking it daily since 1961."
Folk doctors also prescribe it for kidney, bladder and urethra problems, duodenal ulcers and hemorrhoids.
Some apply it to gouty joints.
The plant has a hairy stem that produces flowers and diminutive seeds.
It is the seed's colorlessness and size -- 1,000 of them weigh only 1.5 grams, or about as much as two paper clips -- that explain the historical allusions to fleas.
The translucent husk of the seed is removed, sifted and crushed; the seed itself is fed to animals.
Some 90% of the crop, which was worth $26 million last year, is exported.
For decades, psyllium husk has been the main ingredient in such laxatives as Procter & Gamble Co.'s Metamucil, the top-selling brand in the U.S., and Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Fiberall.
But some time ago, researchers discovered that soluble fibers also lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Cincinnati-based P&G took an interest; it ordered two studies on psyllium and cholesterol.
One of the studies, done at the University of Minnesota, tested 75 people with raised cholesterol levels.
After 16 weeks, the group that took three daily teaspoons of Metamucil saw a significant dip in their general cholesterol levels, and an even larger reduction in levels of low-density lipoproteins, the so-called bad cholesterol.
In late 1987, P&G asked the FDA for approval to market Metamucil as the first non-prescription, cholesterol-lowering product in the U.S.
In April, the psyllium bandwagon got more crowded.
General Mills Inc., the food giant, launched a breakfast cereal called Benefit, containing psyllium, oat, wheat and beet bran; the words, "reduce cholesterol" were prominently displayed on its package.
In September, Kellogg Co. launched a competing psyllium-fortified cereal called Heartwise.
Suddenly, on television, in advertisements and on their cereal boxes, Americans were inundated with news about the obscure seed.
The flood of claims and counter-claims worried consumers and actually hurt sales of the new cereals.
This month, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that Americans might someday, in various forms, ingest too much psyllium.
Currently, there is a lull in the psyllium war.
The FDA has asked Kellogg and General Mills to show research that their cereals are safe.
It also ordered P&G to produce more studies to buttress its claims that Metamucil can lower cholesterol.
But the agency hasn't yanked psyllium off store shelves.
If the FDA approves the new uses of psyllium, other companies are expected to rush to market with psyllium products.
It's going to be a sensational thing, says Mr. Krishnamurthy of P&G in Bombay.
Says psyllium exporter Mr. Patel: "I just got back yesterday from the U.S.
In the newspapers, on the radio and TV, psyllium is everywhere."
But the news of the boom has yet to trickle down to the farmers.
They only know of one use for the crop, as a laxative, and with psyllium prices currently languishing in the wake of a bumper crop, they think of the seed as a marginal crop, something to grow between summer wheat crops.
Psyllium's not a good crop, complains Sooraji Jath, a 26-year-old farmer from the village of Lakshmipura.
You get a rain at the wrong time and the crop is ruined.
Even at the Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export Promotion Council, the government agency that promotes the seed, the psyllium boom is distant thunder.
The staff brags about psyllium's hefty contribution to American regularity, without quite grasping the implications of the research on cholesterol.
The council's annual report has psyllium on its last page, lumped with such unglamorous export items as sarsaparilla and "Nux vomica," a plant that induces vomiting.
In one way, the psyllium middlemen -- the buyers and exporters -- are glad to keep news of the boom to themselves.
They want psyllium prices low for their purchases next year.
But there's a catch.
Sidhpur and adjacent districts are the only places in the world where psyllium is grown in large quantities.
This is partly due to the particular demands of the crop.
Psyllium needs sandy soil, dew during the first few weeks, and then total dryness when its seeds are maturing.
Small crops are grown in Pakistan, France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Brazil, but their quality can't compare to that of Indian psyllium.
Big buyers like Procter & Gamble say there are other spots on the globe, and in India, where the seed could be grown.
It's not a crop that can't be doubled or tripled, says Mr. Krishnamurthy.
But no one has made a serious effort to transplant the crop.
In Sidhpur, it is almost time to sow this year's crop.
Many farmers, too removed to glean psyllium's new sparkle in the West, have decided to plant mustard, fennel, cumin, fenugreek or castor-oil seeds.
Mr. Jath is thinking of passing up psyllium altogether this year in favor of a crop with a future such as cumin or fennel.
Maybe I'll plant castor-oil seeds.
His brother, Parkhaji, whose head is swathed in a gorgeous crimson turban, nods vigorous assent.
So when next year's psyllium crop is harvested in March, it may be smaller than the 16,000 metric tons of the past few years -- right at the crest of the psyllium boom.
And the world could experience its first psyllium shortage.
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his U.S. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the Contra rebels.
Lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras, and President Bush parried the question at a news conference here Saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees."
But Mr. Ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the Contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said yesterday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Mr. Ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it."
The threat came during a two-day celebration in Costa Rica to highlight Central America's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by President Bush, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and 14 other Western Hemisphere leaders.
Mr. Bush returned to Washington Saturday night.
Mr. Ortega announced on Friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic Contra assaults against his army.
Saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the U.S. ends its financial support for the Contras.
He asked that the remaining U.S. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels.
Not only did Mr. Ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as Nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned February elections.
Outside observers are gathering in Nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates.
And important U.S. lawmakers must decide at the end of November if the Contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the Bush administration in March.
The humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the Nicaraguan border with Honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by Congress in February 1988.
While few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, Mr. Ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said yesterday on "Meet the Press": "I would hope after his {Mr. Ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid."
Sen. Dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan leader.
While renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by Congress and de-emphasized by the Bush administration, Mr. Ortega's statement provides Contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue.
The administration should now state that if the February election is voided by the Sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.
In these circumstances, I think they'd win.
Sen. Mitchell said that congressional Democrats intend to honor the March agreement to give non-lethal support to the Contras through the February elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the Contras not initiate any military action.
Mr. Ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as U.S. officials were acknowledging that the Contras have at times violated it themselves.
Secretary of State James Baker, who accompanied President Bush to Costa Rica, told reporters Friday: "I have no reason to deny reports that some Contras ambushed some Sandinista soldiers."
Mr. Baker's assistant for inter-American affairs, Bernard Aronson, while maintaining that the Sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "It's never very clear who starts what."
He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire.
In addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending Contra aid, Mr. Ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some U.S. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the February elections.
Administration officials traveling with President Bush in Costa Rica interpreted Mr. Ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections.
Mr. Abrams said that Mr. Ortega is seeking to demobilize the Contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections.
My sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
A frozen mountaintop in Tibet may offer an important clue about whether the Earth is warming perilously.
Researchers at Ohio State University and Lanzhou Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology in China have analyzed samples of glacial ice in Tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years.
The ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the Earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead.
A substantial warming would melt some of the Earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas.
If you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said Lonnie Thompson, a research scientist at Ohio State who dug for and analyzed the ice samples.
To compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen.
These measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change.
Analysis of ice from the Dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in Tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last Ice Age, Mr. Thompson said.
Some climate models project that interior regions of Asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes.
But the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, Mr. Thompson acknowledged.
According to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the Earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space.
Skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide.
Instead, the Dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year.
Other temperature data show similar unexplained swings.
Climate varies drastically due to natural causes,said Mr. Thompson.
But he said ice samples from Peru, Greenland and Antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable.
The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot."
He speaks only in Filipino.
Batibot,which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show.
In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language.
It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show.
When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, it's no longer an issue.
The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon.
Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language.
For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse, says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines.
There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions.
They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language.
There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.)
What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia."
The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English.
But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role.
According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino.
It's not as if we're teaching language per se, he says, "We're just using it."
These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks.
With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold.
Batibot" lacks the polish of "Sesame Street.
Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing.
But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment.
Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot."
During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English.
The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency.
The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas.
Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization.
Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority.
The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S.
The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy.
Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere, Mr. Mulroney said recently.
Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization.
Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper.
Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%.
Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS.
Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said.
The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement.
Early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach.
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones.
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu.
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint.
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work.
Last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram.
Oh yes, the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards.
If there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them, says Les Johns, De Beers's engineering manager.
Here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box.
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality.
While other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use.
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one.
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations.
When the Germans lost World War I, they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer, patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers.
Today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers's stingy approval.
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa.
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever.
Oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents.
Jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers.
On most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag.
The wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop.
Still, miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming.
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds.
There are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling.
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world.
Last year, when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood.
Nothing is too good for our golf course, says Tony George, a mining engineer.
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from South African control, De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10.
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes.
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheel-like excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach.
Then there is the artificial sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean.
Made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintenance against the battering waves.
When the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward.
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard.
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood.
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves.
The Caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs Mr. George.
They figure it's not a very good advert.
Despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators.
Laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds.
But should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value.
For these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail.
Still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two.
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie.
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe.
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail.
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security.
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms.
The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China," an FDA spokesman said yesterday.
The agency won't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until "satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent" bacterial contamination.
On May 19, the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms.
In subsequent tests, the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated.
The outbreaks were traced to Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables.
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March.
In 1987, China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms, valued at $47 million, to the U.S.
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken "many effective measures" to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes.
He predicted the problem will be solved "very soon.
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the so-called Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society.
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants.
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop.
If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980.
They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady.
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races.
Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice.
Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep.
Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves.
If we want to survive as a people, he says, we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others.
In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever.
If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation.
People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation, says the son.
The Orange Workers speak sincerely.
We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer.
We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly.
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night.
Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa.
So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the white walled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know."
The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers.
Impossible, impossible,say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades.
We can't do without their help,says Mrs. Conradie.
Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them.
Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation.
What they want us to do just isn't practical, he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks.
I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money."
Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom.
We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd.
By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account."
Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960.
The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations," says Mr. Verwoerd.
Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners.
He apologizes for sounding pushy.
Look, he says, If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea.
And they will even serve it themselves.
When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City.
He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts -- his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with.
In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates.
For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures.
The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: the U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life.
The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along, says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama.
He has mastered the art of survival.
In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement.
If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends.
Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage -- in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
"He is cornered," says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega.
The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option.
His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation.
The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born.
It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school.
In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say.
He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges," recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend.
Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service.
The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co.'s banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader.
Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly.
"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation.
He started building the files that helped him gain power.
A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 -- as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses.
This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control.
"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez.
Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people.
During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office.
People started wondering if something was wrong with him," Mr. Miranda recalls.
But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers."
Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's so-called G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans.
Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977.
Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans."
Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination.
The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S.
Everybody was afraid of him, Mr. Ingersoll says.
Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials.
"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner.
For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says.
In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you."
Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration.
The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself.
At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June.
The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama.
Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read.
Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with re-indicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms.
In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him -- much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told.
After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed.
"Unfortunately," Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control."
The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death.
I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now," Mr. Sanford says.
If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him.
In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA.
Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges.
But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says.
An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation.
"Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video."
Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment.
As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C.
Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate.
In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces."
North, the document went on, referring to Oliver North, "has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal."
Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image.
The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him.
Lawyers in Miami this time working virtually without impediment -- prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him.
Now, neither side the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega -- has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death.
In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power?
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends.
For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger,he says.
I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong."
The nations of southern Africa know a lot about managing elephants; their herds are thriving.
But the nations of Europe and North America have decided they know better.
At this week's U.N. conference in Lausanne, they imposed a global ivory ban that seeks to overturn local policies.
A Zimbabwean delegate argued that the ban would "guarantee the extinction of the elephant."
Legitimate ranchers, who have an interest in preserving the herds, would go out of business.
Poachers would control the underground trade.
Many delegates were willing to craft a compromise, but U.S. delegate Constance Harriman and others thundered that down.
The Greens from the First World wanted a morality play, not a negotiation.
Fortunately, the nations of southern Africa haven't totally surrendered their sovereignty.
Five countries announced they would not honor what one Zimbabwean delegate wryly called the "made in Switzerland" solution.
In fact, they seemed a mite resentful.
The director of Zimbabwe's Wildlife Department described American conservationists as "fat little puppies from urban environments who don't know a thing about Africa."
That's not fair; they're not all fat.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign.
Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms.
The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days.
Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will.
According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages.
He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party.
The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend.
According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself.
The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his "self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out."
But others criticized him, "for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, "has seriously weakened his authority."
The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired.
Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying "the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view."
And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate.
Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state.
Walter Sisulu and the African National Congress came home yesterday.
After 26 years in prison, Mr. Sisulu, the 77-year-old former secretary-general of the liberation movement, was dropped off at his house by a prison services' van just as the sun was coming up.
At the same time, six ANC colleagues, five of whom were arrested with him in 1963 and sentenced to life imprisonment, were reunited with their families at various places around the country.
And as the graying men returned to their homes, the ANC, outlawed in South Africa since 1960 and still considered to be the chief public enemy by the white government, defiantly returned to the streets of the country's black townships.
A huge ANC flag, with black, green and gold stripes, was hoisted over the rickety gate at Mr. Sisulu's modest house, while on the street out front, boys displayed the ANC colors on their shirts, caps and scarves.
At the small four-room home of Elias Motsoaledi, a leading ANC unionist and a former commander in the group's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, well-wishers stuck little ANC flags in their hair and a man tooted on an antelope horn wrapped in ANC ribbons.
"I am happy to see the spirit of the people," said Mr. Sisulu, looking dapper in a new gray suit.
As the crowd outside his home shouted "ANC, ANC," the old man shot his fists into the air.
"I'm inspired by the mood of the people."
Under the laws of the land, the ANC remains an illegal organization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.
But the unconditional release of the seven leaders, who once formed the intellectual and organizational core of the ANC, is a de facto un-banning of the movement and the rebirth of its internal wing.
"The government can never put the ANC back into the bottle again," said Cassim Saloojee, a veteran anti-apartheid activist on hand to welcome Mr. Sisulu.
Things have gone too far for the government to stop them now.
There's no turning back.
There was certainly no stopping the tide of ANC emotion last night, when hundreds of people jammed into the Holy Cross Anglican Church in Soweto for what became the first ANC rally in the country in 30 years.
Deafening chants of "ANC" and "Umkhonto we Sizwe" shook the church as the seven aging men vowed that the ANC would continue its fight against the government and the policies of racial segregation on all fronts, including the armed struggle.
And they called on the government to release Nelson Mandela, the ANC's leading figure, who was jailed with them and remains in prison.
Without him, said Mr. Sisulu, the freeing of the others "is only a half-measure."
President F.W. de Klerk released the ANC men -- along with one of the founding members of the Pan Africanist Congress, a rival liberation group -- as part of his efforts to create a climate of trust and peace in which his government can begin negotiations with black leaders over a new constitution aimed at giving blacks a voice in national government.
But Pretoria may instead be creating a climate for more turmoil and uncertainty in this racially divided country.
As other repressive governments, particularly Poland and the Soviet Union, have recently discovered, initial steps to open up society can create a momentum for radical change that becomes difficult, if not impossible, to control.
As the days go by, the South African government will be ever more hard pressed to justify the continued imprisonment of Mr. Mandela as well as the continued banning of the ANC and enforcement of the state of emergency.
If it doesn't yield on these matters, and eventually begin talking directly to the ANC, the expectations and promise raised by yesterday's releases will turn to disillusionment and unrest.
If it does, the large number of right-wing whites, who oppose any concessions to the black majority, will step up their agitation and threats to take matters into their own hands.
The newly released ANC leaders also will be under enormous pressure.
The government is watching closely to see if their presence in the townships leads to increased anti-government protests and violence; if it does, Pretoria will use this as a reason to keep Mr. Mandela behind bars.
Pretoria hasn't forgotten why they were all sentenced to life imprisonment in the first place: for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
In addition, the government is figuring that the releases could create a split between the internal and external wings of the ANC and between the newly freed leaders and those activists who have emerged as leaders inside the country during their imprisonment.
In order to head off any divisions, Mr. Mandela, in a meeting with his colleagues before they were released, instructed them to report to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka as soon as possible.
The men also will be faced with bridging the generation gap between themselves and the country's many militant black youths, the so-called young lions who are anxious to see the old lions in action.
Says Peter Mokaba, president of the South African Youth Congress: "We will be expecting them to act like leaders of the ANC."
They never considered themselves to be anything else.
At last night's rally, they called on their followers to be firm, yet disciplined, in their opposition to apartheid.
We emphasize discipline because we know that the government is very, very sensitive," said Andrew Mlangeni, another early Umkhonto leader who is now 63.
We want to see Nelson Mandela and all our comrades out of prison, and if we aren't disciplined we may not see them here with us."
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war."
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: "While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination."
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: "In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever."
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized."
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
But the sense of urgency for this meeting matches the rage felt by both Israelis and Palestinians after yesterday's violence.
Today Israel buried one of its two soldiers beaten to death bay a mob of Palestinians yesterday.
Today in Jerusalem, Israeli security forces barred Palestinians under the age of 45 from praying at the al-Aqsa mosque.
Young Palestinians prayed outside and some young men were asked and beaten by Israeli police which may help make clear why arranging a summit is so difficult.
And why the political leaders will have such a hard time keeping the streets -- getting the streets calm.
ABC's Gillian Findlay reports tonight from Palestinian Gaza.
On the streets of Gaza today, talk of summits and peace was the last thing many Palestinians wanted to hear.
Only a day after Israeli missiles destroyed two police boats here, one of them very close to Mr. Arafat's own office.
Today, Israel released footage of yesterday's other attacks shot from inside a helicopter gun ship.
These missiles landed in the city of Ramallah.
With Israeli gun boats continuing to control the coast today, Gaza police were taking no chances.
Abandoning their stations for the city's main square.
What Israel did yesterday has turned anger here to fury.
It is war, Palestinians say, and Mr. Arafat has no business talking peace.
You want a war?
Yes.
Why?
I hope.
Why?
Because no peace.
After all this, no peace.
At another rally in Georgia today, Islamic leaders called openly for terror attacks on Israel.
Extremist groups have a lot of support these days and a lot of power.
This afternoon, a crowd of angry Muslims set fire to a hotel and to homes of people who they say sold alcohol.
Palestinian police did little to stop them.
Even if Mr. Arafat goes to a summit, and even if he signs an agreement, there is no guarantee any more that his people will listen.
Gillian Findlay, ABC News, Gaza.
At the bottom of the sea.
Two months after the submarine "Kursk" went down with 118 men on board, divers have managed to get inside.
They found five bodies so far.
And today, they found a note, written after a pair of explosions ripped through the hull and sent the "Kursk" into the depths of the Barents see.
Here's ABC's bob woodruff.
The note was discovered by divers inside one compartment of the submarine, on the body of 27-year-old lieutenant captain Dmitry Kolesnikov, photographed here on board the "Kursk" three years ago.
"I am writing blindly," he wrote apparently in darkness.
"None of us can get to the surface."
Russian officials believe the note was written at least two hours after the sub began to sink.
All the crew from the sixth, seventh and eighth compartments went over to the ninth."
Kolesnikov wrote, There are 23 people here.
We made this decision as a result of the accident.
The note contains no new evidence about what sank the "Kursk," whether it was an internal explosion or a collision.
But it does contradict the official Russian version that was given to family members, that all 118 men had died instantly.
Today, the chief of Russia's navy was forced to admit to the families he was wrong, that some of the crew not only survived, according to Kolesnikov's note,
Two or three tried to get out through the escape hatch.
But it may have been flooded.
Today, Kolesnikov's widow could not hold back her tears.
It's horribly painful, it's awful," she said.
I had a feeling that he didn't die immediately, and it turned out my feeling was right."
She also says her husband had a premonition.
Last summer, before he went to sea, he gave her his dog tag and a crucifix, and said he may not be coming back.
Bob Woodruff, ABC news, London.
In news overseas, at a United Nations environmental summit in Johannesburg, South Africa, representatives from 122 nations signed an agreement banning the use of 12 highly toxic chemicals.
Among them, dioxins and other chemicals, which are known as "the dirty dozen."
They have been linked to cancer, birth defects, and other genetic abnormalities.
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the Middle East Thursday, demonstrating against military strikes on Iraq and calling on Muslims to wage jihad against the United States and its allies.
Lebanon and the Palestinian Authority issued fierce denunciations of the US-led attacks, while the Egyptian government daily Al-Ahram warned it marked "the beginning an era of US colonisation that will benefit only Israel".
Protests against the action aimed at toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein were held in cities across Libya, Egypt and Lebanon, as well as in Amman, Damascus and the Gaza Strip.
However, there were no reports of protests against the war from the Gulf states, many of whom are host to US military personnel.
Saudi Arabia, however, expressed its "deep concern" and regret over the start of US military operations.
Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal spoke of the "kingdom's hope for a quick halt in military action and for the return to peaceful efforts", the state SPA news agency reported.
In Riyadh's first reaction to the start of the against, he also called for Iraq's "unity, internal security and territorial integrity" to be preserved and rejected military occupation.
Lebanese President Emile Lahoud, meanwhile, was more forthright, strongly denouncing Washington's "aggression" and warning that it could have repercussions beyond the borders of the pariah state.
We have warned against the marginalisation of the United Nations and we see this aggression today plunging the world into a tunnel where one cannot see the end," he said in a statement.
For these reasons, we judge that it is necessary that the forces of peace and those who believe in right and justice take the necessary and rapid steps to halt this dangerous slide into war against Iraq which will result in heavy human and material losses."
The Palestinian Authority also condemned Thursday's early morning missile strikes on Iraq, and warned Israel not to exploit the conflict.
We Palestinians are against the war and we totally condemn this war in the Middle East.
A solution must be found to this problem through diplomatic means, with the international community," local authorities minister Saeb Erakat said.
We are warning Israel not to exploit this war against Iraq to carry out more attacks against the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and destroy the Palestinian Authority and the peace process," he said.
The radical Palestinian movement Islamic Jihad warned that "the war against Iraq is a war against the whole region", while Hamas issued a chilling warning against those taking part in the war against Iraq.
The aggression by the vile Americans and the war against Iraq signifies a war against all Arabs and Muslims around the world," said Hamas senior official Abdul Aziz al-Rantissi.
The war shows the impotence of all Arab states.
We call on all Arab states to act immediately to defend Iraq and counter the US war," he said.
I don't think America will win this war, as our jihad (holy war) and our resistance will teach the Americans and British a lesson they will never forget," he said.
State radio in Syria accused the United States and its allies of wanting to get their "hands on Iraq's oil and wealth and impose their hegemony on the world".
In the Egyptian capital, 10 demonstrators and at least four policeman were injured in clashes after several thousand demonstrators took to the streets near the US and British embassies.
Riot police intervened after the protestors, who included hundreds of students from the American University in Cairo, rallied on the city's central Tahrir Square, close to both the university campus and the US embassy.
More than 1,000 people also gathered at Cairo's Al-Azhar Islamic University, where they burned an American flag and demanded the expulsion of the ambassadors of the United States, Britain, Spain and Israel.
Demonstrations also took place in the northern Egyptian cities of Alexandria, Tanta and Kafr el-Sheikh.
In Amman, three protestors were hospitalised after some 500 Jordanian lawyers staged a sit-in at the main court house after being forcibly blocked by riot police from marching towards the Iraqi embassy to show their solidarity.
In Lebanon, hundreds of students gathered on the campuses of the Arab University of Beirut and the American University of Beirut calling for the assassination of US President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
South of the capital in Sidon, some 1,500 schoolboys denounced "the Bush assassin" and the "silence of the Arab leaders who sold out Iraq".
Fifteen people were killed and more than 30 wounded Wednesday as a suicide bomber blew himself up on a student bus in the northern town of Haifa, the first bombing in Israel in exactly two months.
Several hours later, dozens of Israeli tanks advanced into the northern Gaza Strip backed by helicopters which fired at least three rockets in the Jabaliya area, Palestinian security sources said.
Palestinian medical sources said 60-year-old Mohammed al-Biyari was killed in his home near Jabaliya refugee camp by the rocket fire and another wounded.
A second rocket landed in farmlands and the other hit a house inside the refugee camp, but without causing further casualties, Palestinian security sources said.
Two 13-year-old children were among those killed in the Haifa bus bombing, Israeli public radio said, adding that most of the victims were youngsters.
The army said two soldiers were also among the dead.
The bus was ripped to shreds while travelling between a residential area and Haifa university.
Of the 33 injured still in hospital late Wednesday, two were in intensive care and six others in serious condition, the radio said.
Israel's night-time raid in Gaza involving around 40 tanks and armoured vehicles came after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon convened his security cabinet to discuss a response to the bomb attack.
Israeli media said the retaliation was unlikely to be on a scale that would risk disrupting US preparations for war on Iraq.
The Palestinian suicide bomber on the Haifa bus came from the southern West Bank town of Hebron, public radio said, naming him as 20-year-old Mahmoud Hamadan Salim Qawasmi.
Apart from his ID card, also found in the wreckage were the remains of a letter allegedly outlining his plan to carry out a suicide attack and praising the September 2001 destruction of the World Trade Centre in New York, it said.
Israeli police were not immediately available for comment, but Palestinian sources in Hebron said Mahmoud Qawasmi was a 21-year-old student with links to the Islamic radical group Hamas.
Israeli forces moved into Hebron's Al-Sheikh district where his family lived and arrested Qawasmi's brother and father after the bombing, they said.
Without claiming responsibility, Hamas and another hardline group, Islamic Jihad, said the blast was revenge for a string of bloody Israeli army raids into the Gaza Strip in recent weeks.
But the Palestinian Authority condemned the attack, saying it would divert international sympathy away from the far higher Palestinian civilian death toll.
We condemn all attacks against civilians including today's attack in Haifa, said information minister Yasser Abed Rabbo.
The Palestinian leadership said the attack would serve as "a pretext for Israel's government and occupation army to step up its deadly campaign which caused the deaths of 77 Palestinians in February".
It was the first bomb attack inside Israel since January 5, and came just days after the hawkish Sharon appointed the most right-wing government in Israel's history on a pledge to get tough on security.
In the January attack, two Palestinian suicide bombers blew themselves up in central Tel Aviv, killing 23 other people.
Israeli government spokesman Avi Pazner called the latest deadly blast a "very grave attack" and said the Jewish state would take "vigorous action against the terrorist organisations".
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been dealing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks when the Haifa bus was blown up.
US President George W. Bush condemned the "attack on innocents in Israel," White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said, adding that "his message to the terrorists is: Their efforts will not be succcessful.
He will continue to pursue the path to peace in the Middle East.
EU foreign policy supremo Javier Solana likewise slammed the attack, although he also took a jab at Israel, saying, "There have been too many civilians killed in the last weeks and the last days."
In London, a spokesman for the British prime minister said Tony Blair "condemns absolutely what has happened".
The spokesman added that he would obviously call on all sides to do what they can to break the cycle of violence, because it is only through engagement that we can realise the vision everyone wants to see.
There needs to be dialogue in order for this to be resolved.
The bus attack came just two days after Israeli forces staged a bloody raid into a refugee camp in central Gaza targeting a founding member of Hamas, which has spearheaded suicide bombings against the Jewish state.
Hamas vowed to continue its attacks, while the Palestinian Authority accused Israel of trying to disrupt top-level Palestinian meetings to discuss reforms of Arafat's administration.
Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said international intervention was needed to break the cycle of violence.
Eight people, including a pregnant woman and a 13-year-old child were killed in Monday's Gaza raid, provoking US-led international calls for Israeli restraint.
And on Tuesday, Israeli troops shot dead an elderly Palestinian shepherd outside a Jewish settlement on the edge of Gaza City.
In the West Bank, an eight-year-old Palestinian boy as well as his brother and a sister were wounded late Wednesday by Israeli gunfire in a village north of the town of Ramallah, their elder sister said.
Thousands of fresh US troops headed for Iraq Thursday as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and US President George W. Bush discussed the effort to oust Saddam Hussein, which some senior US military officials warn could last months.
About 1,000 soldiers from the US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into an airfield in a Kurdish-controlled area of northern Iraq, establishing a base through which to bring in more troops and tanks, Pentagon officials said.
And some 12,000 soldiers from the US Army's 4th Infantry Division, which was supposed to have gone into northern Iraq through Turkey, began flying out of Fort Hood, Texas, Thursday to the region, a military fort spokeswoman told AFP.
The soldiers are to meet up with ships transporting their equipment, which is arriving in Kuwait from the Mediterranean, where it had been idling for weeks on navy ships awaiting Turkey's decision.
The war in Iraq could last months and require considerable US military reinforcements to assure a victory, the Washington Post reported Thursday, quoting senior US military officials.
Sandstorms, dangerously long supply lines and a recalcitrant enemy "has led to abroad reassessment by some top generals of US military expectations and timelines," the Post reports.
"Tell me how this ends," one senior officer asked the Post.
Most US army commanders believe it is critical to pause the breakneck advance towards Baghdad to secure the supply lines and make sure weapons are operable and troops resupplied after days of powerful sandstorms and damage inflicted by Iraqi attacks, the Post reports.
The Post also quoted Central Intelligence Agency and Pentagon intelligence analysts complaining that Bush officials largely ignored their warning that Iraqi irregular forces would use guerrilla tactics and offer significant resistance.
Publicly US officials have insisted that the war is going according to plan, and the most advanced US forces are currently some 100 kilometers (60 miles) outside of Baghdad.
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed worries that there were insufficient forces in the Gulf region if the battle for Baghdad goes wrong.
After briefing US senators on the war, Rumsfeld told reporters that the number of forces "has been increasing and it will continue to do so until it is finished."
Meanwhile Blair arrived in Washington late Wednesday for two days of talks with Bush at the Camp David presidential retreat.
Talks were to focus on how to run a post-Saddam Iraq, with Washington resisting a large United Nations role.
Blair faces an uphill battle to win Bush over to giving the UN oversight of a post-Saddam administration, as Washington officials are still angry at Germany, Russia, and especially France, over the failure to secure UN Security Council approval for military action.
Blair and Bush were to hold a joint press conference at 1600 GMT Thursday.
Britain has deployed some 45,000 troops to fight with the more than 250,000 US soldiers lined up against Iraqi troops.
Bush gave a new, stronger warning that the war could become drawn out.
As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime," Bush told cheering military personnel Wednesday at the Florida headquarters of Central Command, which is running the campaign.
We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you -- and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq -- there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near," he said.
At the last minute, Bush withdrew a phrase in his speech saying the campaign was "ahead of schedule."
A senior administration official said the president had decided to be cautious.
Bush pointedly paid tribute to the 48-nation "coalition of the willing" -- particularly Britain -- that is publicly backing the campaign.
Separately, US Secretary of State Colin Powell emphasized US determination to pursue the military campaign despite the diplomatic pressure Washington faces at the United Nations.
We are interested in concluding this conflict, not having a pause right now or stopping right now, but concluding this as quickly as possible so we can get on with the rebuilding of Iraq and putting in place a better system of governance," Powell said in an interview with the Al-Jazeera Arab television network.
Powell, the most moderate member of the Bush cabinet, said he fully agreed with the president's policy on Iraq and had no plans to leave.
Personally, I'm very much in sync with the president and he values my services," he said in an interview with National Public Radio.
Meanwhile the Wall Street Journal reported that several British and US oil companies have quietly advised US and British forces on how oil fields operate so they could safeguard the fields in Iraq.
The companies, including Britain's BP PLC and the Texas-based Boots and Coots International Well Control Inc., were not paid for their consultations, but allied military engineers said their advice was critical.
Some 2,500 mainly university students formed a human chain in Japanese characters spelling out "No War" in Osaka on Sunday to protest against the ongoing US-led military campaign in Iraq.
We cannot forgive this war," Miyako Fuji, 20, one of the rally's organisers told Jiji news agency.
I want to join together the feelings of each of us as individuals who oppose the war."
Protesters, who exceeded the 2,000 expected to show up at the park at Osaka Castle in the city's downtown neighbourhood, carried placards that read "Stop war" and "Love and Peace" while forming the human chain after 3:00 pm (0600 GMT), Jiji said.
The protest follows a string of others involving tens of thousands of peace activists across Japan since January.
According to a poll by Kyodo news agency released Saturday, 78 of 100 people surveyed opposed the military action in Iraq.
A separate poll of 1,846 adults by the leading Yomiuri newspaper published Tuesday showed 64 percent felt Japan had "no choice" but to back the United States, with only 12 percent saying Japan had "every reason" to back the war.
British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown on Tuesday named the current head of the country's energy regulator as the new chairman of finance watchdog the Financial Services Authority (FSA)
Former senior banker Callum McCarthy begins what is one of the most important jobs in London's financial world in September, when incumbent Howard Davies steps down.
Davies is leaving to become chairman of the London School of Economics, one of the best-known parts of the University of London.
Brown said McCarthy would bring to the FSA "an unrivalled combination of experience of the public sector, experience as a senior practitioner in the financial services industry, and chairman of a highly successful regulator."
McCarthy currently heads the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, or Ofgem, which regulates Britain's privatised energy industry.
As well as previously holding senior positions at Barclays Bank, BZW and Kleinwort Benson, McCarthy was formerly a top civil servant at the Department of Trade and Industry.
Under Davies's watch, the FSA became Britain's sole regulatory body for financial services in November 2001, taking on the various functions of nine separate agencies.
At least three members of a family in Indias northeastern state of Tripura were hacked to death by a tribal mob for allegedly practicing witchcraft, police said Thursday.
A spokesman said a group of 25 to 30 armed men Wednesday attacked a house belonging to a village quack doctor in Tultuli, 60 kilometers (38 miles) south of Tripuras state capital Agartala.
The mob dragged out three members of a family and (killed) them with machetes and spears before fleeing the area," the spokesman said by telephone from Agartala.
The dead included the quack doctor, 55-year-old Nityalila Naotia, his teenaged son and another member of the family, whom he did not identify.
It was believed Naotia was a practicing sorcerer and through his black magic he had cast evil spells on villagers, prompting a group within the village to eliminate them," the spokesman said.
Police have arrested four people in connection with the killings.
Superstitious beliefs, black magic and demonology are integral to the tribal custom in parts of Tripura and other northeast Indian states.
Many tribes practice faiths believed to be a mix of black magic and superstition.
A Pakistani court in central Punjab province has sentenced a Christian man to life imprisonment for a blasphemy conviction, police said Sunday.
Judge Shahid Rafiq, of the district court in the industrial city of Faisalabad, found Ranjha Masih guilty of defiling Koranic verses during a protest rally by the minority Christian community in 1998.
In a verdict handed down on Saturday, the judge also ordered Ranjha to pay a fine of 50,000 rupees (about 870 US dollars), they said.
Ranjha was accused of tearing down a billboard carrying verses from the Koran in Faisalabad during a Christian demonstration after the city's bishop committed suicide over the 1985 blasphemy law.
Faisalabad's Catholic Bishop John Joseph, who had been campaigning against the law, shot himself in the head outside a court in Sahiwal district when the judge convicted Christian Ayub Masih under the law in 1998.
Ayub Masih was charged in 1996 with blasphemy for allegedly defending British author Salman Rushdie, whose novel "The Satanic Verses" infuriated radical Mulsim clerics who accused the author of defaming Islam.
The Pakistani supreme court last year aquitted Ayub Masih, who had denied uttering any word against Islam or the Prophet Mohammad.
Blasphemy is punishable by death under the Pakistan Penal Code.
However, no blasphemy convict has ever been executed in the country.
Christian rights activists campaigning against the laws, introduced by late military dictator General Zia-ul Haq, say they are mainly used to persecute Christians or to settle feuds over land.
Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Wednesday stressed Qatar's role in the Middle East peace process during talks with his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr al-Thani in Paris.
Shalom told a joint press conference that the tiny Gulf state's strong relationship with the recently appointed Palestinian prime minister, Mahmud Abbas, could be a boost for peace.
We discussed the Middle East peace process.
Over an hour of talks, we asserted the will of both parties (Israel and the Arab world) to do everything to return to the negotiating table," Shalom said.
Qatar is a very important country on this issue.
I know the special relationship that the Qatari foreign minister has with Abu Mazen," he said, using Abbas's alternative name.
The meeting was Shalom's first encounter with an Arab counterpart since he took office as Israel's foreign minister on February 27.
Qatar has economic links with Israel without maintaining diplomatic relations, in the face of criticism from other Arab countries.
Afterwards Shalom was to fly on to London for talks with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw.
US President George W. Bush told Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien by telephone Monday that he looked forward to seeing him at the upcoming summit of major industrialized nations and Russia, the White House said Tuesday.
The two leaders discussed the upcoming G-8 meeting, US-Canada (relations) and other international issues of concern," Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said days before the June 1-3 summit, to be held in France.
Both said they look forward to seeing each other in Evian.
They also touched on Afghanistan, the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and on the global economy," said Fleischer.
Amid a chill in relations over the war in Iraq, which Canada opposed, Bush indefinitely postponed a visit to Canada, instead choosing to host Australian Prime Minster John Howard, who endorsed that military campaign.
On Monday, Chretien told reporters that he and Bush, who had not spoken since late February, discussed a wide range of issues, including Iraq, the upcoming summit of the Group of Eight industrial powers and aid to Africa.
We've always been on good terms.
We just disagree on one item, the Canadian leader said.
The Times of India newspaper quoted Digvijay Singh, chief minister of the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, as saying that Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and President Abdul Kalam had off ended the Hindu rain God Varuna by remaining bachelors.
Not just Prime Minister Vajpayee but president Kalam’s bachelor status is making the country dry, arid and infertile," he added.
The country is being ruled by a bachelor president and an unmarried prime minister.
This according to the Hindu shastras (books) is very inauspicious and that is the reason there is a widespread heat wave and drought, "said Singh.
The skeleton of a second baby has been found at a rural Wisconsin home where a 22-year-old woman's dead infant was discovered in a blue plastic container June 8, officials said Monday.
Kristin Scott, the mother, told police she gave birth secretly to both babies at her parents' home in Byrds Creek, Richland County, one of unknown sex in April 2001 and the other, a fullterm girl, January 14.
Police arrested her in Abilene, Texas, Saturday where she had moved with a friend June 2.
She is being held on 50,000 dollars bail on a charge of first-degree reckless homicide and hiding a corpse in the death of the infant born in January.
Scott told police she did not tend to the baby, and it died after 30 minutes.
She said the baby had to die, according to the criminal complaint.
The woman's parents, William and Nancy Scott, found the decomposing body of the first baby in her closet after they went looking for the source of a foul odor in their house.
Scott told investigators she had moved that body around before she moved to Texas, sometimes in the closet at the Byrds Creek house, in the trunk of her car and in the closet of her apartment in Richland Center, the complaint said.
The sheriff released no other details about the second baby.
Palestinian security forces returned Monday to the positions they held in the Gaza Strip before the outbreak of the 33-month Palestinian uprising as Israel removed all major checkpoints in the coastal territory, a Palestinian security source said.
Police officers took up their positions across the Gaza Strip, enjoying a freedom of movement they have not known since the intifada exploded in September 2000, the source said.
Palestinian police have taken over all the posts and positions they held before September 28, 2000.
It is the first time they have had freedom of movement with cars and weapons since the start of the intifada," the source said.
The move marked a huge step forward in carrying out the US-backed Middle East "roadmap", which aims to end the months of bloodshed and create a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
Following the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the northern town of Beit Hanoun late Sunday, police took up positions there and in the neighbouring town of Beit Lahiya, he said.
They also deployed along the border with Israel.
The handover is a credibility test for the Palestinian Authority, which must show it means business when it comes to reining in hardline groups plotting attacks on the Jewish state.
In another first in the almost three-year intifada, the Israeli army allowed Palestinians free circulation on the trans-Gaza highway as troops abandoned three major checkpoints across the coastal territory.
Traffic was flowing freely through the Netzarim junction, just south of Gaza City, the Kissufim junction by Deir al-Balah in the central Gaza Strip, and the Guest House junction just south of Deir al-Balah after the army withdrew.
The three military checkpoints on the highway, which runs the entire length of the Gaza Strip, had transformed the trip from north to south, ordinarily a 30-minute ride, into a grinding two or three-hour ordeal and came to symbolise the horrors of occupation.
Israel has implemented most of the agreement except for a few issues,the source said, pointing out that Israel had still not removed two military observation posts at the Kissufim junction and the Guest House junction.
Although there was free movement along the trans-Gaza highway, several other roads remained temporarily closed, he said.
The Karni-Netzarim road, which runs east-to-west across the route, was still closed as was the section of the highway passing close by Kfar Darom settlement, just south of the Guest House junction, he said, adding both were likely to be opened in the coming weeks.
Another road, leading from the southern border town of Rafah to Khan Yunis, would be opened within 10 days, he said.
Adressing Palestinian complaints, an Israeli military source confirmed troops had installed a gate at the Netzarim crossing and at the southern Guest House junction but said that they were only there for when Jewish settlers needed to use the road.
A ban on Palestinian men under the age of 35 being allowed to move freely was still in force but that was expected to be lifted later on Monday or early Tuesday.
The army also handed over control of Rafah border crossing between the Gaza Strip and Egypt to the Palestinians, security sources said.
Six Palestinian police officers were allowed to return to the Palestinian section of the border crossing, which had been taken over by Israeli troops shortly after the start of the uprising.
Under the 1993 Oslo accords, which granted a measure of autonomy to the Palestinians, the Rafah border crossing with Egypt was to be jointly managed by both Israel and the Palestinians, although Israel had final control over the zone.
Although the crossing has, in principle, been open for movement between the two territories -- while being frequently closed by Israeli for reasons rarely explained -- the Palestinian section has been manned by Israel for more than two years.
I wish I could have been at a Pub, or wherever these people convene, to see the reactions from all the Britons who read the Telegraph this morning (emphasis added): Britain's gun laws are aimed at the wrong target, curbing and criminalising legal ownership while failing to tackle huge rises in shooting offences over the past few years, according to an international firearms legislation expert.
Prof Gary Mauser said that Britain was making the same mistake as Canada and Australia in focusing on legal owners - a section of the law-abiding community where gun crimes, such as the Dunblane massacre, were aberrations.
The Home Office and police chiefs should instead tackle the possession of guns in criminal hands, said Prof Mauser, a member of the independent Fraser Institute in Canada.
He has given evidence to select committees of the House of Commons and the Canadian Senate and predicted the escalation of gun crime on Britain's streets.
His warning comes as gun crime incidents are averaging about 29 a day in England and Wales, more than twice the level of when the Labour Government came to power in 1997 .
In the past two years, there have been cases of schoolchildren and a baby, killed or injured by guns.
I believe that factors of political correctness are at work,he said.
Police crackdowns, Home Office initiatives and over-regulation of legally held weapons create froth and they may even fool the police themselves into believing they are doing something about gun crime."
Prof Mauser added: The sad truth is that while the police officers are inspecting farmers' gun cabinets to see if they comply with regulations somewhere in the UK, someone, who has not filled in a firearms certificate form, will be smuggling a gun into the country or selling one to an inner city youth."
Recorded gun crime rose by three per cent to 10,590 incidents in the year to June.
Two-thirds of gun crime takes place in London, Birmingham and Manchester.
It doesn't matter to these people that crime has skyrocketed since the irrational ban on private gun possession went into effect in Great Britain.
Just as long as it's there, they feel safe.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld took part in a Q&A with the troops today that was anything but cozy.
Disgruntled soldiers complained to Rumsfeld about long deployments and a lack of armored vehicles and other equipment.
From the Associated Press : "You go to war with the Army you have," Rumsfeld replied, "not the Army you might want or wish to have."
Spc. Thomas Wilson had asked the defense secretary, "Why do we soldiers have to dig through local landfills for pieces of scrap metal and compromised ballistic glass to up-armor our vehicles?"
Shouts of approval and applause arose from the estimated 2,300 soldiers who had assembled to see Rumsfeld.
We do not have proper armored vehicles to carry with us north, Wilson, 31, of Nashville, Tenn., concluded after asking again.
Wilson, an airplane mechanic whose unit, the 278th Regimental Combat Team of the Tennessee Army National Guard, is about to drive north into Iraq for a one-year tour of duty, put his finger on a problem that has bedeviled the Pentagon for more than a year.
Rarely, though, is it put so bluntly in a public forum.
Rumsfeld said the Army was sparing no expense or effort to acquire as many Humvees and other vehicles with extra armor as it can.
What is more, he said, armor is not the savior some think it is.
You can have all the armor in the world on a tank and a tank can (still) be blown up," he said.
Can't say that's the most comforting answer.
From the Associated Press : City residents will vote next year on a proposed weapons ban that would deny handguns to everyone except law enforcement officers, members of the military and security guards.
If passed next November, residents would have 90 days to give up firearms they keep in their homes or businesses.
The proposal was immediately dismissed as illegal by a gun owners group.
Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else "actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment," according to the measure.
Gun Owners of California, a Sacramento-based lobbying group, quickly called the ban illegal.
Sam Paredes, the group's executive director, said state law bars local governments from usurping the state's authority to regulate firearms.
The amazing thing is they are going to turn San Francisco into ground zero for every criminal who wants to profit at their chosen profession," Paredes said.
Washington, D.C., is the only major American city that currently bans handgun possession by private citizens.
Andrew Arulanandam, director of public affairs for the National Rifle Association, said San Francisco would be remiss to use that city as a model.
If gun control worked, Washington, D.C., would be the beacon.
However, it's the murder capital of the United States," he said.
If approved, the weapons ban would take effect in January 2006.
Quote of the day: "Firearms would be allowed only for police officers, security guards, members of the military, and anyone else actually employed and engaged in protecting and preserving property or life within the scope of his or her employment."
So preserving property or life within the scope of self-defense and protection of the home is not allowed.
No thanks.
If the people vote for this measure it will be hard to sympathize with them when robbery and rape rates skyrocket, because burgulars will know homes are not guarded, and rapists will know the only thing stopping them from the victim they desire is their own inhibitions.
From the Associated Press : A baby girl who had been cut out of her mother's womb was found after a frantic search, and authorities arrested the woman they say strangled the mother and stole the child.
The baby was in good condition Saturday.
Lisa M. Montgomery, 36, of Melvern, Kan., was arrested later Friday and charged with kidnapping resulting in death.
Bobbie Jo Stinnett, 23, was found Thursday in a pool of blood inside her small white home in Skidmore, a town in northwest Missouri.
Stinnett, who was eight months pregnant, had earlier been talking with her mother on the phone, and hung up saying a woman she had chatted with online had just arrived at her door, authorities said.
U.S. Attorney Todd Graves said Montgomery contacted Stinnett through an online message board, and authorities zeroed in on her using computer forensics.
Montgomery was seeking to buy a dog from Stinnett, who raised rat terriers, he said.
According to the criminal complaint, Montgomery traveled about 40 miles to Topeka, Kan., on Thursday to go shopping.
Her husband received a call from her saying she had gone into labor and given birth.
The next day, authorities say, Montgomery confessed that she strangled Stinnett from behind, cut her open, removed the baby and cut her umbilical cord.
I don't understand how we can call this fetus-thing that was ripped from a mother's womb a "child" or "girl" in a society that sanctions partial-birth abortion.
If you can't charge someone for killing a fetus via abortion during the eighth month, then surely you can't make a big deal about a woman who kidnapped a fetus that survived the knifing.
On a less-sarcastic note, I pray for the family of the 23-year-old woman.
No one should have to die because some crazy nut wanted a child and decided to kill for it.
If there's any good news in this story, it's that Victoria Jo will live on and carry her mother's memory.
Question for the pro-choicers: Being that it isn't yet the ninth month, can we still charge the killer with kidnapping?
Feminists have a reason to celebrate today as an appeals court just threw out the convictions of their martyr, Andrea Yates, by ruling that one of the prosecutor's expert witnesses gave false testimony at her trial.
Yates, in case you have forgotten, is the women from Texas who heinously drowned her five kids, aged 6 months to 7 years, one by one, in her bathtub.
Liberal feminist organizations rushed to Yates' defense, most notably the National Organization for Women, which provided money for her defense fund and held candlelight vigils.
No such ceremonies were held for her five dead children.
In 2002 a jury sentenced Yates to life in prison for the deaths of three of her children.
She was not tried in the deaths of the other two.
Today the 1st Court of Appeals overturned the convictions and ordered a new trial.
We can only hope for the same verdict.
The blood red nation of China is trying to curb the effects of a devastating 20-year-old policy that outlawed women from having more than one child.
As a result, only about 100 girls are born for every 119 boys, because couples traditionally favor males.
Beijing has set a goal of reversing the imbalance by 2010, and to do this they will outlaw the selective abortion of female fetuses to correct an imbalance in the ratio of boys to girls.
So now by killing the males they can hopefully narrow the gender gap.
What a country!
From Reuters : Sex-selective abortion is already banned but technologies such as ultrasound have made it easier to know a baby's gender in advance, increasing the chances for aborting girls.
Despite a desire to curb the sex imbalance and a relaxation in recent years that allows rural families to have two children if the first is a girl, China has shown no sign of abandoning the one-child policy and cracks down on those who advocate against it.
One such activist is Mao Hengfeng, who was dismissed in 1988 from her job at a Shanghai soap factory after becoming pregnant a second time.
Last April, the Shanghai public security bureau sentenced her to 18 months in a labor camp for campaigning against the one-child policy.
In other news: feminists still believe they're second-class citizens in the United States.
A CNN poll asks readers to rate the president's State of the Union speech last night.
After 90,000 votes Mr. Bush has a 'C-C+' grade across the board, meaning 45,000 Republicans gave him an 'A' and 45,000 liberals failed him.
But a new CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll suggests more people side with the president.
70 percent of respondents said Bush's policies on health care were positive, while 66 percent approved of the president's plan for Social Security.
78 percent said U.S. policy in Iraq is hading in the right direction, a 12 percentage point increase over pre-speech polling.
Overall, 77 percent of respondents said Bush is taking the country in the right direction after the speech compared to 67 percent beforehand.
And who wasn't moved by the embrace of mother of a soldier killed in Iraq and the daughter of a man killed by Saddam Hussein's regime?
It was a beautiful moment last night that resulted in the longest standing ovation of the evening.
Today the parents of Marine Corps Sgt. Byron Norwood said the Iraqi woman, Safia Taleb al-Suhail, had turned and introduced herself just before the speech.
She thanked us for our son's sacrifice and made sure we knew the people in Iraq were grateful for the sacrifices that were made not just by our son, but by all of them," Janet Norwood said.
It was an uplifting moment suggesting that maybe we're doing the right thing.
I talked to a friend currently serving in Iraq last night and he says morale is up and the presence of troops is a positive thing.
They just can't pack up and leave.
Not just yet.
We must be patient.
We've all lived next to some pretty undesirable people at one point or another, but I can't imagine anyone being worse than this.
A Colorado judge ordered two teen-age girls to pay about $900 for the distress a neighbor said they caused by giving her home-made cookies adorned with paper hearts.
The pair were ordered to pay $871.70 plus $39 in court costs after neighbor Wanita Renea Young, 49, filed a lawsuit complaining that the unsolicited cookies, left at her house after the girls knocked on her door, had triggered an anxiety attack that sent her to the hospital the next day.
Taylor Ostergaard, then 17, and Lindsey Jo Zellitte, 18, paid the judgment on Thursday after a small claims court ruling by La Plata County Court Judge Doug Walker, a court clerk said on Friday.
The girls baked cookies as a surprise for several of their rural Colorado neighbors on July 31 and dropped off small batches on their porches, accompanied by red or pink paper hearts and the message: "Have a great night."
The Denver Post newspaper reported on Friday that the girls had decided to stay home and bake the cookies rather than go to a dance where there might be cursing and drinking.
Zebra Report has a picture of the good-intentioned girls.
Maybe delinquency does pay off better.
From the Associated Press : A lone gunman opened fire with an assault rifle Sunday inside a crowded mall in upstate New York, wounding one person before running out of ammunition and being subdued by employees, authorities said.
The gunman began shooting inside the Hudson Valley Mall shortly after 3 p.m. in Kingston, nearly 90 miles north of New York City.
The 24-year-old gunman went into a Best Buy store and started firing.
When he ran out of ammunition, he was captured by mall employees, police said.
Ulster Town Supervisor Fred Wadnola identified the gunman's weapon as an AK-47 assault rifle.
Everyone was running and screaming.
Then I heard the shots,witness Heather Craig told Fox News.
Whoa!
You're telling me someone was able to take an AK-47 "assault rifle" into a mall and injure people?!
But it's New York.
They have gun laws!
And because New York has such strict gun laws - meaning citizens are prohibited from concealing weapons - a gunner can use bag-toting shoppers as target practice because guns laws keep mall shoppers at his mercy.
Had an armed civilian been inside the mall, perhaps he could have intervened before the suspect began injuring people before he ran out of ammo.
But not in New York.
Because there people like me who have never had so much as a traffic ticket in life cannot conceal weapons, unlike in Florida, where you walk past us everyday without even knowing it.
From the St. Pete Times : Some Florida legislators want to give people the right to shoot an attacker in a public place.
A House committee voted Wednesday to allow people to shoot to kill in self-defense if they are attacked "in any other place where he or she has a right to be."
Sponsored by Rep. Dennis Baxley, an Ocala Republican, the bill (HB 249) passed 13-0.
State law defines deadly force as that which is likely to cause "death or great bodily harm," such as firing a gun at a person or a vehicle.
Florida courts consider deadly force a last resort and have held that a person being attacked has the "duty to use every reasonable means to avoid the danger, including retreat, prior to using deadly force."
But this legislation says a person who is under attack in a public place "has no duty to retreat."
Law-abiding people should not be told that if they are attacked, they should turn around and run," NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer told lawmakers.
This bill gives back rights that have been eroded and taken away by a judicial system that at times appears to give preferential treatment to criminals."
Baxley held up a stack of more than 800 e-mails from Floridians who he said have written him to support the bill.
He said 62 House members, a majority, have endorsed his bill, and supporters include Attorney General Charlie Crist and groups representing Florida sheriffs, police chiefs and police officers.
Rep. Jeff Kottkamp, R-Cape Coral, said the bill reminded him of a sign he saw on a constituent's house while campaigning door-to-door.
Kottkamp said the sign, next to a doorbell, showed a smoking .44-Magnum handgun and the words: "We don't dial 911."
This is great news for Florida gun carriers because now to defend yourself you don't have to first make sure a "duty to retreat" is impossible.
Currently, if one's life is threatened he/she must make sure it is impossible to escape before using deadly force on an attacker.
Slobodan Milosevic's wife will go on trial next week on charges of mismanaging state property during the former president's rule, a court said Thursday.
Mirjana Markovic, the power behind the scenes during Milosevic's 13-year reign, is accused of illegally providing their grandson's nanny with a state-owned luxury apartment in Belgrade in 2000.
The Belgrade district court said that Markovic will be tried along with 10 other Milosevic-era officials who face similar charges of ``inappropriate use of state property'' that carry a sentence of up to five years in jail.
The trial will start on March 13, the court said.
Milosevic and his wife wielded enormous power in Yugoslavia for more than a decade before he was swept out of power after a popular revolt in October 2000.
The post-Milosevic government later extradited him to the U.N. war crimes tribunal in The Hague, the Netherlands.
Since then, many of Milosevic's political and business allies as well as his two children have been accused of crimes.
Markovic, the leader of the neo-communist Yugoslav Left party, lost her parliamentary immunity from prosecution after she failed to become a deputy in the parliament of Serbia and Montenegro, the country that last month succeeded Yugoslavia.
The charismatic leader of Turkey's governing party was named prime minister Tuesday, a step that probably boosts chances that the United States will get permission to deploy troops in the country along Iraq's northern border.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who favors the deployment, hinted that he will reshuffle the Cabinet, but gave no indication if he would purge officials who opposed letting in the troops as analysts have suggested he might do.
Erdogan is extremely popular in Turkey and is likely be one of the few leaders with enough clout to unite his party and gain public support for allowing in the U.S. troops.
Turks overwhelmingly oppose a war by 94 percent, according to some polls.
Earlier this month, the Turkish parliament shocked the United States by rejecting the deployment by just four votes.
Erdogan has hinted that he will resubmit the resolution for approval, which could take another week.
The United States is pressing Turkey to act quickly.
Ships carrying equipment for U.S. troops are already waiting off the Turkish coast.
In Washington, Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Gen. Richard Myers told a Pentagon news conference Tuesday that the United States would ``have a northern option whether or not Turkey fully supports all our requests.
I'm not going to talk about the operational ways of doing it, but just be assured there will be a northern option,'' he said.
Also in Washington, Turkish Ambassador Farouk Logoglu told The Associated Press that the U.S. and Turkish militaries were holding informal discussions on the use of Turkish airspace.
The troop-basing resolution would allow the United States to use Turkish airspace.
If the resolution is not passed, Washington would likely want to use the airspace for strikes against Iraq and for airlifting troops to northern Iraq.
Refusing access to the troop deployment would mean Turkey would lose a US$15 billion U.S. aid package that Washington has offered to help cushion the country's economy if there is war.
It would also threaten Turkey's possible role in the future of Iraq.
Turkey, which fears northern Iraqi Kurds may declare independence in the aftermath of a war, has been pressing for a say if Saddam Hussein is ousted.
Secession by Iraqi Kurds could inspire Turkey's rebel Kurds, who for 15 years have been fighting for autonomy.
After he was elected, Erdogan said Turkey wanted assurances from the United States on its role in Iraq.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Tuesday there had been talks that Turkish troops could be deployed ``a short distance from their border to try to avoid refugee infiltration.''
Iraqi Kurds fear that Turkish troops could move deep into the autonomous enclave in northern Iraq and have threatened clashes.
Rumsfeld also said that like Turkey, the United States doesn't want to see a breakaway state: ``Our interest, needless to say, is to see that Iraq remains a single country,'' he said at the Pentagon news conference.
Prime Minister Abdullah Gul resigned earlier Tuesday to make way for Erdogan, who won a parliamentary seat in by-elections Sunday.
Gul will remain as a caretaker prime minister until President Ahmet Necdet Sezer approves Erdogan's Cabinet, a move that could happen as early as Wednesday.
Erdogan said he would submit his Cabinet list to the president ``as soon as possible,'' and leaders of Erdogan's Justice and Development Party met Tuesday evening.
When asked about possible changes in the Cabinet, Erdogan said: ``Perhaps there will be a small amount of change, a certain number of revisions.''
Gul's resignation had been long expected.
Erdogan heads the party but was constitutionally barred from running in November elections because he was jailed in 1999 for anti-secular activities.
The Justice party changed the constitution after taking power in the elections.
Erdogan, a leader of Turkey's pro-Islamic movement when he was jailed, said he moderated his policies in prison.
His party considers itself conservative and no longer uses the word 'Islamic' in its literature.
He now also advocates letting in U.S. troops for a war against Iraq even though it is a fellow Muslim state.
Unlike the soft-spoken Gul, Erdogan has a reputation as a fighter.
Erdogan will be willing to engage in a bruising confrontation in a way that Gul was not willing to,'' said Bulent Aliriza, an analyst at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
If Erdogan decides that for his own reasons, and not U.S. pressure, he wants this, he will push it through.''
Tensions over the basing agreement spilled over into parliament Tuesday when opposition deputy Ufuk Ozkan shouted ``You are all American lackeys!'' at members of Erdogan's party, the Anatolia news agency reported.
A furious Justice party member, Fehmi Husrev Kutlu, rushed toward Ozkan, bumping into him and sending his eyeglasses flying, Anatolia reported.
Other legislators surrounded the two to head off a brawl.
U.S. and British troops were moving on the strategic southern port city of Basra Saturday after a massive aerial assault pounded Baghdad at dawn.
Thousands of beleaguered Iraqi soldiers in the south surrendered in the face of the major push.
The battle for Basra, an oil hub of some 1.3 million people, was underway by midday, with coalition troops trying to surround Iraqi positions and force a surrender.
U.S. aircraft bombed Iraqi tanks holding bridges close to the city.
Iraqi forces responded with artillery fire.
Earlier Saturday, Baghdad was again targeted, one day after a massive U.S. aerial bombardment in which more than 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles rained down on the capital.
The nine-story Security Headquarters in the Iraqi capital took a direct hit, strewing bricks, masonry and glass across the street in the al-Salhiya neighborhood of central Baghdad.
As coalition troops advanced, an entire Iraqi army division gave itself up, U.S. military officials said.
The division the 51st Infantry Division, with 8,000 men and as many as 200 tanks, a key unit in the defense of Basra -- was the largest defection in a day when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's forces showed signs of crumbling.
Allied successes were marred by the collision of two Royal Navy helicopters over the Persian Gulf in which all six British crew members and one American were killed.
Saturday morning, American Marines and British troops rumbled along the main road from the Kuwaiti border to Basra, Highway 80, nicknamed the ``Highway of Death'' during the 1991 Gulf War, when U.S. airstrikes wiped out an Iraqi military convoy along it.
American units advancing west of Basra have already secured the Rumeila oil field, whose daily output of 1.3 million barrels makes it Iraq's most productive.
Until Basra, U.S. and British troops had encountered little resistance, even when they seized nearby Umm Qasr, and moved to secure key oil fields.
Iraqis mostly fought back with small arms, pistols, machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
Regular Iraqi forces had withdrawn from Basra but elements of Saddam's security forces are continuing to resist, British Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon said Saturday.
Other units moved into airfield complexes in western Iraq believed to have Scud missiles capable of reaching Israel, and possibly weapons of mass destruction.
Early Saturday, more units were waiting in Kuwait to smash through any Iraqi resistance.
Hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, Humvees and trucks were lined up in parallel columns waiting in single-file to cross the Iraqi-Kuwait border.
By early next week, U.S. ground forces led by the Army's 3rd Infantry Division are likely to be at the outskirts of Baghdad, where they could face greater danger from the Republican Guard, some commanders said.
After weeks of delay, Turkey relented and agreed to let combat aircraft fly over its territory.
At the same time, however, Turkey sent 1,000 troops into northern Iraq, and the government said it would send more to prevent Iraqi Kurds from creating an independent state.
The United States strongly opposes any unilateral move by Turkey into northern Iraq.
A Turkish military spokesman on Saturday denied Turkish troops had crossed into Iraq.
The United States and Britain suffered their first casualties Thursday and Friday as they pushed into Iraq, with two U.S. Marines killed in combat and another eight British and four American Marines dying in a helicopter crash that appeared to be accidental.
There was no clear figure of Iraqi casualties.
Australian commandos, who have been operating deep in Iraq, destroyed a command and control post and killed a number of soldiers, according to the country's defense chief, Gen. Peter Cosgrove.
In an address Saturday, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf told Iraqis that fighting had been ``fierce.''
He said most of those captured by allied forces were civilians, not soldiers.
He claimed Iraqi troops had destroyed five tanks.
He said more than 200 Iraqis had been injured, including women, children and other civilians who were being treated at five hospitals in Baghdad.
Hoon said Saddam's regime was crumbling under the pressure of a huge air assault.
As last night's dramatic television coverage showed, the lights stayed on in Baghdad, but the instruments of tyranny are collapsing,'' he said.
Iraqi Vice President Taha Yasin Ramadan, speaking on Iraqi Radio, was quoted by the British Broadcasting Corp.'s monitoring service as accusing Britain and the United States of working to ``eliminate'' the state of Iraq.
In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Ramadan said, ``It is also regrettable and deplorable that the (U.N.) General Secretariat has not issued any statement or reaction that condemns or deplores this aggression.''
Despite the heavy bombing, which the U.S. Central Command said targeted military command and control installations, the Iraqi regime gave no sign of quitting.
Bombers have also hit targets in the northern cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
The Iraqi government released a video of Saddam, in uniform, meeting with his son Qusai, the commander of the Republican Guard, and the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmad.
It was unclear when the video was made.
U.S. intelligence officials said the Iraqi command and control system was in disarray, and U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said, ``The regime is starting to lose control of their country.''
Kurdish militiamen and U.S. special operations troops linked up with more than 1,000 U.S. Army paratroopers Thursday to secure the area around a strategic air strip, as the first large coalition ground force in northern Iraq began opening another front against Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade , including elite Army Rangers, jumped out of low-flying C-17 transport planes under cover of darkness Wednesday and secured a snow-dusted airfield, which will be used to bring in supplies and support personnel.
The airdrop one of the biggest paratroop drops in decades -- was a dramatic entry for ground troops into a region where only small groups of U.S. special forces have been operating.
Coalition airstrikes have been hitting Iraqi military forces and other strategic targets in the north.
This tightens the noose against Saddam's forces battling coalition forces to the south,'' Brig. Gen. James Parker, commander of U.S. forces in the north.
And it may also serve as a warning to Turkish forces.''
Giving cover for the deployment, U.S. warplanes struck Iraqi ground troops and bunkers in northern Iraq.
Three waves of combat planes from the aircraft carrier USS Theodore Roosevelt hit ``ground troops, command and control bunkers, artillery positions and ... a surface to air missile battery,'' said Lt. John Oliveira, the ship's public affair officer.
Around dawn Thursday, strikes resumed, with a massive explosion just outside the Kurdish zone close to the village of Kalak.
Warplanes pounded forward Iraqi positions in the hills overlooking Chamchamal, 35 kilometers (22 miles) east of the key oil city of Kirkuk.
Later Thursday, Kurdish troops in Chamchamal advanced their positions between government-controlled and rebel-controlled areas, taking over a Iraqi check point on their front with no fighting at this point, witnesses said.
Early Thursday, Kurdish fighters closed off a highway and roads near the airstrip where troops were said to be arriving, outside the town of Bashur, about 30 miles (50 kilometers) northeast of the Kurd-controlled city of Irbil and 30 miles (50 kilometers) south of the Turkish border.
From the highway, dusted from a recent snow, a flashing light from the airstrip's control tower was visible in the distance, and three helicopters could be seen landing, flying with nearly all their lights extinguished.
Future airlifts into the area will include supplies and support personnel for the 173rd's fighters, defense officials said.
The airfield's 6,700-foot (2,042-meter) runway is long enough to land C-17s and other U.S. military cargo planes.
Lt. Col. Thomas Collins, a spokesman for the U.S. Army's Southern European Task Force, refused to say whether the paratroopers deployed directly from Italy into Iraq or had taken a different route.
The matter immediately sparked controversy in Italy, where there is a strong anti-war movement.
The country's parliament voted this month to allow U.S.-led coalition forces to use Italian air space and military bases -- but not for directs attacks on Iraq.
Pentagon officials have said for weeks they would have U.S. forces in northern Iraq to open another front against Saddam's forces.
The vast majority of the coalition ground troops in Iraq are moving toward Baghdad from the south after entering from Kuwait.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the Army's 4th Infantry Division invade Iraq from the north, but Turkey balked at allowing up to 62,000 U.S. troops on its soil to prepare for that option.
The use of the 173rd shows the military has shifted to a smaller, lighter force.
Military officials say they would have liked to have secured key oil fields around the northern cities of Mosul and Kirkuk -- and perhaps the cities themselves -- by now.
Though no hostilities were expected during the deployment, the 173rd decided to parachute in rather then ferry troops in by plane so that a significant combat force could mass almost immediately to protect itself, officers said, according to a U.S. reporter traveling with the 173rd.
Kirkuk is key.
The Iraqi's want it, the Kurds want it, the Turks want it and various other ethnic groups also want it,'' Maj. Mike Hastings said.
What this drop means is that we can secure it until we are relieved by other forces.''
Besides Mosul and Kirkuk, another key target in northern Iraq is Tikrit, Saddam's hometown and the tribal center for most of his inner circle.
Most of the Adnan Division of the Republican Guard relocated from the Mosul area to the Tikrit area shortly before the war began.
Another key mission for the 173rd could be to keep order in northern Iraq, which is controlled by two semi-autonomous Kurdish factions but also includes several splinter groups and a base for the al-Qaida-linked Ansar al-Islam.
Turkey has said it may send more troops into northern Iraq to prevent refugees from moving north, while U.S. officials have said they advised Turkey against sending large additional forces into northern Iraq.
Former Danish international Stig Toefting dropped his appeal of an assault conviction and will serve a four-month jail sentence, Denmark's TV2 reported Monday.
Toefting was convicted in October 2002 of assaulting a pair of restaurant workers during a night out with national squad teammates in the capital, Copenhagen.
He was sentenced to four months in prison, but appealed.
The hearing was scheduled for April 10.
TV2, quoting Toefting's lawyer Anders Nemeth, reported that that 33-year-old midfielder was ready to serve his sentence immediately.
Neither Toefting or Nemeth were immediately available for comment.
Earlier this month, Toefting said English Premier League club Bolton let him go so he could prepare for the appeal.
It was unclear whether Toefting would return to Bolton after serving his sentence.
The club said it wasn't aware of Toefting's decision to drop his appeal.
Toefting transferred to Bolton in February 2002 from German club Hamburg.
Toefting has been convicted before.
In 1999 he was given a 20-day suspended sentence for assaulting a fan who berated him for playing with German club Duisburg.
The popular player -- known for his temperament and the words ``No Regret'' tattooed across his chest -- retired from Denmark's national team after it was knocked out in the second round of the 2002 World Cup.
Toefting joined the Danish squad in 1993 and has 41 caps.
U.S. soldiers moved to capture Baghdad's Saddam International Airport early Friday and fought running battles with Iraqi defenders along the city's southern fringes.
A vise is closing on the regime, U.S. President George W. Bush said.
Some frontline units went on heightened alert against the threat of chemical weapons, ordered to wear rubber boots and suits despite temperatures that soared into the 90s.
There was fierce fighting in Kut, to the south of Baghdad, where desperate Iraqis armed with rifles charged tanks in a suicide raid.
We mowed down the attackers, said Lt. Col. B.P. McCoy.
Despite declarations that more tough fighting lies ahead, the top U.S. military official indicated there may not be an all-out battle for Baghdad.
Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested isolating members of the old regime in the capital -- cut off from the rest of the country -- while an ``interim administration'' is put in place to begin work on a postwar government.
A meeting to organize an interim government could be held in Iraq within a week, a senior Pentagon official said Thursday night.
For the first time in the war, large parts of Baghdad lost electricity.
The cause was not known.
Myers told reporters at a Pentagon briefing that Americans had not targeted the power grid.
Tracer rounds lit the night sky and artillery boomed near the airport a few kilometers (miles) from the heart of President Saddam Hussein's capital of 5 million people.
At one stage, it appeared that U.S. forces had taken control of the airport, ``and then it got more confusing with continued fighting, Myers said Thursday night.
Capture of the airport would give American and British troops a facility for airlifting equipment and troops to Baghdad.
Along the city's southern edge, U.S. tanks and Bradley vehicles destroyed at least seven Iraqi armored personnel carriers and more than 15 Iraqi tanks in fighting that went on for more than four hours.
Two weeks into the war, American commanders reported a string of successes -- on the battlefield and within an Iraqi population initially reluctant about embracing invading troops.
Kurdish fighters in the north chipped in, when a top leader suggested they may agree not to seek control of the northern city of Kirkuk.
There were battlefield setbacks, as well.
Two Marines were killed and one injured in the close-quarters fighting in Kut.
And an Army soldier investigating a destroyed tank in central Iraq was killed by friendly fire when he was mistaken for an Iraqi, the military said.
U.S. defense officials also were investigating whether a Navy Hornet jet that crashed Wednesday was shot down by a U.S. Patriot missile.
The Navy was searching for the pilot Thursday.
The overall toll of American troops dead passed 50, and Bush visited a Marine camp, which has lost 13 -- more than any other installation.
He's in heaven, the commander in chief told the family of one fallen Marine in a private moment.
To the cheers of thousands earlier in a speech, he vowed victory, and said, ``A vise is closing on the regime.''
Iraqi officials issued the latest in a series of exhortations in Saddam's name.
Fight them with your hands.
God will disgrace them,'' they said, referring to invading American and British troops.
But the daily urgings seemed increasingly at odds with the military situation across the country, and Myers said Saddam had lost control of 45 percent of Iraq's territory.
As conventional units fought their way to the outskirts of the capital, officials said special forces had raided the Tharthar presidential palace near Tikrit, Saddam's hometown.
Documents were seized at the site north of Baghdad, said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks at U.S. Central Command in the Persian Gulf, but no ranking members of the regime were found.
That's all right, he added, ``there's other operations ongoing.''
To the far north, U.S. special forces and Kurdish militiamen captured the town of Bardarash and a nearby bridge, one of few routes into the city of Mosul near government-held oil fields.
Iraqis had held the town for 13 years.
In the country's southern region, British forces penetrated closer to the center of Basra, and warplanes dropped 500-pound (225-kilogram) and 1,000-pound (450-kilogram) laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi intelligence complex.
Die-hard defenders have held out for days inside the city of 1.3 million.
American officials cited continuing examples of Iraqis cooperating with invading troops.
In Najaf, they said a prominent cleric under house arrest by the Iraqi government had urged the population not to interfere with the operations of American or British forces.
A small group of Iraqi defenders has been holding out inside the city in a mosque, considered a Shiite holy site, and local clerics said one religious leader had recently arrived in hopes of arranging for their safe passage out of the shrine.
Ground forces closed in on Baghdad from separate southern approaches, the Army from the southeast and Marines from the southwest, in advances begun Tuesday night.
American and British helicopters and planes bombed positions in Kut, and Marines and Iraqis lobbed grenades at close quarters.
Between 10 and 15 Iraqis armed only with rifles charged Marine tanks in the suicide charge.
Two U.S. Marines died in the fighting -- and a medic who tried to save one of them sorrowfully buried his resuscitation equipment on the spot.
Army forces rolled past dozens of dead Iraqi soldiers and bombed-out hulks of Iraqi military equipment as they made their way toward Baghdad from the area around Karbala.
Many more Iraqi soldiers surrendered to the overwhelming force of the Americans, and were shuttled to the rear.
At the same time they worried about chemical weapons attacks, Brooks disclosed that a special operations force in the southwestern desert had found a number of bottles ``marked in strange ways.''
He said an investigation was under way.
Toyota Motor Corp. said Tuesday it will promote Akio Toyoda, a grandson of the company's founder who is widely viewed as a candidate to some day head Japan's largest automaker.
Managing director Toyoda, 46, grandson of Kiichiro Toyoda and the eldest son of Toyota honorary chairman Shoichiro Toyoda, will become one of 14 senior managing directors under a streamlined management system set to be introduced after a shareholders' meeting in June, the company said in a statement.
Toyoda, who joined Toyota, based in Toyota city, central Japan, in 1984, spearheaded the automaker's Internet and telematics business -- a technology that puts wireless communications into vehicles.
Considered a candidate for future Toyota president, Toyoda oversees its China business, a critical market for the automaker.
Toyoda has been on the star track for years.
When he joined the board in 2000, he was its youngest member.
Under a reform led by President Fujio Cho, the membership of Toyota's board of directors will be slashed to 27 from 58.
Executive vice presidents will be reduced to seven from nine.
The new system is designed to ``speed up decision-making and operations,'' Toyota spokesman Shigeru Hayakawa said.
Toyota's top posts held by Cho and Chairman Hiroshi Okuda remain unchanged.
Kiichiro Toyoda founded the automaker in 1937, transforming the loom manufacturer started by his father into an automaker.
U.S. forces tightened their grip throughout Baghdad, entering the city for the first time from the north, seizing a military airport and battling snipers and Republican Guard fighters.
Meanwhile, the U.S. military faced sharp criticism over assaults that killed three foreign journalists.
Pentagon officials said Tuesday they didn't know whether Iraqi President Saddam Hussein died in the U.S. airstrike on a Baghdad neighborhood the day before.
The strike destroyed three nearby houses and killed at least two people.
U.S. Marines battled snipers as they fought deeper into the capital from the east.
They seized the Rasheed Airport and captured enough ammunition for an estimated 3,000 troops.
Ominously, they also took a prison where they found U.S. Army uniforms and chemical weapons suits possibly belonging to American POWs.
Some army units routed Iraqi fighters from a Republican Guard headquarters inside the capital.
Others discovered a 12-room complex inside a cave, complete with white marble floors and fluorescent lighting.
Members of the U.S. Army's V Corps opened up a new front by entering Baghdad from the north.
The toll on Iraqi civilians four days after Americans first penetrated the Baghdad outskirts is unknown.
But the World Health Organization said Baghdad's hospitals were running out of supplies to treat the burns, shrapnel wounds and spinal injuries caused by the fighting.
Iraqi officials, however, remained defiant, saying Iraq's forces would never surrender to American forces: ``They will be burnt,'' said Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf.
In central Baghdad, a Reuters cameraman and a cameraman for Spain's Telecinco died when an American tank fired on the Palestine Hotel.
The incident raises questions about the judgment of the advancing U.S. troops who have known all along that this hotel is the main base for almost all foreign journalists in Baghdad,'' Reuters Editor-in-Chief Geert Linnebank said.
Tareq Ayyoub, a journalist with Al-Jazeera, died when a U.S. warplane bombed the Arab-language satellite television's office.
An Abu Dhabi TV office in Baghdad also was hit.
Al-Jazeera categorically denied that its Baghdad bureau had been used by Iraqi forces to fire on U.S. troops.
U.S. Central Command said it fired on the TV office and the hotel after U.S. forces came under ``significant'' fire from those buildings.
Associated Press photographer Jerome Delay said he watched from the top floor of the hotel as American tanks took up positions on the bridge.
All the shooting was concentrated on the bridge and across the river,'' where U.S. forces were located, he said.
It was not clear whether any Iraqi leader had been killed in the airstrike targeting Saddam in an upscale Baghdad neighborhood.
Iraqi rescue workers pulled two bodies from the rubble but said the toll could be as high as 14.
I don't know whether he survived, U.S President George W. Bush said of Saddam at a joint news conference with British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
The only thing I know is that he's losing power.''
Iraq's U.N. ambassador, Mohammed Al-Douri, said Tuesday he believes that Saddam is alive, although al-Douri acknowledged he has not communicated with Baghdad.
Bush and Blair sought to minimize their differences over who should govern and rebuild Iraq.
Blair favors a stronger U.N. role than Bush.
There will be a vital role for the U.N. in the reconstruction of Iraq,'' Blair said.
But the key is that Iraq in the end will be run by the Iraqi people.''
In northern Iraq, Kurdish forces tightened their ring around Kirkuk on Tuesday, following heavy coalition airstrikes on Iraqi fronts.
Kurdish militia took control of Sekamian plateau, about 10 kilometers (six miles) north of Kirkuk, Kurdish media reported.
The area affords a commanding view of the city and the vast oil fields of Iraq's No. 2 oil region.
The U.S. military said two planes had been lost.
An A-10 ``Warthog warplane was shot down near Baghdad, believed to be the first fixed-wing aircraft downed by an Iraqi surface-to-air missile since the war began.
U.S. Central Command said the pilot ejected, was recovered by ground forces and was in good condition.
A U.S. F-15E jet fighter also went down early Monday and a search was under way for its two-man crew, the military announced Tuesday.
Officials did not say whether the plane was shot down or crashed accidentally.
British forces in southern Iraq worked to restore order in the heavily looted streets of Basra, as desperate citizens swarmed water tanker trucks the day after British soldiers claimed Iraq's second largest city.
British forces also began establishing the country's first postwar administration Tuesday, granting a local sheik power to set up an administrative committee representing the groups in the region.
Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohammed Al-Douri, the first Iraqi official to concede defeat in the U.S.-led war, met privately with Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but refused to talk about rumors that he was planning to leave New York.
I am sorry, he said.
No Answer.
No comment at all.
This is my last word to you, he told hordes of journalists who chased him Thursday at his New York residence and U.N. headquarters seeking comment on his talks with the secretary-general, his future and the war.
Asked who should govern Iraq, Al-Douri said: ``I have nothing to do with that.''
Annan also declined to comment on Thursday's meeting with Al-Douri.
With the fall of Baghdad Wednesday, Al-Douri declared ``the game is over'' and expressed hope that the Iraqi people will now be able to live in peace.
He said he had not been in touch with Baghdad.
Beside meeting with Annan, Al-Douri spent several hours during the late morning and afternoon meeting with ambassadors and diplomats in the Delegate's Lounge.
I wished him good luck but I don't know what he said to the secretary-general and what will be his next steps,'' said Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa, who talked with Al-Douri before his own meeting with Annan.
In an interview with The Associated Press Wednesday night, Al-Douri said he will continue to work at the United Nations and had no intention of defecting.
Defecting from who? he asked.
I think the government has already defected.
There is no more Iraqi government to be defected from.''
Annan said early Thursday before meeting Al-Douri -- that in talks with the envoy Monday, ``he didn't ask for an asylum or protection ... (and) he didn't ask me for help with his status.''
We did talk about what happens, depending on the evolution of things on the ground,'' Annan said.
The ambassador had vehemently defended his country for months as the United States and its allies sought U.N. backing for war on Iraq.
Privately, many U.N. diplomats see him as a respectable colleague.
I sympathize with his need to create a new life for himself,'' said Britain's U.N. Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock.
Al-Douri taught international law at Baghdad University for over 30 years before becoming a diplomat in 1999, first at the United Nations in Geneva and since early 2001 at U.N. headquarters in New York.
He said in the AP interview he would love to return to teaching but for now he plans to remain at the United Nations.
Things will be crystalized one day,'' he said.
What I worried about is that things are settled in the country ... so in the future the Iraqi people will live in peace without sanctions, without wars, without suffering.
This is my message.''
Separately, lawyers who claim that Iraq helped plan the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing that killed 168 people asked a judge at a federal court in New York to force Al-Douri to testify in the case and hold the envoy in contempt, saying they worry that he would flee the country.
But U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said Al-Douri still has diplomatic immunity as Iraq's ambassador.
Under U.N. rules, a new Iraqi government would have to ask to represent the country, which the General Assembly would then consider.
He is still Iraq's ambassador at the United Nations,'' White House spokesman Ari Fleischer said in Washington.
Legally, that is the way it works at the U.N.''
Larry Klayman, chairman of Judicial Watch, which represent 14 survivors and victims' relatives who have filed a $1.5 billion federal lawsuit against Iraq in Washington, said his organization had served a subpoena on Al-Douri twice, on March 26 and March 28, but said he has not responded.
U.S. District Judge John S. Martin did not immediately rule but scheduled a hearing for next week.
The April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah federal building was the deadliest terrorist strike on American soil at the time.
The suit claims Iraqi officials provided money and training to convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh and conspirator Terry Nichols.
McVeigh was executed in 2001, and Nichols is serving a life sentence.
The dictator Suharto has fallen, the constitution has changed, the media was unshackled, democratic elections held, and East Timor freed.
After Sept. 11, 2001, Indonesia was quick to sign onto U.S. President George W. Bush's global war on terror.
Yet, Washington maintains a 12-year ban on arms sales to the world's most populous Muslim nation with the aim of curbing human rights abuses still happening despite momentous political change.
Frustrated, Jakarta's generals are looking elsewhere to replace antiquated arsenals.
Later this month Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri travels to Moscow to seek the Kremlin's help in modernizing her increasingly obsolete 300,000-member armed forces.
She is also likely to open the way for Russian companies to vie for lucrative deals in the oil and gas sector, long dominated by American and British resource giants.
Although opposite ends of the Earth, Indonesia and Russia have some basic things in common.
Both are geographically sprawling with massive multiethnic populations.
Both are struggling to preserve national unity as they fight separatism and build democracy after the collapse of decades of authoritarian rule.
Both are resource-rich, but face huge economic problems made worse by endemic corruption.
And, currently, both have opposed the U.S.- led war on Iraq.
Indonesia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Marty Natalegawa says Megawati's meeting with Russian President Putin slated for April 21 will touch on the Iraq crisis.
But other diplomats say that issue will serve primarily to bring the two closer together on bottom-line issues such as trade and arms sales.
Analysts worry that Indonesia's military is now so degraded it can no longer control the borders of the far-flung archipelago, allowing for easy infiltration by extremists.
Last year's Bali bombings, which killed 202 people, illustrated the threat of terrorism in Indonesia.
And, broad opposition to the U.S.-led attack on Iraq threatens to lead to a backlash by militant Islamists.
Nearly everybody in Indonesia sees this Iraq war as completely unnecessary and there is widespread public opposition to U.S. policies,'' said Jusuf Wanadi of the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Jakarta.
Close ties between Moscow and Jakarta are not unprecedented.
Indonesia relied on Soviet military assistance in the 1950s under Megawati's father and founding President Sukarno, but these were severed after the anti-communist Gen. Suharto seized power in 1965.
The United States quickly became the Southeast Asian country's main weapons supplier, and annual arms sales peaked at US$400 million in the 1980s.
In 1991, however, the U.S. Congress banned this after Indonesian troops killed hundreds of civilians in East Timor.
In 1999, East Timor became free, but only after Indonesian forces laid waste to it as they withdrew after a pro-independence referendum.
The shocking level of destruction prompted U.S. lawmakers to expand the ban to cover almost all military ties with Indonesia.
Since then some in the Bush administration -- particularly Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz, a former ambassador to Jakarta and a prime architect of the Iraq war -- have pushed for the ban to be repealed.
So far, U.S. lawmakers have reinstated only a limited officer training program.
But that's far from enough for Indonesia's generals.
I think the Indonesian military has finally decided that restrictions and conditionalities from Washington are just not worth it,'' said Juwono Sudarsono, a former defense minister.
So they want to look for alternative sources for planes, helicopters and other hardware.''
Moscow has already had some success in wooing Indonesia as a customer.
Jakarta has recently purchased some Russian weapons, including 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles, a squadron of naval Mil-2 helicopters and a dozen BTR-80A amphibious carriers for its marines.
Currently, Indonesia uses short-range Rapier missiles purchased 30 years ago to protect its vital oil and natural gas fields in Sumatra, Borneo and Papua from air attack.
Replenishing them has been a big problem,'' Sudarsono said.
Air defense commanders want to augment the Rapiers with Russia's impressive long-range S-300 missiles, or shorter-range systems such as the SA-15 Gauntlet or shoulder-fired Igla.
The Air Force is reportedly considering purchasing several squadrons of Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors, considered the world's premier dogfighters.
Previously, Indonesian Air Force commanders preferred Western jets that were compatible with the U.S.-made F-16 fighter-bombers already in the Indonesian inventory.
But neighboring Malaysia's success in integrating Russian MiG-29s and American F/A-18 Hornets persuaded them otherwise, Sudarsono said.
If Megawati does stiff-arm the United States on the weapons issue, it is unlikely relations with Washington will be permanently damaged.
Whatever happens, Indonesia, a mainly Muslim but politically secular state, is natural ally in the struggle against terrorism and religious militancy.
What could be more worrying for Washington is Russia's economic ambitions.
Trade between Indonesia and Russia increased by dlrs 36.2 million to dlrs 203.5 million in 2001 -- the last year for which statistics are available.
Analysts say this can only grow.
The real concerns, though, are in the petroleum sector.
Megawati and Putin are expected to sign agreements to give Russian companies a toehold in Indonesia's oil and gas industry, long dominated by American and British giants such as Exxon Mobil and BP.
A U.S.-sponsored forum that brought Iraqi opposition leaders together to shape the country's postwar government began Tuesday with a U.S. promise not to rule Iraq and concluded with an agreement to meet again in 10 days.
Meeting in the biblical birthplace of the prophet Abraham, delegates from Iraq's many factions discussed the role of religion in the future government and ways to rebuild the country.
But some Shiite Muslim groups boycotted the meeting and thousands protested nearby.
A 13-point statement released after the meeting stressed the need to work toward a democratic Iraq built on the rule of law and equality.
It also called for dissolving Saddam's Baath Party but left open the question of separating church from the state.
Retired Lt. Gen. Jay Garner, who will head the U.S.-led interim administration in Iraq, opened the conference under a golden-colored tent in the shadows of the 4,000-year-old ziggurat at Ur, a terraced temple platform of the ancient Sumerians.
What better birthday can a man have than to begin it not only where civilization began but where a free Iraq and a democratic Iraq will begin today?'' said Garner, who turned 65 Tuesday and wore a twin American and Iraqi flag pin on his blue shirt.
White House envoy Zalmay Khalilzad told delegates that the United States has ``no interest, absolutely no interest, in ruling Iraq.''
We want you to establish your own democratic system based on Iraqi traditions and values,'' Khalilzad said.
I urge you to take this opportunity to cooperate with each other.''
Participants included Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites from inside the country and others who spent years in exile.
U.S. officials invited the groups, which picked their own representatives.
Many Iraqis boycotted the meeting in opposition to U.S. plans to install Garner atop an interim administration.
Thousands of Shiites -- who constitute Iraq's most populous religious group but were repressed under Saddam Hussein -- demonstrated in nearby Nasiriyah, chanting ``No to America and no to Saddam!''
Iraq needs an Iraqi interim government.
Anything other than this tramples the rights of the Iraqi people and will be a return to the era of colonization,'' said Abdul Aziz Hakim, a leader of the largest Iraqi Shiite group, the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
U.S. officials hope more Iraqis join the process and stressed that this was just the first of many such meetings in Iraq.
The meeting concluded with the delegates voting by show of hands to meet again in 10 days.
A national conference is planned to select the interim administration, perhaps within weeks, a senior U.S. official said on condition of anonymity.
The interim administration could begin handing power back to Iraqi officials within three to six months, but forming a government will take longer, said Maj. Gen. Tim Cross, the top British member of Garner's team.
One has to go through the process of building from the bottom up, allowing the leadership to establish itself, and then the election process to go through and so forth,'' Cross said.
That full electoral process may well take longer.''
Garner's Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance is charged with coordinating humanitarian assistance, rebuilding infrastructure shattered by years of war and U.N. sanctions, and gradually handing back power to Iraqis leading a democratically elected government.
Tuesday's meeting was the first step toward that goal after the ouster of Saddam.
Sheik Ayad Jamal Al Din, a Shiite religious leader from Nasiriyah, urged the delegates to craft a secular government, according to a pool report.
But Nassar Hussein Musawi, a schoolteacher, disagreed: ``Those who would like to separate religion from the state are simply dreaming,'' he said.
Iraqi exile Hatem Mukhliss quoted President John F. Kennedy's exhortation, ``Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,'' and called on Iraqis to write a constitution, establish a legal system and consider what role the army should play.
He asked coalition representatives to address problems of security, electricity and water in Iraq and help rebuild destroyed and looted hospitals.
Saddam reduced the country to such a state that it was necessary for people to sell off personal possessions,'' Mukhliss said.
Now it's time to take our country back.''
There are already tensions between the United States and some Iraqi factions.
Kurdish groups appear unwilling to compromise on their demand to expand the border of their autonomous area to include the oil-rich city of Kirkuk and Kurdish parts of the city of Mosul.
That could pose a problem for the United States, because Turkey worries that Kurdish control of Kirkuk could lead to aspirations for independence and in turn encourage separatist Kurds in Turkey.
Iraqi opposition leaders fear the United States is trying to force Ahmed Chalabi, head of the London-based umbrella Iraqi National Congress, on them as leader of a new Iraqi administration.
Chalabi was the first top Iraqi opposition leader to be airlifted by the U.S. military into southern Iraq as the fighting wound down, and he and other top members of his group plan to meet soon in Baghdad.
U.S. officials said Chalabi was brought in because he offered forces to the coalition.
Neither Chalabi nor many other leaders of anti-Saddam groups attended Tuesday's meeting, but they sent delegates.
Iraqis protesting the conference said it did not represent their interests.
The protesters held banners written in English and Arabic saying the ``Hawza,'' or the Shiite religious seminary in Najaf, represents them.
Even some of those at the meeting said they did not want Garner leading the interim administration.
We will press for any Iraqi civilian administration regardless of what the Americans say.
An administration by Garner is not acceptable,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an Iraqi physician and opposition activist.
He said American officials have outlined what Garner's administration would look like: Each ministry would be headed by an American, either military or civilian.
Each minister would have two American deputies and eight American advisers, plus four Iraqi advisers from inside the country and four Iraqi exiles.
Associated Press writer Patrick McDowell in Kuwait City contributed to this report.
The lawyer for a Russian military journalist convicted of treason filed an appeal Wednesday in an effort to overturn the guilty verdict against his client, who was released on parole earlier this year, news agencies reported.
Grigory Pasko's lawyer Genri Reznik filed the appeal with Russian Supreme Court, the Interfax and ITAR-Tass news agencies reported.
He asked the court to invalidate the verdict and throw out the criminal case against Pasko, they said.
Pasko was sentenced to four years in prison in December 2001 for illegally attending a meeting of top military commanders and taking notes there.
A military court said he intended to pass the notes to Japanese media with which he had worked.
Pasko, whose sentence included time served, was released in January for good behavior after serving more than two-thirds of the sentence.
He has maintained his innocence, saying the military was punishing him for exposing environmental abuses by the Russian navy, including the dumping of radioactive waste into the sea.
Reznik said an initial appeal he lodged the day Pasko was freed never reached the presidium of the Supreme Court, according to Interfax.
The lawyer said the court's military board had refused to launch proceedings on the appeal.
Reznik said he addressed the new appeal directly to Supreme Court Chairman Vyacheslav Lebedev and asked that it not be considered by military judges ``because the military justice system has adopted a biased attitude against Pasko,'' Interfax reported.
The U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Europe and Eurasia said Tuesday that the U.S. government won't be involved in choosing subcontractors for American companies named to help rebuild Iraq.
The way it works is that there have been an initial set of contracts let to US companies, since it's U.S. money.
Those companies can subcontract to any company they want,'' Elizabeth Jones said.
She made the statements after a meeting with the speaker of the Portuguese parliament, Joao Mota Amaral.
The U.S. government has done what it is going to do: it has opened up the process to international companies.
We can't direct commerce,'' Jones said.
Once it's a commercial proposition, then international bidding processes come into effect.''
Jones met with Defense Minister Paulo Portas on Tuesday and will meet Foreign Minister Antonio Martins da Cruz before leaving Portugal Wednesday.
About 50 Portuguese companies - mostly in the construction sector -- are applying for subcontracts to help rebuild Iraq, Portuguese media reported.
Many are hoping to reap benefits from Portuguese government support of the U.S.-led war to oust Saddam Hussein.
Also, Portugal hosted a last ditch pre-war summit in the Azores islands for leaders of the United States, Britain and Spain.
Rudolph Giuliani will wed his companion, Judith Nathan, on May 24 in the ex-mayor's old home, Gracie Mansion.
The news was announced Thursday by Giuliani spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.
His successor, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, will perform the ceremony.
Giuliani, 58, proposed to Nathan, a former nurse, during a November business trip to Paris -- five months after he finalized his divorce from Donna Hanover after 20 years of marriage.
In interviews last year, Giuliani said Nathan gave him ``tremendous emotional support'' through his treatment for prostate cancer and as he led the city during the aftermath of the Sept.
11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center.
We were close already, Giuliani said.
And then we went through hell together.
Giuliani and Nathan began appearing in public together in May 2000.
Soon after, he announced that he and Hanover were moving toward legal separation.
During the legal proceedings leading up to the divorce, a judge ruled that Nathan could not visit Gracie Mansion, the official mayoral residence, as long as Giuliani's children lived there.
Giuliani and Hanover have two teenage children, Andrew and Caroline.
The divorce settlement called for Giuliani to pay Hanover more than $6.8 million.
Hanover, 53, is host of a syndicated television show, ``Famous Homes and Hideaways.''
Last month, she and her fiance -- an old high school sweetheart -- invited the press along as they went shopping for wedding bands, saying they are planning a wedding in the New York City area this summer.
Giuliani's first marriage to his second cousin, Regina Peruggi, lasted about 14 years.
It was annulled by the Catholic Church because the couple had not obtained a church dispensation required when second cousins marry.
Nathan divorced wallpaper salesman Bruce Nathan in 1992.
They have a teenage daughter.
The Giuliani-Nathan nuptials will be a first for Bloomberg, who is making an exception from his policy of not performing weddings, said Bloomberg spokesman Ed Skyler.
Giuliani regularly officiated at weddings while in office.
The mayor is honored by their request,'' Skyler said.
The United States and Britain are preparing a resolution that would give the United Nations a role in humanitarian relief but not peacekeeping in Iraq, a senior official in U.S. President George W. Bush's administration said Friday.
Separately, the United States has decided to divide the military and humanitarian relief mission in Iraq into three parts under American, British and Polish command, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Six European countries have agreed to contribute troops to the British and Polish sectors to create an international stability force, the official said.
The draft resolution would limit the U.N. role to helping with refugees and displaced people, reconstruction and humanitarian assistance, the official said.
The United States and Britain agree on all but a few of the fine details of the resolution, the official said, though there is no timetable on when it would be introduced.
U.N. officials are already in Iraq providing humanitarian relief.
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan said this week that the body has no interest in policing a postwar Iraq, although it could contribute to the political resuscitation of the country.
Take the question of security.
I don't think the U.N. would want to take on that,'' Annan said.
There has been a suggestion that the U.N. wanted to take over the whole Iraq and run it, which was also not the case.''
What the United Nations could contribute beyond humanitarian assistance was ``political facilitation,'' Annan said.
The proposed draft resolution would probably face resistance from other U.N. Security Council members who have favored a U.N.-convened conference of the kind that helped establish Afghanistan's post-Taliban government.
U.S. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld discussed the resolution with Prime Minister Tony Blair and Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon on Friday as Rumsfeld returned from a tour of Iraq, Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf region.
Rumsfeld said afterward he hoped the U.N. would play a role but did not publicly discuss the draft resolution outlining that role.
Hoon, who joined Rumsfeld in a news conference at Heathrow airport, also did not mention the draft resolution.
We are right to be optimistic about the way forward'' in Iraq, Hoon said.
International stability forces will be sent to Iraq as soon as possible, the U.S. official said, though it was unclear when that would be.
Those troops will work to restore and maintain order and supervise humanitarian projects such as the restoration of water and electricity and delivery of food and medical aid.
The six nations contributing troops are Italy, Spain, Ukraine, Denmark, the Netherlands and Bulgaria, the official said.
Representatives of those countries will meet with British officials May 7 and Polish officials May 22 to determine what forces each country will contribute and whether they will be put under British or Polish command.
The U.S. part of the stability force will be comprised of American troops.
While that portion is likely to consist of a military division -- about 20,000 -- the troop strength of the other two sectors has yet to be determined, the official said.
The international stabilization force would be under the U.S. war commander, Gen. Tommy Franks.
At least initially, the coalition stability forces will augment rather than replace the 135,000 American troops inside Iraq, the official said.
The stability forces will focus on providing security and humanitarian relief while other U.S. troops focus on rooting out leftover members of Saddam Hussein's government and other armed elements in Iraq.
Rumsfeld said, however, that the more troops other countries contribute to the stability effort, the fewer U.S. troops will be needed inside Iraq.
Planning for both the U.N. resolution and the international security force left out France, Germany and Russia, three U.S. allies that vehemently opposed the war in Iraq.
Some of the NATO members who agreed to send troops may want NATO authorization for that action, the official said.
Requests for such authorization will be routed through the alliance's defense planning committee, which does not include France, the official said.
The outlines for the international stability force were decided at a conference Hoon hosted Wednesday with representatives from 16 countries, mostly NATO members.
Other countries including the Philippines, South Korea, Qatar and Australia agreed to send other help such as field hospitals, engineers, explosive ordnance disposal teams or nuclear, biological and chemical weapons experts.
The U.S., British and Polish sectors will be drawn to take into account ethnic, religious, tribal and political factions within Iraq, the official said.
For example, although ethnic Kurds are the majority in large parts of northern Iraq, there are also large numbers of Kurds within Baghdad.
Some Arab countries also want to play a role in the stability operation in Iraq but are reluctant to send troops because of political, religious and ethnic considerations, the official said.
Countries in the Gulf Cooperation Council have offered to donate money for the effort.
Rumsfeld also met Friday with King Abdullah of Jordan, an American ally in the Middle East.
Defense officials say Jordan provided key help in the Iraq war, acting as a staging area for U.S. special operations raids into western Iraq to prevent missiles from being fired at Jordan or Israel.
Rumsfeld did not say what the two discussed.
Police intercepted 33 African immigrants who came ashore Thursday in southern Spain aboard an overcrowded boat, including several pregnant women and other travelers suffering from hypothermia, police said.
Spanish media showed dramatic photos of police struggling to carry women on the verge of fainting after they were found wandering through Tarifa, Spain's windswept southern tip, Civil Guard officials told Spanish news agencies.
Police also arrested two Moroccan men suspected of trafficking in human beings and navigating the Zodiac boat across from Africa, Efe said.
Twenty-six of the would-be immigrants were from sub-Saharan Africa, six of them women, and the other seven were males from North African countries, police said.
Red Cross officials administered first aid on the scene, and the detainees were taken to a processing center for the government to begin expulsion proceedings.
Tens of thousands of destitute Africans try to enter Spain illegally each year by crossing the perilous Strait of Gibraltar to reach the southern mainland or by sailing northwest to the Canary Islands out in the Atlantic.
They seek a better life doing menial jobs in Spain or hope to use the country as a stepping stone to other points in Europe.
Most are caught trying to sneak in and some die in the attempt.
North Korea's military may have fired a laser at a U.S. helicopter in March, a U.S. official said Tuesday, as the communist state ditched its last legal obligation to keep itself free of nuclear weapons.
The aircraft's censors detected the unknown type of laser while it was flying near the heavily fortified frontier that divides the two Koreas, the U.S. military official said on condition of anonymity.
No one was injured and no equipment was damaged in the incident.
North Korea said Tuesday that a 1992 agreement with South Korea not to deploy nuclear arms on the Korean Peninsula was nullified, accusing the United States of derailing the deal.
The inter-Korean declaration on denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was thus reduced to a dead document due to the U.S. vicious hostile policy to stifle the DPRK with nukes,'' said the North's official news agency, KCNA.
DPRK stands for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the North's official name.
The announcement came as U.S. President George W. Bush and South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun were about to meet Wednesday in Washington to discuss North Korea's nuclear programs.
The accord was the last remaining legal obligation under which North Korea was banned from developing atomic arms.
In January this year, North Korea withdrew from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, a global accord to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
A U.S. military official in Seoul, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Tuesday North Korea is believed to have exported US$580 million worth of missiles to Iran, Pakistan, Libya, Syria, Egypt, Yemen and the United Arab Emirates in 2001.
In December, a shipment of North Korean missiles bound for Yemen was briefly stopped in the Arabian Sea.
North Korea accuses the United States of planning to attack the communist country, which Bush has branded part of an ``axis of evil'' along with Iran and Iraq.
It also revived its claim that the U.S. military keeps many nuclear weapons in South Korea, turning the country into ``the biggest nuclear advance base in the Far East.''
Washington says it wants to use dialogue to resolve the nuclear crisis, although U.S. officials have not ruled out a military option.
North Korea ``keenly felt that the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would only remain as a daydream unless the U.S. drops its hostile policy toward the DPRK,'' KCNA said.
It said the U.S. invasion of Iraq taught it that ``a war can be averted and the sovereignty of the country and the security of the nation can be protected only when a country has ... a strong military deterrent force capable of decisively repelling any attack to be made by any types of sophisticated weapons.''
In New York, South Korean President Roh said he will never condone North Korea's nuclear development, but Seoul and Washington agree the nuclear standoff with the North must be solved peacefully ``by all means.''
It is incumbent upon Pyongyang to give up its nuclear project and come forward as a responsible member of the international community,'' he said.
When the North takes this route, the Republic of Korea and the international community will extend the necessary support and cooperation.''
Julianne Lee, a Roh spokeswoman, said the North Korean statement might be a negotiating ploy in the wake of talks last month with U.S. officials in Beijing.
During the talks in Beijing, U.S. officials said North Korea claimed it already possesses nuclear weapons, and that it had reprocessed 8,000 spent nuclear fuel rods -- a move that could yield several atomic bombs within months.
North Korea offered to drop its nuclear and missile programs in exchange for security guarantees and economic aid, according to U.S. officials.
The nuclear crisis flared in October, when Washington said North Korea admitted having a secret nuclear program in violation of a 1994 treaty with Washington.
Australia will keep open its embassy in Saudi Arabia despite decisions by the United States, Britain and Germany to close their diplomatic outposts in the country amid growing terror fears.
On the eve of a visit to the Saudi capital, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said security at the Australian embassy appeared to be sufficient.
We have quite a substantial security presence at the Australian embassy in Riyadh and the ambassador thinks that that security presence is sufficient,'' Downer told the Australian Broadcasting Corp.
Australia is one of Washington's staunchest allies.
Canberra sent troops to fight in the war on terror in Afghanistan and alongside U.S. and British forces in Iraq.
New Zealand also has no immediate plans to close its Saudi embassy.
On Tuesday, Saudi security officials said three suspected al-Qaida militants were arrested in Jiddah, Saudi Arabia, in sweeps following the near-simultaneous suicide attacks on three residential compounds on the outskirts of Riyadh on May 12.
The bombings killed 34 people -- including nine attackers, eight Americans and two Britons -- and wounded nearly 200 others.
Earlier this week, Saudi and U.S. officials said they had new intelligence pointing to Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida group possibly launching fresh attacks in the United States or against American interests overseas.
Israeli troops shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and critically injured two children, ages 7 and 9, during conflicts in the West Bank that erupted Tuesday as Israeli and Palestinian leaders moved toward talks on a new Mideast peace plan.
The shootings which the Israeli army said came in response to attacks by Palestinians throwing stones and molotov cocktails -- came a day after Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared that Israel's occupation in the West Bank must end, stunning both dovish opponents and hardline allies.
Sharon's remarks and Israel's conditional acceptance Sunday of the so-called ``road map'' to peace were expected to jump-start stalled Mideast peace negotiations.
A summit between Sharon and his Palestinian counterpart, Mahmoud Abbas, had been planned for Wednesday but was postponed, according to Israeli and Palestinian officials, who blamed each other for the delay.
The officials said no new date had been set; Israel Radio said the meeting would take place Thursday.
A three-way summit with U.S. President George W. Bush could take place as early as next week, possibly in Jordan.
Israeli soldiers shot and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy and wounded a 7-year-old boy after opening fire at stone throwers in the Tulkarem refugee camp in the West Bank on Tuesday, Palestinian hospital officials said.
The army said troops fired, and hit a boy, after a Palestinian youth threw a molotov cocktail.
In a village near the West Bank city of Nablus on Tuesday, Israeli troops opened fire on youths throwing stones, hitting a 9-year-old Palestinian boy in the head and critically wounding him, and hitting two 12-year-old boys in the legs, lightly wounding them, Palestinian hospital officials said.
A 10-year-old boy was struck in the leg by a rubber bullet, but was not seriously hurt, the officials said.
Military sources said troops were trying to break up stone-throwing protests, but did not use live fire.
The army was not aware of any injuries.
Five Palestinian children, a Palestinian woman and a police officer, were injured Tuesday after accidentally detonating explosives in the West Bank city of Hebron, Palestinian security officials said.
The children found the explosives in two plastic bags under a tree and accidentally detonated the first bag.
After a police officer arrived, the second bag exploded, seriously injuring him, the officials said.
Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager Monday and another surrendered after infiltrating from Gaza, the military said.
They were unarmed and apparently looking for work.
In a village near the West Bank town of Qalqiliya, an 11-year-old Palestinian boy was killed during an exchange of gunfire.
Also Monday, Israeli soldiers fired on four diplomatic vehicles in the northern Gaza town of Beit Hanoun, diplomats said.
There were no injuries from the incident.
Peter Lundberg, an official from the Swedish Consulate in Jerusalem, said that two bullets hit the windshield of the Swiss Consulate's armored car, and that small-arms fire also was directed at other cars from Sweden, Denmark and the European Union.
Military sources said the Israeli army had established roadblocks at the entrance to Beit Hanoun to prevent Palestinians militants from leaving the area.
The sources said shots had been fired in the air when vehicles tried to skirt the roadblocks.
The violence erupted after Sharon endured withering criticism Monday from members of his own Likud Party over his Cabinet's acceptance of the U.S.-backed ``road map'' peace plan.
Sharon indicated a 180-degree turnaround after decades of warning that an Israeli withdrawal from even small parts of the West Bank could endanger Israel's existence.
Skeptics, however, wondered whether Sharon's conversion was a shrewd effort to deflect U.S. pressure in the hopes the road map would fail before Israel had to make tough concessions.
To keep 3.5 million people under occupation is bad for us and them,'' Sharon said in remarks broadcast on Israel Radio.
The term ``occupation'' is anathema to the Israeli right, which believes Israel has a legitimate claim to the West Bank and Gaza Strip for religious and security reasons.
Palestinians and their dovish Israeli allies routinely use the word ``occupation'' when demanding that Israel leave the West Bank and Gaza and dismantle Jewish settlements.
Palestinians claim all of the West Bank and Gaza for a state.
On Sunday, Sharon's Cabinet conditionally approved the ``road map,'' a three-phase plan that begins with a halt to violence and envisages a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 2005.
Sharon told party critics he was committed to finding a political solution to the conflict, including an Israeli withdrawal from West Bank population centers.
This can't continue endlessly.
Do you want to remain forever in Ramallah, Jenin, Nablus?'' he asked.
Likud lawmakers charged that the road map was slanted in favor of the Palestinians and endangers Israel.
In his remarks Monday, Sharon left himself an out.
What will happen if Palestinian terror continues?
Nothing.
Nothing will happen.
The Palestinians will get nothing,'' he said.
Critics have said Sharon's long-held condition that all violence must stop before peace moves is unrealistic and guarantees failure of any peace initiative, including the road map, thus releasing him from the necessity of following through on his remarks.
Liberal lawmaker Yossi Sarid argued Sharon was trying to keep his intentions murky to persuade the U.S. government that he was committed to the plan, while his hawkish allies could assume he was just making a tactical move to end U.S. pressure.
Ariel Sharon likes to walk in the fog, because then no one knows where he is headed,'' Sarid wrote in the Yediot Ahronot daily.
A retired navy officer facing life in prison over a failed effort to protect Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Ocalan, told a court Thursday he felt remorse for his part in the 1999 plot.
I have a guilty conscience,'' Andonis Naxakis said during his two-hour testimony.
Naxakis is one of 13 people on trial for bringing the fugitive guerrilla leader to Greece.
Ocalan was moved by the government to its embassy compound in Kenya, where he was captured by Turkish commandos.
The retired Greek officer said he had been trying to get Ocalan to The Netherlands, home to a large Kurdish community.
He claimed he had been manipulated by the government.
I believe I was unwittingly used as bait for its disgraceful plan ... an organized move by the government to hand Ocalan over to Turkey,'' he said.
Naxakis and two of Ocalan's Kurdish associates are being tried on criminal charges of endangering national security.
Ocalan, being tried in absentia, was indicted for entering the country illegally, a misdemeanor.
Ocalan, leader of the Kurdistan Workers Party, or PKK, is serving a life sentence in Turkey for leading a 15-year insurgency against the country that left 37,000 people dead.
He is being tried in Greece in absentia.
Five of the U.S. sailors killed in the attack on the destroyer "USS Cole" are now home.
A military transport plane brought the flag-draped caskets from Germany where they were taken yesterday.
An honor guard removed them to a hangar at Dover Air Force base for a short memorial service for close family members.
They requested privacy for today's proceedings.
The bodies of two other sailors recovered from the ship are in Bahrain and will be returned later.
More than 100 FBI agents and explosives experts are expected in Yemen by the end of the weekend to investigate the suspected terrorist attack.
A team of special Naval engineers will work on recovering the bodies of ten sailors listed as missing and presumed dead.
Officials suspect a suicide bombing caused the blast, which tore a 40 foot hole in the hull of the destroyer.
Pentagon sources say an early examination finds 400 to 500 pounds of explosives may have been used.
There are no confirmed suspects yet, but officials say several Middle East groups are expected to be investigated.
The summit is coinciding with more unrest in several areas of the West Bank and Gaza strip.
Hundreds of stone-throwing Palestinians stormed the Israeli-controlled section of Hebron, breaking a curfew imposed since the outbreak of the unrest last month.
Witnesses said Israeli soldiers fired live ammunition and rubber-coated metal bullets, wounding at least seven people.
Thousands of Palestinian demonstrators marched in the area to protest against a renewal of contacts with Israel.
The nuclear submarine "Kursk" could become a permanent underwater grave for 118 Russian sailors.
Russia's top admiral says he may scrap efforts to recover the bodies if experts decide the mission would endanger deep sea divers.
All those aboard the "Kursk" were killed in August when the sub sank after being damaged by an explosion in the Barents Sea.
The cause of the disaster has not been determined.
An international salvage team is due to arrive at the scene of the accident tomorrow.
A U.S. businessman accused of spying says he has no chance of getting a fair trial in Russia.
Edmond Pope appeared in a Moscow courtroom today and read from a 40-page statement, denying charges of espionage, and protesting his treatment by the court.
Russian prosecutors say Pope tried to buy secret blueprints for a high-speed torpedo used by the Russian military.
Pope's supporters say he was seeking information on an old Russian underwater propulsion system.
President Clinton says he's willing to meet separately with Israeli and Palestinian leaders if both sides work to end the Mideast violence.
The president proposed the talks in a call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.
Mr. Clinton says he wants to see Arafat and Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak abide by promises to end the bloodshed made at last week's emergency summit in Egypt.
A White House spokesman says Arafat is reviewing the offer.
Meanwhile, some 30,000 anti-Israeli protesters clashed with police in Jordan.
Demonstrators from across the country traveled to a west bank border town to call for the return of Palestinian refugees.
The number of police and protesters who were injured is still not known.
A note from a doomed sailor raises new questions about Russian efforts to save the crew of the submarine "Kursk."
The note was found in the pocket of a sailor whose body was recovered yesterday.
It was written after explosions sent the "Kursk" to the bottom of the sea.
It confirms 23 sailors survived.
For days, teams tried without success to open the escape hatch.
It was pried open by divers from Norway who found no one left alive.
Relatives have complained some sailors might have been rescued had Russia sought help immediately.
The widow of the sailor who wrote the note wept today as she was interviewed on Russian television.
I came here after I heard the official announcement on TV.
I love him very much.
I want to see him and I want to read his letter.
While the cause of the "Kursk" disaster remains unknown, Russian officials say the sub may have collided with a World War II mine or there may have been an internal malfunction.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres is expected to meet soon with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in an attempt to quell Mideast violence.
The meeting comes amid fresh clashes between the two sides.
Fighting broke out in Ramallah, Hebron and at the border crossings between Israel and Gaza today.
Three Palestinians were killed, at least 49 people wounded.
Overnight, Israeli gunships attacked three headquarters of Fatah, the political party allied with Arafat.
Israel calls it a response to Palestinian guerrilla warfare.
Arafat is condemning the attacks.
A verdict handed down three years ago today brought debate from both sides of the Atlantic.
In this edition of "Headliners," Bob Glascoff has the story of British au pair Louise Woodward and finds out what she's doing now.
October 1997.
Louise Woodward is sentenced to life in prison on charges she murdered an infant boy.
Woodward, then a 19-year-old au pair from Britain, was accused of killing 8-month-old Matthew Eappen by shaking him and slamming his head.
The case attracted widespread attention in England, where many thought she was innocent.
Woodward had been living with the Eappen family taking care of their two young sons.
Despite receiving a life sentence, her charges were reduced two weeks later from second-degree murder to manslaughter.
She was sentenced to time served and released.
Woodward returned to Britain in 1998 to another controversy.
Her parents were accused of defrauding her defense fund.
They went on trial this year and were acquitted.
Today, Woodward is studying to be a lawyer.
With "Headliners," I'm Bob Glascoff.
An Oregon girl missing for 15 years has been reunited with her family.
The mother says her daughter was taken by her baby-sitter when she was just 3 years old.
The alleged abduction of Fallon Marie Hodges was never reported to police.
Authorities say the girl contacted law enforcement in Nevada last Friday saying she needed help in finding her identity.
She says she was abandoned by her surrogate parents, one of whom was her alleged kidnapper.
The name Father Frost may not be familiar to you, but to Russian children, Christmas wouldn't be the same without him.
Denise Dillon reports.
Santa Claus visited the northern Russian city of Veliki Ustyug to meet with his Russian counterpart, Father Frost.
It's believed Veliki Ustyug, which is about 600 miles north of Moscow, is the hometown of Father Frost, one of the main characters of Russian Christmas stories.
The 50,000 residents here have a deep respect for the history of their town, and it seemed as though all of them bundled up against the cold and came out to welcome Santa and Father Frost as they rode into the town's central square on a horse-drawn carriage.
People who live here hope this is the beginning of a long tradition that others around the world will celebrate with them.
A new great holiday came to our town.
This is how new traditions are generated.
And I hope this holiday will become nationwide soon.
As for us, we are always happy to see guests in our town.
When Santa arrived, the temperature was 16 degrees below 0, but that did not stop the Russian folk singers and dancers from performing traditional dances.
Later, Santa visited Father Frost's home, where they met with all the good little boys and girls.
When you believe in Santa Claus, then you are good people and good children.
Then your dreams can come true.
Children around the world believe that Santa Claus or Father Frost will bring them good luck, and presents, for the holidays.
Denise Dillon, "Headline News."
A woman whose husband was killed in last month's crash of a Singapore Airlines plane has filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the carrier.
Investigators say the Boeing 747 hit a barrier and a crane on the runway and exploded during takeoff.
82 people were killed.
The lawsuit filed in Federal court says negligence and reckless misconduct contributed to the crash.
A spokesman for Singapore Airlines declined to comment.
The Navy now says it will cost about $240 million to get the "USS Cole" up and running again.
Officials originally estimated it would cost $150 million to repair the gaping hole in the ship's midsection.
But a Naval official says that does not include the cost of replacing equipment and weapons damaged in the attack carried out by suicide bombers in Yemen.
The ship is scheduled to arrive in Mississippi in about ten days.
Russia's Presidential Clemency Commission is advising president Vladimir Putin to release convicted American spy Edmund Pope on humanitarian grounds.
A top Putin aide says Pope could be home by Christmas.
However, according to Russian law, Putin cannot issue a pardon any earlier than December.
Pope was convicted of espionage Wednesday in Moscow and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He suffers from a rare form of bone cancer and has asked Putin to let him return to the U.S. to receive medical care.
Ousted Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif is heading to exile in Saudi Arabia.
He left Pakistan yesterday, after being pardoned by the president.
Sharif had been in jail since his ouster in a military coup last year.
He was convicted of kidnapping and corruption.
Saudi Arabia offered to accept Sharif and more than a dozen members of his family on humanitarian grounds.
Will winter storms affect the weather where you are?
Let's check the "Headline News" extended forecast.
Another round of winter weather is expected today as another major winter storm will be spreading from the southern plains through the Ohio River valley and eventually into the Northeast.
Cities like Springfield, Missouri, back towards St. Louis and Indianapolis and Columbus will pick up the heaviest snowfall.
Over six inches is expected by tomorrow morning, and then moving in towards the northeast, where we expect even some ice in some of the suburbs to the northwestern areas of New York City.
Here's a look at the forecast weather map -- slow pressure is moving in towards the Ohio River valley and eventually into the northeast by late tomorrow.
It's moving rather quickly, too, so the precipitation will be ending through the Midwest as high pressure builds in tomorrow.
Look for the snow to continue into New England tomorrow.
Friday, rain into the southeast.
There will be some showers in the Northwest.
Temperature-wise, it remains cold over the northern tier.
It begins to warm up over parts of the south.
A wet day on Saturday over much of the East and Southeast.
There'll be some snows, though, back into the Midwest.
Forecast highs are still on the cold side.
And as we check out Sunday's weather, snow through the great lakes and rain into the Northeast with forecast highs mainly in the over the northeastern U.S.
I'm meteorologist Dave Hennen.
For more weather information, login to cnn.com.
The damaged "USS Cole" comes home today.
It's due to arrive in Pascagoula, Mississippi, this morning.
The destroyer was christened there five years ago.
Repairs are expected to cost about $240 million.
Yemeni and U.S. authorities are still investigating the October bombing.
17 sailors were killed.
Yemen's Prime Minister says at least three Yemenis will go on trial next month in connection with the attack.
They're suspected of belonging to an international terrorist network.
Edmund Pope, the U.S. businessman convicted of espionage in Russia, is offering the first details of his eight-month stay in a Moscow prison.
Speaking from a U.S. military hospital in Germany, Pope says he was treated well by prison guards, but suffered from mental anguish and depression.
Today, Pope is undergoing an extensive medical checkup, to see if there is any recurrence of bone cancer.
He's undergoing tests for skin cancer as well.
He will wait for the results before returning home to the U.S.
Pope was pardoned yesterday by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
U.S. and Yemeni officials have released a photo of one of the suicide bombers killed in the attack on the "USS Cole" in the port of Aden October.
17 U.S. sailors were killed and 39 others hurt.
The officials say Yemeni national Hussan Saeed Awad Al-Khamri was described by a boy as having launched the boat used in the attack.
Six possible suspects are still being held in Yemen pending a trial that could start as early as next month.
Investigators say they're still looking for other key suspects.
Many people in North America will be able to experience a partial solar eclipse tomorrow.
But scientists say it won't block much Christmas sunlight in most places.
As always, eclipse fans are being warned not to look directly at the Sun because that can cause permanent eye damage.
The eclipse will occur at around 12 P.M. Eastern Time.
The best view will be in the Northeast.
Welcome all to my new site.
I've decided to incorporate my old work blog into a general blog, the work diary is up on the right titled "my work diary".
EFF YEAH!
BUSH WON!
OK then.
My next thought.
The world is a much better place now that the terrorist Yassar Arafat is dead.
Here is a good one minute video on his great legacy Here.
This guy was one of the early innovators of terrorism in this century and he is protrayed by the Main Stream Media (MSM for short) as a "freedom fighter".
Because of him millions of palestinians chose "jihad" over peace with Isreal.
He innovated suicide bombers and plane hijacking plus he embezzelled hundreds of millions of dollars from aid funds.
and this guy got a nobel peace prize, what a disgrace.
UPDATE 1 - Drudge is reporting that Arafat has been skimming 2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories.
MAG: Arafat Skimmed $2 Million a Month From the Gas Trade Sun Nov 14 2004 09:53:40 ETNew York.
Last year auditors discovered Arafat was guilty of skimming $2 million a month from the gasoline trade in the territories, TIME reports.
In August 2002 international donors forced Arafat to sign over his investments to the Palestine Investment Fund, which was audited by U.S. accountants and managed by Palestinian Finance Minister Salam Fayyad, a former International Monetary Fund official.
After scouring corporations throughout the Arab world and bank accounts in the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg, the auditors identified $800 million, which has been made a part of the Palestinian Authority's official budget.
It's the most successful financial reform in the Arab world, -- Jim Prince, president of the Los Angeles-based Democracy Council and head of the audit team, tells TIME.
People close to Fayyad's investigation told TIME of Arafat's skimming from the gas trade.
Breaking the gasoline smuggling and corruption boosted the Palestinian Authority's official treasury by $10 million a month and cut gas prices for ordinary Palestinians.
"Arafat's death means his followers may never know just how much more they may be owed, "writes TIME's Matt Rees in "Where's Arafat's Money?"
In the mid-1990s, Arafat controlled a financial empire worth at least $3 billion.
By the time of his death, he was down to his last $1 billion, according to Israeli-intelligence estimates.
Arafat wife Suha's outburst that his successors were "trying to bury [him] alive" came after she learned that Arafat had signed over at least $800 million to the government of the Palestinian Authority two years ago, TIME reports.
Top Palestinian officials say Suha wants the new chief of the P.L.O., Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qurei to give her money out of the P.L.O.'s party coffers.
But a senior P.L.O. official tells TIME, "they'll pay her a pension, and that's it."
People familiar with Arafat's finances say the Palestinian leader sent Suha $200,000 a month out of the Palestinian Authority's budget for the Office of the President.
French authorities are investigating transfers of $15 million from Swiss banks to Paris accounts in Suha's name at the Arab Bank and at BNP Paribas Bank, a French bank, TIME reports.
Senior Palestinian security officials tell TIME that Arafat also shipped money to the gunmen of the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Developing.
Sure sounds like a Nobel Prize winner to me.
Time is reporting today that a al-Qaeda operative was captured and is spitting out that they have plans in the work to smuggle nukes into the US from Mexico, see the article here.
Thank god Bush is still our president, although I strongly disagree with him on his new immigration policy.
This policy would just make it easier for the enemy to get within our borders.
Just reported from AP that Condi Rice has been chosen by President Bush to become the new Secretary of State for his second term.
I agree with his choice and think she will make a much better Secretary then Powell did.
Her views are much more in step with the President then Powell, although he was a true soldier and carried the message.
Plus, any lady who works out to Led Zeppelin and is a Football nut is alright in my book.
Thanks to Captain Ed for bringing this up.
Apparently James Baker, former Secretary of State and current envoy for the Bush Administration, has asked the Isreali government to release a scumbag terrorist to promote "peace".
There is now ... in an Israeli prison a man named Marwan Barghouti, who is one of the young guard of Palestinians, and if the Palestinians are going to make this work against the really hard-line elements, the Islamists and some of the people of Hamas, they're going to have to have a coalition of the young guard and the old guard.
Gotta say that this shocked me, I've always thought Mr. Baker was a upstanding guy but this is just plain good old fashioned bullcrap.
Here are some of the fine achievements of the terrorist Marwan Barghouti Marwan Barghouti (born June 6, 1958) is a Palestinian leader from the West Bank and a leader of the Fatah movement that forms the backbone of the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
On June 6, 2004, he was sentenced to five life sentences for five murders of Israeli civilians and 40 years imprisonment for attempted murders in terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians.
Barghouti was one of the major leaders of the First Intifada in 1987, leading Palestinians in a mass uprising against Israeli occupation of the West Bank.
During the uprising, he was arrested by Israel and deported to Jordan, where he stayed for seven years until he was permitted to return under the terms of the Oslo Accords in 1994.
In 1996, he was elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council, in which he advocated peace with Israel, sometimes coming in conflict with Yasser Arafat.
The formal position occupied by Barghouti was the General Secretary of Fatah in the West Bank.
By the summer of 2000, Barghouti and Arafat had grown increasingly at odds with each other, with Barghouti accusing Arafat's administration of corruption and his security services of human rights violations, and Arafat was planning to fire him shortly.
However, as the Second Intifada began, Barghouti became increasingly popular as a leader of the Fatah Tanzim militia.
This was perhaps due to the transformation of Tanzim into an organization more resembling militant groups like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, responsible for dozens of civilian deaths in drive-by shootings.
Under Barghouti, the Tanzim has also carried out suicide bombings in Israel under the name al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades.
What is he thinking?
Release a known terrorist to run the PLO and that will bring about peace, give me a effin break.
Chris Matthews, that idiot talking head over at MSNBC, said yesterday about the terrorists we fought in Fallujah "a rival, I mean they're not bad guys especially, just people who just disagree with us".
this just amazes me, the complete idiocy of this waste of human sperm.
These are the same terrorists blowing up families, chopping off heads of civilians, and the complete disregard for any human life and they just disagree with us?
Tell that to the family of Margaret Hassan, the school teacher who was brutally tortured and then slaughtered by these same guys, they ain't so bad are they Chris Matthews?
This women who was known for her 30 years of work in Iraq, distributing medicine, food and supplies to Iraqis suffering under the sanctions of the 1990s.
British officials say they believe Hassan was a blindfolded woman seen being shot in the head by a hooded militant on a video obtained but not aired by the Arab television station Al-Jazeera.
She would be the first foreign woman to die in the wave of kidnappings in Iraq.
No group has claimed responsibility.
On Sunday, Marines found the mutilated body of what they believe was a Western woman on a street in Fallujah during the U.S. assault on the insurgent stronghold.
The body, clothed in what appeared to be a purple, velour dress, was wrapped in a blanket, with a blood-soaked black cloth nearby.
As of Tuesday night, the U.S. command said the body had not been identified.
These are the reasons that none of these mothereffers should ever see the light of day.
they need to be all lined up and shot.
Torturing this poor women for what?
WHAT?
And we should treat them as enemy soldiers under the Geneva Convention.
Last I remember the convention applies to countries that signed the document and the two countries must have standing armies with uniforms.
the Iraqi military is at our side, the terrorists are not.
Since when are terrorists soldiers?
They are lower then dogs.
Finally there is this written by a student of Mrs. Hassan She was my English teacher.
In the memory of my teacher and a fellow aid worker colleague Mrs. M. Hassan.
Mrs. Hassan was my English teacher in The British Council in Baghdad in Al-Wazirya district, I remember her years ago with her Irish accent telling me it's not Important how many words I must learn but the pronunciation of the words I already knew must be perfected.
Mrs. Hassan speak s perfect Arabic and she has a heart of gold, she's been killed by (men in pajamas), turn Iraq upside down and find them.
The Marines will find them, and when they do they shall die.
2Slick pointed me to a article at In Iraq For 365.
This is a great blog and I encourage you all to read it regularly.
On Sunday he wrote of two Iraqi soldiers who didn't see us as conquerors but as allies when the Mosul bombing occurred.
The suicide bomb sprayed bb-like fragments throughout the Marez dining facility.
One piece of shrapnel sliced through the femoral artery of a U.S. soldier and his only chance for survival was in the hands of these two Iraqis.
Recalling the medical classes they'd received from the special forces, the Iraqis reacted calmly, fastening a belt above the wound, creating a tourniquet, which stopped the gushing stream of red.
They moved the soldier to a MEDVAC vehicle via two-man litter carry.
After they hoisted the soldier in the truck, the two Iraqis -- one an officer, the other an NCO -- ran back to the facility and began treating the other wounded without regard for their safety.
When the dust settled and the mess tent had been evacuated, everybody who could talk was questioned about their health.
When the medics came to the two Iraqis, the ING soldiers only wanted to know how everybody else was.
When asked why did they do it, they simply stated, "this was our duty; we are a team, and we take care of each other."
Even the Americans.
No matter what the MSM tries to tell you, there are Iraqi's who will help the allies, who will fight alongside them and put their lives at risk to make sure Democracy succeeds in their country.
This brings to mind a speech Prime Minister Tony Blair gave recently while visiting Iraq.
When I meet the people working alongside the United Nations--Iraqis in fear of their life every day, because they are trying to bring freedom and democracy to their people--when I see their courage and their determination and know that they speak for the vast majority of people in Iraq who want that democracy and freedom, then I know that we are doing the right thing.
And I will also say this to you: There are people dying in Iraq, but the reason people are dying is because of the terrorism and the intimidation and the people who are deliberately killing anyone trying to make this country better.
Now what should our response be as an international community?
Our response should be to stand alongside the democrats--the people who've got the courage to see this thing through--and help them see it through.
I've got no doubt at all that that is the right thing for us to do.
Sometimes when I see some of the reporting of what's happening in Iraq in the rest of the world, I just feel that people should understand how precious what has been created here is.
And those people from that electoral commission that I described as the heroes of the new Iraq--every day ... a lot of them aren't living in the Green Zone, they've got to travel in from outside.
They do not know at any point in time whether they're going to be subject to brutality or intimidation, even death, and yet they carry on doing it.
Now what a magnificent example of the human spirit--that's the side we should be on.
This recent news story is troubling in many different ways.
When I first heard of the story I figured it was some wackjob playing with a new toy but now we find out there have been 7 incidents since Christmas from the West to East coast.
The FBI, concerned that terrorists could use lasers as weapons, is investigating why laser beams were directed into the cockpits of seven airplanes in flight since Christmas.
Laser beams can temporarily blind or disorient pilots and possibly cause a plane to crash.
The FBI is looking into two incidents in Colorado Springs, Colo., and one each in Cleveland, Washington, Houston, Teterboro, N.J., and Medford, Ore., according to federal and local law enforcement and transportation officials, some of whom spoke only on condition of anonymity.
A federal law enforcement official, who declined to be identified by name, said Thursday there is no evidence of a plot or terrorist activity.
But pilots are troubled by the incidents, and the FBI earlier this month warned of the possibility that terrorists might use the devices as weapons.
"It's not some kid," said Paul Rancatore, a pilot who serves as deputy chairman of the security committee for the Allied Pilots Association.
"It's too organized."
Loren Thompson, who teaches military technology at Georgetown University, called it a "rather worrisome development," though he said experts would be more puzzled than alarmed.
What we're talking about is a fairly powerful visible light laser that has the ability to lock onto a fast-moving aircraft," Thompson said.
That's not the sort of thing you pick up at a military surplus store."
Thompson said a piece of equipment that could do the things the FBI suspects would be "fairly expensive and fairly sophisticated."
It sounds like an organized effort to cause airline accidents," Thompson said.
Michelle Malkin has a post about this today where some outlets have stopped selling lasers.
Lots of people think that these indeed might be loonies playing with new Christmas toys but I disagree.
These are incidents where the Airplanes were tracked , some as high as 8500 feet.
To track a fast moving plane at that altitude would not be some toy you can get from the local wal-mart.
In my opinion this is quite alarming.
This Isn't Writing, It's Typing has a great post out with a ton of info, some of it quite scary A more frightening scenario is that terrorists may have obtained a Chinese-produced ZM-87 laser blinder which is specifically designed to blind eyesight.
The Japanese terrorist cult Aum Shinrikyo--which launched the infamous Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway system in 1995--was discovered to have experimented with the use of lasers as weapons.
According to The Asian Pacific Post, "Cult members apparently obtained laser design information from Russian institutes they visited and built a laser weapon mounted on a truck.
They had planned to use the laser against Tokyo policemen, but the plan failed when the laser malfunctioned during the testing stage."
PoliticAlex also has some info on this story also.
I found the following report that was presented to Congress recently about the shoulder launched missle threat to airliners, which this might very well be a precursor to: Recent events have focused attention on the threat that terrorists with shoulder fired surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), referred to as Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), pose to commercial airliners.
Most believe that no single solution exists to effectively mitigate this threat.
Instead, a menu of options may be considered, including installing infrared (IR) countermeasures on aircraft; modifying flight operations and air traffic control procedures; improving airport and regional security; and strengthening missile non-proliferation efforts.
Equipping aircraft with missile countermeasure systems can protect the aircraft even when operating in areas where ground-based security measures are unavailable or infeasible to implement.
However, this option has a relatively high cost, between $1 million and $3 million per aircraft, and the time needed for implementation does not allow for immediate response to the existing terrorist threat.
Procedural improvements such as specific flight crew training, altering air traffic procedures to minimize exposure to the threat, and improved security near airports may be less costly than countermeasures and could more immediately help deter domestic terrorist attacks.
However, these techniques by themselves cannot completely mitigate the risk of domestic attacks and would not protect U.S. airliners flying to and from foreign airports.
Legislation introduced in the 108th Congress (H.R. 580, S. 311) calls for the installation of missile defense systems in all turbojet aircraft used in scheduled air carrier service.
While this legislation is still under consideration, Homeland Security appropriations designated $60 million in FY2004 and $61 million in FY2005 to fund a program to develop and test prototype missile countermeasure systems for commercial aircraft based on existing military technology.
It is anticipated that at the conclusion of this program, in January 2006, the Department of Homeland Security will be able to provide a detailed analysis of the suitability of such systems for use to protect commercial passenger aircraft.
American Future has a link up to a article written in yesterdays Houston Chronicle.
It describes how the European Governments look to be changing their tune in regards to President Bush.
Why you ask?
But there is arguably more to this sea change than just a grumpy acceptance of the status quo.
From a European perspective, three things are making it easier to warm to the Bush White House.
One is the death of Yasser Arafat.
No issue divides Europe and the United States more keenly than the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
For the last few years, Europeans have criticized Bush for failing to put enough pressure on Israel to get out of the occupied territories and for refusing to deal with Arafat.
That another reason why I respect Bush so much, his refusal to acknowledge that windbag terrorist Arafat.
May he rot in hell.
But since Arafat's death, Europeans and Americans have been able to find common ground: supporting Ariel Sharon's withdrawal from Gaza, putting pressure on Israel to let the Palestinians hold elections and, covertly, backing Mahmoud Abbas to become the next Palestinian leader.
A second reason is Europe's growing worries about Islamic terrorism.
The murder in November of Theo van Gogh, a provocative Dutch filmmaker, at the hands of an Islamic militant has been called Europe's 9/11.
Though the two events are obviously not fully comparable, it is certainly true that American conservatives, such as Francis Fukuyama and Bernard Lewis, have found a wider audience recently for the idea that radical Islam is inimical to European traditions of tolerance.
You mean those radical muslims can be kinda nasty sometimes?
Get outta here.
Keep doing business like the cowards in Spain and they will more then likely have their very own 9/11 to cry about.
The third force is the reappearance, albeit in a milder form, of the threat that kept the trans-Atlantic alliance together for half a century.
The Russian bear is growling again.
The Ukrainian election --- complete with its KGB-style poisoning of the opposition leader and heavy-handed electoral fraud -- has reminded European diplomats of Vladimir V. Putin's determination to control his "near abroad."
They should be very worried about this item, I believe Putin is slowly sliding Russia back to what it once was.
Hopefully our Government isn't asleep at the wheel with this situation either.
There is a personal edge to all this.
Just as the snooty continentals eventually came to admire the gormless Hollywood actor, there is a grudging willingness to rethink some prejudices about the inarticulate Texan.
Many European leaders once swallowed the Michael Moore version of history: that Bush was an ignorant interloper who stole the White House.
His thumping re-election, however, shows that he represents a large body of conservative American opinion.
In short, Europeans are getting used to the idea that it is not Bush who is the exception, but the U.S. itself that is exceptional --- and that if they want to deal with this exceptional superpower they need to humor it rather than rile it.
Strangely enough, this has been Tony Blair's strategy all along; it is rapidly becoming the Continent's strategy, too.
Couldn't of ended that article any better myself.
Get used to it France, we ain't going nowhere.
Nicolae Mischie, authoritarian leader of a district organization of the main opposition party, has been jailed.
Romania voted in the last December, ousting the so-called socialist party PSD (Social-Democratic Party).
PSD managed to keep a stronghold in poor rural areas, with the help of people like Mischie.
They combined blackmail, using their right of decision regarding the public funds for local leaders opposing PSD, and strong seduction of the uneducated masses, in a marvelous way.
E.g., Mischie, who talks like an idiot, got a PhD in history.
His paper was on a political personality of the 19th century and Mischie bought the house where his paper's subject lived.
Maybe he tried to invest in his paper, maybe he believed sincerely in his admiration for the poor innocent dead guy and his ability of earning PhDs, but using a big car and living in a big house are signs for the masses that the man is an invaluable and irreplaceable leader.
Another misleading sign was his position as a University professor - he was teaching mostly at private universities, which are still ways to buy diplomas here in Romania.
Local leaders did their jobs, but national leaders, pressuring TV stations to lie, associating with old communist ex-president Ion Iliescu, failed to win in big cities.
PSD is building a strategy for the 4 years to come and they are going to elect a leader.
It is known that communist leaders die in office (as judges of the U.S. Supreme Court) and Ion Iliescu won't be different.
All the leaders that expressed different points of view will be excluded from the party, that's the untold truth that Romanian media seem to hide or not conceive yet.
Mischie was right to criticize the national leaders, because PSD got a good share in the elections in his area.
But Mischie was wrong, because he did that while in vacation in Switzerland, where you can't go if you earn 20K $ a year.
The new power had nothing to do, but let the policemen do what they should be doing years ago.
Iliescu and Nastase, ex-president and ex-prime minister, are now left only with the leadership of the party and holding this illusory authority.
If Mischie wouldn't take his chance on them, he would still be free, with the help of the weak and weakening strings Iliescu might still pull.
The interim government declared a state of emergency in Iraq excluding the Kurdish region for 60 days, according to the National Security Law introduced last August which states that emergency laws can be declared in the country for a period no more than 60 days provided a serious threat against Iraqi national security is recognised by the interim government.
Obviously, this is a necessary step that should have been taken at least two months ago.
Suicide bombings and guerrilla attacks carried out by insurgents and foreign terrorists based around Baghdad have escalated to alarming levels particularly during Ramadan.
Deputy governor of Diyala along with several council members from Ba'quba were ambushed and killed in Latifiya south of Baghdad, an area which has supposedly been 'cleared' from insurgents a couple of weeks ago.
Four suicide attacks in Samarra, also a recently 'liberated' area, against National Guard units and the governorate building.
Zarqawi's group claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Three police stations in Haditha, a small town west of Ramadi, were assaulted by groups of insurgents.
Some 30 policemen were captured, tied up and executed in cold blood against the walls following a confrontation which lasted two hours.
Zarqawi's group, again, claiming responsibility.
A full-scale military operation against Fallujah, which is apparently underway already, seems to be the government's 'final solution'.
I'm not optimistic to the outcome, especially when significant civilian casualties are unavoidable.
Note, that I'm not suggesting a peaceful or political solution would work either in these areas.
Insurgents west of Baghdad have quite obstinately made it clear that nothing but full control of the country, or at least the Anbar governorate, will satisfy them.
They have refused to participate in the political process, they have repeatedly announced their intentions to boycott the elections and to disrupt them in other areas, and they do not recognise the government or any other authority in the country beside themselves.
The demands of the Fallujah negotiants from the government weeks ago were obscene and they clearly reflect the overt sectarianism and regionalism of the armed groups in the area.
The demands were not released to the Iraqi public at the time for unkown reasons but they have leaked out days ago.
Here are just a few of them:
A clear timetable for the withdrawal of foreign occupation forces.
fair enough.
Immediate withdrawal of US and Iraqi security forces from the Anbar governorate and the handover of security responsibilities to former army officers from Anbar.
The appointment of ministers from the Anbar governorate to the ministries of Interior, Defense, Oil and Finance.
The removal of certain officials (most of them from Shi'ite Islamic parties such as Ibrahim Al-Ja'fari) from governmental positions.
The complete return of Ba'athists, army officers, Republican Guards, Mukhabarat, intelligence and security personnel to their former positions.
The removal of Shi'ite Edhan (call for prayers) from official television and radio programs.
Incomes of Shi'ite sacred shrines should be returned under the control of the Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.
These last two demands have been allegedly added by Sheikh Harith Al-Dhari (head of the Association of Muslim Scholars) and are said to have been a major reason behind the failure of negotiations with the government.
Iraqis here in the south were shocked to hear of these demands and sectarian tensions are on the rise.
It scares me to see the reaction of people around me whenever Fallujah is mentioned.
The director of a primary health care clinic was remarking the other day that "Fallujah should be burnt upon its residents and then razed to the ground.
They are the sons of Mu'awiya, may Allah curse them all."
Sidenote: Mu'awiya bin Abi Sufyan was the governor of Syria during the 7th century and he fought Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (Muhammed's son-in-law) over the Caliphate after the assassination of Caliph Othman.
He became the first Ummayid Caliph and two decades later, under the Caliphate of his son Yazid, Imam Hussein bin Ali (grandson of Muhammed) was killed by his armies at present day Karbala.
Someone hushed the director and pointed out to him that I'm Sunni.
He was a bit embarrassed and tried to explain that he was referring to Wahhabis and foreign fighters.
It was a bit uncomfortable and I could feel that people were giving me furtive glances.
Refugees have been pouring out of Fallujah over the last few days into Baghdad and the surrounding areas.
The military operation will undoubtly aggravate the humanitarian situation inside the city since there are definitely thousands of families with no place to go.
Refugees in Baghdad have confirmed the rumours that the 'Mujahideen' are forcing men from 15-50 years old to stay and that they were threatened with execution if they refuse to carry arms in defense of the town.
Majlis Shura Al-Mujahideen (The Mujahideen Advisory Council) are in control of Fallujah and they have distributed a statement inviting Arab and foreign (including American) media reporters to enter the town and cover the battles.
The statement carried the insignia of Zarqawi's group Qa'idat Al-Jihad.
Everyone is closely watching what the next few days will bring, hoping the violence doesn't spread to the streets of Baghdad or other areas.
I'm still holed up in Basrah but I'll try to be on the road as soon as possible.
Gazprom, the main Russian gas company, has been denied a $10 billion credit line due to the political situation in Russia.
The company intended to use the cash to pay an artificially low price for Yukos assets (hence that firm's bankruptcy filing a few days ago -- you know it's bad when you have to use US courts to protect your own assets from appropriation by your home country).
It's starting to look like Putin's goal is a sort of judicial nationalization -- taking control of key assets through court, rather than executive, fiat.
But the markets have caught on, and Russia may be deprived of the capital it needs to grow.
Don't expect any of the Russian leadership to reverse course; given the current trends there, they'll just Blame the West when their screwy plan screws them over.
One of the rules of thumb that has guided my (limited) business career from the beginning is that China is never as lucrative as it looks.
This assumption is based on about 150 years of economic history, including several booms in interest and investment in China.
Their biggest problem: There's usually a 200-to-1 ratio of Nearly Starving Peasant Laborers to Absurdly Well-Off Government Employees.
And now it's an iffier 100-to-1, since there are also rich private sector employees and the labor force isn't quite so expendable.
What they've been missing for years was the real driver behind any consumer economy: Consumers.
Specifically, they didn't have a real middle class.
That's changed in the last twenty years, as increasing social mobility and a burst in foreign demand has finally made China a genuine, rather than theoretical, contender.
And they've even supplied proof of their economic viability, announcing that they've beaten Japan for exports to the US.
If only I'd figured this out in early 2002, when their stock market was by some stretch of the imagination cheap.
I dunno if you want anything to do with their stock market.
For one, its perforance last year was pretty dismal.
More importantly, its a structural nuthouse.
Unfortunately, minority shareholder rights are virtually non-existent, and excluding the dodgy financial statements listed on the exchange, lots of times companies are more interested in generating cash from an IPO then actually bothering with shareholder value.
This Economist article (not sure if registration is required, sorry):
Finally, the Shanghai Composite on July, 1997 was trading at 1189.76.
As of January 27, 2005 it's sitting at 1225.89.
That's an annualized return of roughly 0.4%.
The 5 year return is even worse 
You haven't missed much.
Apparently Yuganskneftegaz, which was sold to an independent buyer who turned out to be an apparatus of the state (yes, the same state that 1) forced Yukos to do the auction, and 2) ran the auction, not that 3) this is suspicious or anything), and which was then being bought with foreign assistance, is not being bought with foreign assistance.
As of this morning, at least.
Anyway, it looks like they're denying Chinese involvement to avoid a lawsuit , which is funny -- you'd think they might know someone in the Russian judiciary who could help them out.
Apparently Carly made a lot of journalistic enemies during her six hears at HP.
Not only was the catalyst for her fall from grace a Fortune article by Carol Loomis (who as far as I know is immortal -- she's been writing for Fortune since 1954), but the anti-Carly brigades are out in full force at Salon.com.
This is getting a little harsh; she might have messed up at HP (I refuse to call it by the new name, for now), but she wasn't actively trying to destroy a great company and wreck the shareholders.
It just, well, happened.
So, right, Carly was a bad manager, and she eventually got what she deserved, but she isn't evil incarnate.
I was hoping for another incredibly drawn-out story, full of antitrust drama, lurking potential bidders, and contentious confrontations between executives.
And then MCI just sort of accepted a Verizon deal without really bothering anybody.
Clearly, their corporate culture has suffered -- 25 years ago, MCI was the brawling upstart in the telecom industry, constantly challenging AT&T's right to exist, much less to monopolize the phone system.
And now, they're swallowed by Just Another Monolith.
I expected better -- meaner and tougher, sure, but better nonetheless.
Read this report on the U.S.-Russia Technology Symposium.
It's a great summary of the paradoxes of the Russian economy: They have a huge untapped supply of valuable IT labor, but their IT exports are only a tenth of their military exports (and only a thirtieth of India's IT exports).
They develop lots of new technology, but nobody can tell who owns what.
And, of course, their securities laws and property rights are even flimsier than China's -- after the Putin administration mugged Yukos on the grounds that it was too attractive a target to leave alone, they lost a lot of trust.
Still, they have an unbelieveable amount of untapped potential.
The following a grim story out of Russia tonight where there's proof some of the sailors on board that Russian nuclear submarine the Kursk initially survived the explosion that sank the sub, only to be trapped later.
One of the sailors wrote a letter during those terrible final hours.
Today, 10 weeks after a mysterious accident sent the Kursk to the bottom of the Barents sea, a grisly discovery.
In the pocket of one of the crew, a handwritten note, dying words of a sailor trapped alive in the sunken sub.
He is this lieutenant captain, seen here three years ago aboard the Kursk.
His last words tell a chilling tail -- tale of a desperate but future ill attempt to escape.
It now appears 23 survived -- survived the initial explosion.
The 23 frantically scrambled to the rear of the sub.
They find the escape hatch flooded and seal themselves in compartment nine.
Realizing he will die, he begins to write.
He addressed the letter to his wife, Olga.
He is my dear, dear beloved.
I want to see him again, read his letter.
The chilling account raises new questions and criticisms of the Russian navy, which waited several days before attempting to launch any rescue mission
But navy officials here at the Pentagon say any rescue attempt would have failed, that there really was no hope for the 23 survivors.
It's believed they would have frozen to death in hours, long before they ran out of air.
That may be little consolation for the families.
NBC News correspondent Jim Miklaszweski, the pentagon.
Program note here.
Coming up tonight at 10:00 p.m. eastern, a closer look at the Kursk and similar disasters that have taken place at sea.
An investigation is under way into a fatal airliner accident in Mexico last night.
It happened as the DC-9 was trying to land during a rainstorm.
The Aero Mexico jet skidded off a runway and into a neighborhood in the town of Reynosa, about 50 miles from Brownsville, Texas.
Four people on the ground were killed.
But the 83 people aboard the plane escaped with only scrapes and bruises.
We have been here so many times before the threat of a wider war in the middle east.
There has been impressive progress but a lasting past remains elusive.
President Clinton today considered flying to the middle east for an emergency summit meeting, but he backed away.
How did it come to this so swiftly?
Here's Andrea Mitchell.
Reporter:
The president returns to Washington today, hoping to salvage something from eight years of Middle East diplomacy.
What went wrong?
To many peace seemed so close at Camp David in July.
How did it all fall apart?
First, Palestinian resentment.
On the street, people see no economic rewards, aren't any better off after years of peace talks, and they resent the U.S. for blaming Arafat when the summit collapses while praising Israel's prime minister Barak.
The prime minister moved forward more from his initial position than chairman Arafat, particularly surrounding the questions of Jerusalem.
It's quite clear the Palestinians do not accept the various proposals put forward to divide Jerusalem.
Reporter:
Arafat appears weak, and radical groups like Hamas gain strength.
A weakened Arafat emboldens a great deal of forces that does not want peace.
Reporter:
Second, Israeli frustration.
Many Israelis feel Barak goes too far by offering Arafat partial control of the holy sites, gets nothing in return.
I think Barak was very forthcoming at Camp David.
The intransigence or failure of Arafat to come forward with any counterproposal I think frustrated the prime minister and frustrated the Israelis.
Reporter:
Finally, the summit raises false hopes, is not well prepared by Washington.
The U.S. rushes ahead, eager for a breakthrough before the end of Clinton's term.
Other Arab leaders like Mubarak of Egypt and Fahd of Saudi Arabia are not sold on the deal, tell Arafat to hold out.
If a concerted effort was put together to consult with these people and bring them on board, then probably Arafat would have been able to cut a deal.
I think the United States did not prepare adequately for Camp David.
They should have been much more careful in the preparation and more assured of getting some kind of an agreement.
Reporter:
With most observers saying that Camp David only made a bad situation worse, questions tonight as to why the president would even consider going to another summit with even less hope of a solution.
Washington.
With the presidential debate tonight in St. Louis, the candidates will be in the middle of a hot political issue that's not getting much national attention -- what to do about the Missouri river, the fabled waterway of Lewis and Clark that joins the Mississippi in St. Louis.
It's a far different river now than it once was, and the question is -- should it be allowed to return to its true form?
NBC's national correspondent is Jim Avila.
Reporter:
The wide Missouri, pioneers called it  -- too thick to drink, too thin to plow.
A shallow, slow moving, swampy river that birds and fish loved in its natural state.
The ebb and flow in a river like the Missouri provides the basis for life itself.
Reporter:
But the Missouri is no longer wild, tamed by dams and dredging.
Now a shipping highway the government says endangers the very existence of three critical river species -- the 100 million-year-old Pallid Sturgeon, the shore-wading the Least Tern.
The Missouri's natural rhythm destroyed, say the experts, by six dams in a system from north central Montana to the Mississippi River.
A transformation turning the meandering river into essentially a deep water ditch.
Without providing the higher flow in the spring and the lower flow in the summer that Missouri river species are adapted to, they're going to disappear.
Today's sturgeon can't reproduce in the river any more, only in man-made hatcheries and sand bars, homes to wading birds are being washed away by deep water.
So to save fish and birds and improve recreational use in up-river states, where tourism is a major source of income, the government wants to alter 50 years of steady water flow.
Re-creating the original river by releasing more water in spring, less in summer -- fighting words for downriver farmers and barge operators.
Try explaining that times have changed, nonsense to the people who live along the Missouri river and don't want to go back to the spring floods.
Reporter:
It's about the water and who controls it.
The Missouri, second longest river in the country.
7 states, 2,500 miles long and now according to conservationists, second on the list of rivers in danger.
Farmers say it's the planting season that's in danger if the Missouri isn't controlled in spring.
And barge owners say two dry months in the summer will ruin business.
What this proposal does is double the cost of operation on the Missouri river and will cause those companies to move off the river.
Reporter:
But according to figures from the U.S. Corps of Army Engineers, the four grain producing states along the Missouri, producing nearly 5 billion bushels of grain each year, ship very little by barge now.
16.7 million bushels.
That's .3%.
The barge companies do not own the Missouri river.
The flood plain farmers do not own the Missouri river.
Everybody owns it.
We have to find a way to share the Missouri.
Reporter:
And say environmentalists save three threatened  species and a leisure economy dependent upon a wide, untamed Missouri.
Jim Avila, NBC news, Bismarck, North Dakota.
Grief engulfed Austria, one day after a fire in a cable car filled with skiers killed at least 155 people.
It happened inside a tunnel high in the Austrian Alps.
Here's NBC's Ron Allen.
As helicopters carried emergency crews to the scene of the disaster nearly 100 Americans headed home to military bases in Germany, without eight members of their ski clubs who never came back.
Major Drew Stathis and his 8-year-old daughter say they might have been trapped, but they were just five minutes behind the group.
In the Army you kind of expect, prepare yourself.
But not on a family vacation.
That's where the tragedy is.
Lieutenant Mike Coe got tired of waiting for a train and left a family of four Americans who died, standing in line.
It is horrifying what happened to them.
And it is horrifying how close I was to -- I mean, I guess I'm a good, impatient American who did not want to wait in line.
Today this Alpine resort town came to an abrupt halt as more than 150 victims were all but positively identified.
Friends and relatives who'd been waiting and hoping were taken to a private memorial service.
Up the mountain the usually packed ski areas were completely deserted.
Investigators still haven't figured out what caused this disaster.
Several eyewitnesses have told them they saw flames coming from the train as it headed up the mountain, before it entered the tunnel.
One official here said, by the time the driver noticed the fire, it already was too late.
The main concern now is to remove and identify the victims.
These Americans ended a holiday weekend burdened by a deep sense of loss.
Nobody is looking forward to the long bus ride with our friends missing.
It's going to be hard.
Hard for this entire nation mourning the worst disaster here that anyone can remember.
Ron Allen, NBC News, Kaprun, Austria.
It's now been almost two months since the worst terror attack on a U.S. Navy ship, the destroyer "Cole," and tonight, sources tell NBC News that an American Muslim militant, a prime suspect in planning the attack, is now in custody in Jordan.
His name is Jaed Hijazi, and NBC News has learned he's got direct high-level ties to the terrorist Osama bin Laden.
He's reportedly told U.S. investigators of additional plans, to attack U.S. military aircraft in the Persian Gulf and Middle East.
I can't for the life of me figure out why anyone would invest in the airline industry.
Please, someone tell me a group companies facing more serious problems than the legacy airline carriers (Delta, US Airways, Continental, American, Northwestern, United).
High fuel costs, insane pension obligations, and a highly paid, specialized workforce.
To this list of woes, we add a whole slew of competitors with much lower cost structures.
I admit I've already taken advantage of the lower fares announced last week to book a business trip but these next few years are not going to be pretty for some of these companies.
Unfortunately, the pain is not limited to these companies.
Pittsburgh, one of US Airway's hubs, built up its airport complete with a sprawling retail complex in the terminal.
Now US Airways has reduced flights out of Pittsburgh by 28% since January of 2004 and is in real danger of folding completely.
These shiny new airports are usually financed by long-term bonds that still have to paid off.
but not by the airlines.
This is an industry looking for a sustainable strategy.
Southwest and JetBlue were the only major airlines to earn a profit in 2004 but who knows what will be happening in another five years.
So I will thankfully accept the low fares, bemoan the loss of food on flights, and watch these companies parade in and out of bankruptcy.
BusinessWeek Online has some other commentary about the fare cuts here and about US Airway's woes here.
Thousands of people in Botswana have lined up to view the remains of an African man whose body was stuffed and exhibited in a Spanish museum for nearly a century.
The man was returned to Africa after complaints from the UN and other organizations that displaying his body was racist and offensive.
The man will be buried at a funeral service tomorrow.
You are listening to BBC news for The World.
I'm Gregor Craigy.
An apparent attack on a US warship has left at least six American sailors dead and about 35 injured.
The explosion came as the guided-missile destroyer USS Cole was refueling at a port in Yemen.
NPR's Chad Pergram reports.
Both the White House and the Pentagon said the attack appeared to be an act of terrorism.
President Clinton immediately whisked to the region investigative teams from the FBI, the Pentagon and the State Department.
The attack comes as US forces in the Middle East have been placed on a heightened state of alert after days of clashes between Israelis and Palestinians.
Defense Secretary William Cohen said the US would continue to protect its interests around the globe.
No one should doubt our resolve to remain a force for peace and for stability and no one should assume that they can force us to retreat.
No one should assume they can attack us with impunity.
The Cole had just arrived in the harbor for a refueling stop.
Officials say men aboard this small boat had been assisting the Cole with mooring lines just before the blast.
Chad Pergram ,NPR News, Washington.
The bodies of 2 more American sailors were recovered today from the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of Aden.
US officials are on the scene and continuing their investigations into the explosion that killed 17 crewmembers on board the Cole last Thursday.
Today there are reports that police in Aden questioned the landlord of an apartment where bomb-making equipment was found and whose occupants may have carried out the suicide attack against the warship.
Also today at the Cole's homeport in Norfolk, Virginia, President Clinton led a memorial service for those who died aboard the Cole.
The service began with the playing of the national anthem.
The President asked all Americans to take a moment to thank the men and women of the military.
Today we honor our finest young people, fallen soldiers who rose to freedom's challenge.
We mourn their loss, celebrate their lives, and offer the love and prayers of a grateful nation to their families.
Mr. Clinton mentioned the name of each of the 17 victims and praised the courage and character of the men and women who serve in the armed forces.
And he delivered this clear message for those who carry out attacks on members of US military.
For those who attacked them we say you will not found the safe harbor.
We will find you and justice will prevail.
America will not stop standing guard for peace, or freedom, or stability in the Middle East and around the world.
At the end of the somber ceremony, President Clinton asked everyone to join him in a moment of silence followed by the Navy Hymn and Taps.
Britain's going to establish diplomatic relations with North Korea.
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook made the announcement on his arrival in the South Korean capital, Seoul.
But Cook says establishing ties with North Korea doesn't mean London will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses in the country.
We have diplomatic relations around the world, we are going to find out who is a human rights breaker, we have very deep and very real concerns.
The advantage of having diplomatic relations is that we can have a direct dialogue in which we can raise these concerns and express our deep anxiety for the need of improvement in them.
Cook says the South Korean leadership is keen on international help in bringing its northern neighbor in from the cold.
Britain said today that it is normalizing relations with North Korea.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair called the decision a historic breakthrough.
It comes  just days ahead of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's trip to the North Korean capital Pyongyang.
Britain's foreign minister Robin Cook, who made the announcement, said opening diplomatic links could help ease tensions between North and South Korea, technically the two countries are still at war.
Germany said today that it also plans to normalize relations with Pyongyang,
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation in Washington DC.
Mr. Harrison, Britain, Italy, prior to that Australia, the Philippines now and apparently Germany all bringing the most secretive state into the fold.
How about the United States, where does that leave us?
Well, I think President Clinton will get some good political cover.
From what Britain has done, if he goes to Pyongyang, as is now being discussed, Secretary Albright is going to go, the number two man in North Korea was in Washington last week.
Things are moving, what's particularly important is that Britain has not attached any conditions.
The United States has imposed a number of conditions on normalizing with North Korea.
The most important of them is that it renounce its missile program and its nuclear weapons program, or rather reach agreements on limiting and possibly ending them both, and as of now we are not in a position to normalize relations with North Korea just like that.
We will want negotiations on some of these contested issues.
Well let me ask you more about America's interest now and Britain's move, I mean how do you make sense of what's happening, especially if Britain was involved in a war with North Korea as obviously was the United States, and until recently North Korea was considered by the US a rogue nation.
It is still shrouded in secrecy, as we said, including in its nuclear weapons program.
Are you trusting of these newly forced alliances, do you consider what Britain is doing either reckless or ill advanced?
No.
And I don't think it is an alliance really, it is just conducting diplomatic interchange with them.
It is not even clear how soon Britain is going to have a mission in Pyongyang.
And so I think it certainly isn't reckless to establish diplomatic relations, and I think indeed it is a very healthy thing because the present leadership of Kim Jong Il, son of the late General You  , he has been trying to open up to the outside world.
He doesn't want to reform his internal economic system or political controls.
On the other hand he needs western capital, he needs supportive international agencies to deal with tremendous economic problems that North Korea has had since the end of the cold war, when they lost their Russian and Chinese economic subsidies.
So that trend of North Korea opening up to the outside, it seems to be, it should be encouraged.
So then as North Korea opens up more and more, what are the possible repercussions down the road for the nearly 40,000 American troops who remain in South Korea?
Well, North Korea's attitude has been that if the United States and North Korea are friends and the North Koreans don't feel threatened, they wont object to some US forces remaining in the Korean peninsula in a new role.
That is to say, if they are going to be there as allies of South Korea against North Korea, then the North Koreans don't want them there, they will keep putting on the pressure for the US to get the forces out.
The North Koreans are certainly not going to end their missile program, if the US continues to maintain some aspects of its military presence in the Korean peninsula such as its aircraft.
So I think they are going to ask for military concessions in order to do what we want them to do regarding missiles, but I think that the assumption that this improvement in ties between North and South and between North Korea and other countries is going to lead to the complete withdrawal of the US from Korea in the near future, certainly I don't think at all, are.
Mr. Harrison, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Thank you.
Selig Harrison is a Korean affairs specialist at the Century Foundation, speaking to us from Washington DC.
Missouri residents remembered Governor Mel Carnahan today.
He died Monday night in a plane crash while campaigning for the Senate.
Thousands attended a ceremony at the Missouri State capital.
President and Mrs. Clinton were among the mourners.
A former US Army sergeant has pleaded guilty in New York to conspiracy in the bombings of American Embassies in east Africa in 1998.
Ali Mohammed, a native of Egypt, has admitted to five charges of conspiring with a Saudi born dissident Osama bin Laden to attack US targets in the Middle-East.
More than 220 people died in the blasts.
Libyan leader Colonel Gadaffi can be prosecuted in France over the bombing of a French airliner in which a 170 people were killed.
That's the ruling of a court in Paris.
It rejected an appeal that as a serving head of state Gadaffi should be immune from prosecution.
The lawyer representing the victims' families Francoise Rudetski is hailing the decision as a victory.
The victory today is that any people who committed an act of terrorism should know that he can be pursued and could be arrested and there is no immunity for anyone, any leaders in the world.
Relatives of those killed after an explosion on board the plane over Niger in 1989, brought the case against the Libyan leader.
Six Libyans including Colonel Gadaffi's brother-in-law have already been tried in their absence.
This is The World.
I am Lisa Mullins.
Putting aside a half century of acrimony, Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright met today with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang.
Part of the purpose of this historic visit is to lay the groundwork for a possible trip to North Korea by President Clinton before his term ends.
Albright's visit to Pyongyang is the first by a high level US official since the communist state was established in 1948.
Kong Dan Oh is a Korean expert who has just written a book called 'North Korea through the Looking Glass'.
She is now in the South Korean capital of Seoul.
We know that the visit is making big news there in Seoul.
Can you tell us what is being reported about the meeting between the two sides from the South Korean perspective?
Well, when I look at about six major daily newspapers, basically the top news was Madeleine Albright meeting with the Chairman Kim Jong Il.
And basically that indeed this is a very historic event, and some kind of euphoria and very positive upbeat feeling.
But at the same time, the reports are basically telling the importance of this meeting that is that they have to talk about the very critical security matter issues such as missile and nuke.
But nonetheless, the meeting was very crucial, so I think all in all, it was a very positive beginning.
And how much of South Korea as you mentioned is bordering on euphoria, get this new relationship with Pyongyang and at the visit by Secretary of State Albright?
I know that you have taken a more cautious approach, and I wonder if that applies to Secretary Albright's visit in general?
Do you believe that the US is doing the right thing?
Or is perhaps the United States, in your view, moving too quickly to try and patch things up?
I am kind of taking a slightly cautious approach, simply because if Madam Albright is there, without the really thinking down the road some kind of strategic consequences of this meeting, simply because we are interested in seeing this gentleman and maybe before our term is over, let me meet you.
I think that kind of simple approach to be wrong.
But if she understands importance of this meeting and further brings up substance of issue to be resolved between the North Korea and the United States, I think that is very desirable.
What you're saying is that you feel that the part of the impetus of the North is influenced by the fact that the United States has a presidential election just a couple of weeks away.
I think that is a definitely correct statement, provided that maybe the Republican candidate, Mr. Bush to be elected.
North Korea was very, very scared that Mr. Bush would take a much more hawkish and conservative approach.
So before this Clinton administration comes to be over, they would like to lay down the ground rules and kind of create some kind of positive improvement to deal with the United States.
And obviously one of the most important agendas for tomorrow is to discuss the possibilities of President Clinton's next visit sometime in November.
I know that you have concerns about how a potential visit by President Clinton might be portrayed within North Korea itself.
Why is that a concern of yours?
My fundamental belief is that Kim Jong Il has not really made his mind or made a decision to push the reforms, even in the session of 1978 Chinese reform that was taken by Deng Xiaoping.
He is now gambling, he is trying, but he has not really changed his manner or his policy whatsoever.
His economy and his society's politics is really getting in real deep trouble.
He has to show his power and he's been telling his people that I am the true leader and the world is afraid of us.
All the imperialist capitalist is afraid of us.
That we are the center of the universe.
Without the North Korea, the globe is not existing.
Let me show you that I am the true leader and they will come to our country to pay visit, courtesy visit for me.
And so now Putin visited, President Kim visited, Jiang Zemin will visit next year and the President Clinton will go.
Domestic consumption of this visit will be immense, without changing any policy toward the freedom of proliferation  .
Is it really possible with the kind of close watch that the outside world is now going to be invited to give to North Korea, that Kim Jong Il could actually not change a thing in terms of his policies, internally or externally?
I am exactly wondering like you, and I think that there is a maybe the possibility actually is going up.
So I don't object really any of these like U.K. normalization, you know.
I don't have any objection.
But only when the leaders and the elite, the policy elite, is aware of that what they are bringing and what they are negotiating and how they would like to have an impact on North Korean society, I think that's the important key question.
Kong Dan Oh is the author of the book 'North Korea through the Looking Glass', speaking to us from Seoul, South Korea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World service, PRI and WGBH in Boston.
I'm Lisa Mullins.
American spy suspect Edmund Pope took the stand again today in a Moscow courtroom.
The former naval intelligence officer faces charges of stealing secret designs for a high-speed Russian torpedo system.
Pope denies acting illegally and President Clinton and Secretary Of State Madeleine Albright have called for his release on health grounds but Russian prosecutors are pressing ahead as The World's Nenad Sebek reports from Moscow.
The trial was suspended earlier in the week because of Pope's poor health.
Pope has a history of bone cancer but a doctor working for the FSB, the Russian security service, pronounced Pope fit enough to stand trial today.
The proceedings are held behind closed doors and Pope's lawyer said today that his client is still very weak and that he wants a new interpreter, says the current one works for the same agency that has charged Pope.
The lawyer Pavel Astakhov says his client is innocent when it comes to espionage.
The whole case as Astakhov claims is an exercise in politics.
This is the first time in almost 40 years that a foreign national is being tried for espionage.
It's quite blatant.
Officials from the security force, which used to be the KGB, are openly boasting about taking an American citizen to court.
Way back in 1961 US military pilot Garry Powers was tried and sentenced but later on exchanged for a captured Soviet spy.
But Powers was caught red-handed.
His U2 spy plane was brought down by Soviet Air Defenses.
Pope was arrested as he was trying to purchase blue prints for what he says is a 10-year-old underwater propulsion system or as the prosecutions claims ultra modern, secret Russian torpedoes.
Former Russian Army Intelligence Officer, Vitaly Schlykov says Pope could easily have been a victim of the Russian obsession with secrets.
We have of course a secrecy culture in this country for decades and decades and reminisce of it are coming to the surface in this case.
The laws on secrecy are still intact from the times of the Soviet Union.
Guilty or not, Pope is being held under a very harsh regime in the Moscow Lefortovo prison where his wife Sherry visited him last week.
We took two pictures of our grandson and they won't let him keep the pictures and I took a coat and gloves and they wouldn't let him have those, but we did get to embrace and we did get to talk about our family for one hour.
Prison rules say that an inmate can only receive approved gifts on the first and third Thursday in a month.
And Sherry Pope's short-term visa didn't enable her to stay that long.
She says she even appealed to the Russian President.
Ed's mother and I both wrote letters to President to ask him to please take into consideration that Ed is 54 years old and that we want him home.
Military intelligence analyst Vitaly Schlykov says Putin is probably caught between a rock and a hard place when it comes to the American's trail.
I'm sure that it came unexpected for Putin.
He wouldn't have approved on a case like this because politically it is very harmful but he came from the ranks of the FSB himself.
He has to pretend that he is sticking to his guns in this case.
In Schlykov's opinion, Pope is likely to get convicted.
But he believes that immediately after the sentencing Pope is likely to be pardoned by Moscow.
US Congressman John Peterson, who has been championing Pope's cause, says he fears that might be too late for Pope.
The main thing we have been pushing for months is health care.
Earlier we had asked for an American doctor to see him.
When they continued to say no then we found Russian doctors.
The judge delayed the trial for a day and a half so we could furnish her with a list of doctors and hospitals in Moscow and after we provided that information she said no.
Pope's lawyer Pavel Astakhov says that what the authorities here call medical care is a joke.
In Pope's case medical control means everyday testing for his suspected cancer.
What they do here is take his blood pressure and temperature.
The very least they could do is take blood tests and bone marrow tests.
The court has even rejected our demand for medical expertise to establish whether he is fit to stand trial.
As Strakovs says he does not trust the Judge Nina Barkova at all.
He says she has rejected almost every one of his 40 objections and suggestions during the trail so far.
Strakovs is now trying to arrange for fresh witnesses for his defense of Edmund Pope, but is not hopeful that even that will be granted by the court.
For The World, this is Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
In Moscow, today there was a dramatic plot twist in a real life courtroom drama.
A lawyer for US spy suspect, Edmond Pope said that the main prosecution witness has retracted his testimony.
According to Pope's attorney the witness said he provided the evidence under pressure from the Russian Secret Service.
Ever since Pope was arrested 7 months ago, the American businessmen has denied charges that he was gathering secret information on a new high-speed Russian torpedo.
The World's Nenad Sebek is following the trial in Moscow.
Nenad, go back and tell us just how we got here?
Who is Edwin Pope and why is he on trial in Russia?
Well, Edwin Pope is a retired American intelligence officer and that's sort of speaks against him when it comes to the Russian public and certainly the Russian court.
He has claimed that he is now just an innocent businessman, who was dealing with the Russian businesses orbit in the Defense Industry.
He has, however, claimed that he is only dealing with the de-classified military material and that when it comes to these torpedoes that we are talking about, that he was buying an underwater propulsion system, which is 10-years old.
What the Russian prosecution is claiming is that Pope was actually after ultramodern secret high-speed Russian torpedoes.
Okay, so tell us what happened in the trial this morning and bring in this professor from one of Moscow's elite universities who is a key witness?
The big news of today was that Pope's attorney distributed to journalists this morning a letter, which he says was written by Anatoly Babkin, who is a Professor at Moscow's Bauman Technical Institute, who until now was considered to be the main witness for the prosecution.
He says that he gave that evidence under pressure having had a grave heart condition proceeding a heart attack.
Professor Babkin says that he never actually met Edwin Pope face to face, nor has he given him any kind of sensitive information, therefore, his former testimony is to be considered as not corresponding to reality says this letter by Professor Babkin.
However, the court today again, this is what we were told by Pope's lawyer, has decided not to accept this change in testimony.
The court said that Professor Babkin had ample opportunities to appear in the court.
What is not clear at this moment is that whether it will allow a personal appearance by Professor Babkin, in which he could sort of say what he said in this letter.
Then I would assume that the Professor is still ailing.
I mean, is he able to take the stand, is there any indication that he will be asked to?
No he is not able to take the stand at the moment.
He is recuperating after a heart attack, but Pope's lawyer has said that court session could actually take place in the apartment of Professor Babkin.
We still have to wait and see whether the court will accept that.
So how important is this evidence?
I mean how pivotal a figure is he?
Is he providing evidence of no one else can?
Well.
From what we have heard so far, this is supposed to be like a key witness, a very important witness, but then the first reaction came from the FSB, the Federal Security Bureau, which is the former KGB, they are the ones who are prosecuting Pope.
Their spokesman said today that their evidence is far from being based only on Babkin's testimony.
He said that FSB has evidence given by other witnesses and experts, as well as, written documents and videos.
This is not, what would know as a standards of American style trial certainly, first of all of the proceedings are conducted entirely in secret.
What is the defense attorney for Edmond Pope saying about the conduct in the trial?
Well.
He is very unhappy with the main judge.
Pope is not being tried by Jury.
He has been tried by panel of judges headed by judge Nina Barkova and what we have heard from the defense attorney Pavel Astakhov is that she has rejected almost every single one of over 40 objections and suggestions that he has so far submitted during the case.
He is very unhappy with the way she has been conducting the whole case and also with the fact that she has denied Edmund Pope the proper medical attention that he has asked for.
And what has like that it happened should Edmond Pope get convicted.
Would he actually serve time?
Well.
Most of the people I have spoken here believe that that would not be the case, that since the case is already being brought to court that he is most likely to get convicted, but will then afterwards be pardoned either by the president or the parliament, and then sent back home for reasons of ill health, but most people here do expect a conviction at the end of this trial.
It was Nenad Sebek in Moscow talking to us about the espionage trial in Moscow of American Edmond Pope.
Thank you very much Nenad.
You are welcome Lisa.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
A court in Moscow has convicted American businessman Edmund Pope of spying and sentenced him to 20 years in prison.
Pope, a retired naval officer from Pennsylvania, was accused of illegally obtaining secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
He argued throughout the case that the information he obtained was already available to the public.
The White House denounced the court action calling it unjustified and wrong.
Pope's wife and his lawyers have also called for his release on health grounds, saying that he suffers from a rare form of bone cancer, which may have returned during his eight months in a Russian prison.
Corey Flintoff, NPR News, Washington.
A court in Moscow today sentenced American businessman Edmund Pope to 20 years in jail.
Pope, a former naval officer, was found guilty of collecting secret blueprints for a high speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and he had a powerful ally.
President Clinton had appealed for clemency for Pope on health grounds and had brought the case up with Russian President Vladimir Putin, but Mr. Clinton's pleas apparently fell on deaf ears.
The Russian court today handed down the maximum sentence.
Still, The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow says that Pope has not yet exhausted his legal options.
He has got 7 days to appeal this particular sentence.
There is also the possibility of asking for a presidential pardon, Pope has actually indeed already done that.
It's just that his wife said that she has not heard neither from the President nor his office.
His health is a big issue as well, isn't it?
Yes, Pope has been suffering from a rare bone cancer in the past and he has been consistently complaining about his health ever since last Spring when he was taken in to the Lefortovo prison.
The thing is that he has not been allowed any access to American doctors and even to Russian doctors of his own choosing.
He has been examined by the Russian doctors in the Lefortovo prison but they have just said that his complaints are unfounded and that it might be a case of severe rheumatism or something like that.
They are not sort of allowing the possibility of his bone cancer reoccurring.
One of the things that has been said here is that Mr. Pope may have run afoul of a changing mood in Russia about what kind of military and security information might be made available to the west for business purposes.
That his intentions were innocent to begin with, but the times changed and what he did began to look more and more like espionage.
That is certainly a possibility but we don't know actually precisely because we don't even know what the initial charges are.
The whole trial was held behind closed doors and the details of the accusations against Pope have never been fully released.
We know that the prosecution claimed that he was trying to purchase secret plans for a top-secret high-speed Russian torpedo.
He was claiming all the time, and his lawyer was saying that he was sort of trying to purchase plans that had been actually out in the open but we do not know the precise legals of that.
That is one of the possibilities.
Another thing which is mentioned here is that Pope simply ran afoul of a new trend in Russia which was a trend where the security services were getting the upper hand where they were trying to prove that they are actually doing their job, that they are catching spies, that they are getting convictions.
We have, for example, today's reaction by General Alexander Zdanovich, he is the head of the FSB support programs.
He was very, very brief in his comments after the sentencing.
He said that the court has said that FSB investigators have acted correctly and in accordance with the law and he says, "Russia has its secrets, we will do our best to protect them".
Maybe Pope simply ran afoul of such attempts by the Russian Security Services to show that they are doing their job.
Putin, on the one hand, is certainly trying to show that he is in charge and that no one from the outside is going to get away with anything.
By the same token though he is not eager to run afoul of the United States and the State Department is very upset.
Is there any possibility that Mr. Putin might consider a pardon?
I would say there is a very strong possibility of that.
We know that President Clinton has spoken to Vladimir Putin about this when they met last time, and certainly the Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has brought up the issue a number of times, as has the State Department indeed with the Russian Foreign Ministry.
In a curious way the sentencing of Edmund Pope might be the beginning of an end of this ordeal for him.
Because now that there is a sentence, once the judiciary process is started, once the FSB brought him to trial everybody here expected that the trial will end and that it will end with a conviction.
But now that this judicial process is over there is a very, very strong likelihood, that's the feeling here in Moscow that President Vladimir Putin might pardon Edmund Pope.
There is a good reason for that, his ill health.
So it would be a nice humanitarian gesture and a way of offering a friendly hand to the west and to the United States in particular.
The World's Nenad Sebek in Moscow.
Thanks a lot, Nenad.
You are welcome.
The United States is hoping that Russia's President Vladimir Putin will follow the advice of his special commission and pardon Edmund Pope.
This week the American businessman began serving a 20-year prison sentence in Moscow after being convicted of spying.
Specifically Russian prosecutors charged that Pope had stolen secrets relating to a high-speed Russian torpedo.
Pope denied the charges and Washington backed him up.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha, did the Presidential Pardons Commission give any reason for their decision?
It gave several reasons.
I am not sure if those were the formal reasons but members of the commission have been interviewed today by various outlets and they say that they were afraid of the spy mania rising in Russia, that they thought it was really suspicious to them that Edmund Pope was sentenced to the maximum term, whereas the article of the law had 10 to 20 years.
He was sentenced to 20, even though according to the members of the Pardon Commission, the evidence that was presented by the prosecution was far from quotient.
They also said this court did not give the lawyers for the defense due procedure.
The court listened to the defense much less than it did to the prosecution.
Much of this sounds less like a pardon and more like a criticism of the number of institutions that Mr. Putin also has to show some support of,  including his court system and his police and his prosecutors.
How is he going to respond to this and when?
I don't think anybody knows and I don't think anybody will know until President Putin has responded.
It is his decision.
According to the Russian law the Pardon Commission, after it has made its decision, sends it to the President and it's up to him whether to endorse it or not to say no.
One last question for you, Marsha.
He does have a lot to balance doesn't he, President Putin?
Not only the institutions I mentioned but the need to keep things somehow free of tension.
Is this case likely to strain US-Russian relations?
I'm afraid it might.
Recently the Russian policy toward the US has fallen into a line where Russia tries to demonstrate force it once had but no longer does.
It wants to put an end to what is regarded by the current Russian government as humiliation of the past years.
There were numerous attempts to be a source of minor troubles even though Russia can no longer be a source of scare to the west and among such instances there were several, there was just recently flying over by Russian military planes over Kitty Hawk, an American warship.
There is also a scandal that erupted over Russia's declaration that it will sell weapons to Iran, contrary to the earlier made agreement.
Such examples are quite a few already, some of them are combined with material profits for Russia but not necessarily.
Marsha Lipman is Editor of the Moscow based news magazine 'Itogi'.
Marsha,  thank you very much for speaking with us.
Pleasure.
Edmund Pope tasted freedom today for the first time in more than eight months.
Pope is the American businessman who was convicted last week on spying charges and sentenced to 20 years in a Russian prison.
He denied any wrongdoing.
Russian President Vladimir Putin pardoned him for health reasons.
Pope was flown to the U.S. military base at Ramstein, Germany.
He will spend the next several days at the medical center there before he returns home with his wife Sherry.
Pope was in remission from a rare form of bone cancer when he was arrested in Russia.
Doctors will examine him for signs that the cancer may have come back while he awaiting trial in a Russian jail.
A spokeswoman said that Pope was suffering from malnutrition and high blood pressure.
Congratulations from foreign leaders poured into the governor's mansion in Texas today.
The messages were addressed to President-elect George W. Bush and they all contained words of welcome and optimism.
But truth be told for most international figures, Bush is something of an unknown.
He has traveled little and his diplomatic experience is limited to contacts with Mexican officials during his tenure as governor.
The World's Jeb Sharp has been hunting down clues to the foreign policy of the incoming administration.
A few broad foreign policy themes emerged during the campaign.
Chief among them are debate over the wisdom of US intervention.
Bush clearly favors limiting the use of American force and troops to solve conflicts overseas.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says that view is consistent with the philosophies of two top Bush advisors, Russia expert Condoleezza Rice and retired General Colin Powell.
Certainly, Condoleezza Rice, certainly Colin Powell who I expect, the two of them to be the dominant force in the next administration on foreign policy.
I certainly think they believe they would like to not intervene as much as the Clinton administration or I guess the previous Bush administration did.
In fact, Condoleezza Rice who is slated to become Bush's National Security Advisor has already said she'd like to see US troops pulled home from the Balkans.
But, Robert Kagan says its one thing for Bush's advisors to state a philosophy, its quite another to implement it.
I think they may find the world has a way of intruding itself and that it won't be that easy to pull forces out of the Balkans for instance, without destroying the NATO alliance.
After Rice made some comments about having a new division of labor, I think that was the word she used with regard to NATO and peacekeeping issues, there was a riot in Europe and the real fears that the United States was getting ready to withdraw from the continent and I think they had to walk that back a little bit.
The Balkans is just one example where the Bush administration will have to walk a fine line in delineating a different approach from that of Mr. Clinton.
The foreign policy challenges facing the next President are daunting.
The Mid East peace process is on hold with Israelis and Palestinians practically at war.
The sanctions regime against Iraq has unraveled.
Russia and China are alarmed at the prospect of America beefing up its missile defenses.
India and Pakistan, now nuclear powers are locked in a dangerous standoff.
Stability in East Asia is another pressing concern.
But despite the challenges, Northeast Asia expert Bates Gil of the Brookings Institution is encouraged by what he knows of the Bush foreign team.
One of the most interesting aspects of the new likely team under the Bush administration is first of all, extensive experience in defense and military affairs.
Secondly, it's easy to point to a number of persons who will have leading positions who have had extensive experience in East Asian affairs.
So you have a combination of depth of experience plus an understanding of the region.
Both of which will come in handy if there is a crisis with China over Taiwan or relations with North Korea deteriorate.
In such a crisis, Bush is likely to rely on the advice of government officials who cut their teeth during the cold war.
Some critics like Gore advisor Bruce Jentelson worry that the Bush team will be out of step with today's issues.
Issues related to globalization, global public health, technology, and those challenges.
Yet in my view a truly realistic policy cannot be based only on the old agenda issues, really has to address these new agenda issues as well.
But no matter what sort of expertise Bush's international affairs people bring to the White House, they won't be able to fully control what happens on their watch.
Robert Kagan of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace says each President's foreign policy is ultimately shaped by events, not theories.
Really, most of a President's foreign policy comes down to how they respond to specific events.
Bill Clinton did not come in to office intending to send troops to Haiti and the Balkans, and events sort of forced his hand and I think that, you know, the truth is Bush administration comes in with certain kinds of prejudices, but we will have to see how they respond to crises.
And the only thing that I'm confident of is that there will be crises.
President-elect Bush is expected to begin naming his top cabinet picks in the next few days.
Those choices will mean everything when the first crisis rolls around.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
In 1998, the United States voted against the creation of the World's first permanent International War Crimes Court.
President Clinton still has a chance to sign the treaty creating the Court before a final deadline this Sunday.
Advocates are pressing him to do just that, but Conservatives in Congress and Pentagon officials don't want the US to join the treaty.
The World's Jeb Sharp explains why.
Jesse Helms, the Conservative and powerful Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has made it clear the Rome's statuette would be dead on arrival if it were brought to Congress for ratification.
But proponents of the permanent International Criminal Court would still like to see President Clinton at least sign the treaty before the New Year's eve deadline.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Clinton's signature would be an important symbolic gesture.
What he will accomplish is making a clear statement that the United States not only in the former Yugoslavia, not only in Rwanda, not only in Cambodia, not only in Sierra Leone, where the administration has supported efforts at justice, but worldwide the United States supports the rule of law and supports holding those accused of genocide to account under the highest standards of due process.
But the opposition here in the United States is intense.
It comes mainly from the Pentagon where US military officials fear the Court will leave Americans vulnerable to politically motivated prosecutions.
Negotiators have tried to include safeguards in the treaty to address those fears, but stop short of exempting US personnel from prosecution.
John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute shares the Pentagon's objections.
I think there is every prospect such a court and its prosecutor would be highly politicized and the principal target of a court like this might well turn out to be the United States or Israel or other countries like that.
Bolton says that almost happened at the War Crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague, when Chief Prosecutor Carla Delponte briefly contemplated an investigation of NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia in 1999.
But proponents of the court say it's healthy for the United States and its allies to come under the same scrutiny as other countries.
Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch says Delponte's handling of the NATO case was exemplary.
Carla Delponte was acting as any responsible prosecutor must when she receives credible allegations of wrongdoing.
She looked into those allegations and then after an appropriate investigation she dismissed them.
Richard Dicker says President Clinton should keep the promise he made to the Rwandan people in 1998 when he told survivors of the genocide there the United States would support the International Court.
But John Bolton of the American Enterprise Institute says a Clinton signature in the face of stiff domestic opposition would be meaningless.
I think it's a symbolic act that doesn't achieve much, but I don't think anybody internationally should think that whatever President Clinton does will have the slightest impact on the next administration.
Despite American objections, the International Criminal Court enjoys wide support worldwide and among major US allies.
131 countries have signed the treaty, 7 today and 25 have ratified it.
60 nations in all must ratify the treaty for the International Criminal Court to come into existence.
That's expected to happen, with or without US support, in 2002.
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp.
This is PRI, Public Radio International.
Got job?
And so, I have rejoined the world of the fully employed.
After Christmas, I got a call from the wife of one of my former bosses (at my last full-time job).
She was looking for a Development Assistant at the retirement community where she works.
I started here 4 weeks ago.
WM is affiliated with, but not run or fully supported by, the denomination I've been a part of all my life (UMC).
My grandmother (who was Baptist) lived here for a few months before she died in 1995, so I have many connections to the job.
Our offices are in one of the patio homes, and I have my own lovely office with a window.
The job's only about 12 miles from home, and I'm going against the bulk of the traffic mornings and afternoons.
It all seems perfect and yet.
.. Oh, I'm so thankful to be somewhere so nice where I might actually make a difference in people's lives, and I want to keep an open mind and hope it'll last forever, but I have a feeling I'll be restless within a year or so.
My boss is a very nice person, but conservative and resistant to technology, i.e. computers, internet, etc.
We just got new computers a week and half ago, and she's griping about XP (her old OS was Windows 98--mine was 95, so I'm thrilled with the new stuff).
I tell her it'll just take some getting used to.
We'll see.
I'm not making the kind of salary I was hoping to get, but it's the best salary I've gotten thus far.
When I was fulltime in radio I made a little less, but I got quite a few remotes, which make up for not getting a topnotch salary.
I'm still doing my TV announcing and my weekend radio stuff, so that money will help.
I'm going to start actively pursuing more voice work in the next month or so, too.
My plan is to pay off my car early, and then work on the other debts.
I think it's time to go on and fill out the adoption applications.
I'm terrified of more debt, but Mom and Dad will help with the money.
I'm not sure they realize how expensive it all is.
I'm thinking we might lean toward adopting from Guatemala, but we've still not hashed it all out.
It's almost bad making some money now, because while most of me wants to save as much as possible, the other, smaller part is screaming loudly for stuff, stuff, stuff!!!
I've got a trial subscription to XM at work because of the Dell computers, and now I'm lusting to have it all of the time.
G got me a nice office stereo for my birthday and it does have an aux jack, so I could listen to it here.
He asked if I wanted a car stereo, and I said no, but I do.
There are so many things I want.
A garage.
A dining room set.
New stuff for our house.
New clothes.
New everything.
But I want family more.
I think part of the draw of the other stuff is I could get it now.
But I'd be paying for it later.
Money makes the world go round and round and round til I'm just dizzy.
A Moscow court has denied a request by US spy suspect Edmond Pope for a medical examination, despite his rare bone cancer.
Mr. Pope's condition has gone untreated since he was jailed five months ago.
Russia accuses the former US naval intelligence officer of illegally obtaining secrets about a high-tech Russian torpedo.
On Friday the court denied a series of defense motions that also included a request to tape the proceedings and replace the court translator, who works for Russian security.
The trial opened Wednesday and has been suspended until Monday.
Ivory Coast's army has pledged its loyalty to opposition candidate Loran Gbagbo.
The pledge followed a tumultuous 24 hours that ended the rule of the junta, which seized power last December.
Soldiers and civilians took to the streets to celebrate the departure of junta leader General Robert Guei.
In an address on state television, Wednesday, Mr. Gbagbo, leader of the Ivorian Socialist party, said he would be forming a cabinet shortly.
A Russian scientist has told a Moscow City court that the information an American businessman allegedly tried to purchase about a Russian torpedo is commonly available and not a state secret.
The scientist, an expert on the torpedo and a defense witness at the trial of businessman Edmond Pope said he had often used the torpedo information for his research and had spoken openly about it.
A defense lawyer said the testimony would help his client.
In Yemen, a bomb threat has forced the tightening of security at the hotel housing US investigators probing the attack on the USS Cole.
Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon told reporters the situation caused the Secretary of Defense to call US field commanders.
The Secretary held a video conference call with all the commanders in chiefs, as well as the service chiefs and the service secretaries and the topic was force protection.
The hotel has been hosting scores of investigators who are looking into the apparent suicide bomb attack on the navy destroyer that killed 17 US sailor two weeks ago.
The US Navy destroyer damaged apparently by a terrorist bomb while refueling at the Red Sea port Aden has begun its journey back to the States for repair.
As Dave Gavlak reports, the USS Cole was towed out of the Aden harbor to awaiting Norwegian transport ship, that will actually carry the damaged destroyer home.
The American national anthem played as four tug boats pulled the USS Cole slowly out of Yemen's Southern port of Aden.
The Cole was badly damaged two weeks ago in an apparent suicide bombing that killed 17 US sailors.
Security was tight as the ship was towed out.
American and Yemeni patrol boats mounted with machine guns escorted the Cole out to open waters while American helicopters flew overhead.
Some Yemenis expressed relief to see the ship leave.
Many locals said they feared the bombing of the ship would serve as an excuse for continued US military presence in the Gulf country.
Diplomats and analysts have commented that a joint investigation into the attack may in fact strengthen ties between the world super power and the poor, but strategic Arab state.
US and Yemeni officials say they believe Islamic militants may have carried out the bombing.
So far two little known Islamic groups have claimed responsibility for the attack.
Yemeni authorities claimed they have detained over 70 people for questioning.
These include some Afghan-Arab volunteers who came to Yemen after fighting against Soviet forces in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Dave Gavlak for VOA News, Cairo.
And this is VOA News now.
I'm Tom Crosby.
As we have been reporting, the White House confirms Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat are going to meet separately with President Clinton later this week.
Meanwhile, there has been continued trouble in the streets of West Bank and the Gaza Strip with at least two more Palestinians killed, Sunday in clashes with Israeli troops.
Laurie Kassman reports the trouble came despite an impassioned plea from Prime Minister Barak that Mr. Arafat rein in the rioters and return to the negotiating table.
On Saturday, Palestinians reported more than 30 injuries.
But reports of the fighting also talked of a drop in the level of violence, since both sides agreed to a cease-fire late Wednesday night.
More than 170 Palestinians have died and more than 6000 are reported to have been wounded in clashes with the Israeli military.
Several Israeli soldiers and civilians have also been killed.
Shopkeepers in East Jerusalem are being urged to close their doors to protest against the killing of two Palestinian teenagers on Friday, Southeast of Jerusalem.
Both Arab and Israeli businesses are suffering from the latest violence.
A shopkeeper in the Arab town of Jaffa, which is adjacent to Tel Aviv, complains that few Israelis venture into the area since clashes erupted there a few weeks ago.
Jaffa is usually bustling with Israeli and foreign tourists.
All our work is dependent totally on the Jews.
If they are not coming, so really we cannot work.
I mean, what happens that the Arabs here, the 20,000 Arabs in is dependent on the Jews going to their market and the Jews coming here.
So we cannot live, I mean, we are really totally paralyzed right now.
Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat have agreed to meet separately with US President Bill Clinton to see how to ease tensions and get the peace process back on track.
The meetings will take place later in the week after the US presidential vote on Tuesday.
Laurie Kassman, VOA News, Jerusalem.
US Defense Secretary William Cohen plans to travel next week to nine Middle Eastern Gulf states for meetings with regional leaders.
Mr. Cohen will depart next Tuesday to visit Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Israel, Jordan and Egypt.
The Pentagon says, the Secretary will consult with defense officials in those countries and also visit US troops in the area.
US forces in the Gulf have been on high alert, since last month's apparent terrorist bombing of the USS Cole, which killed 17 sailors.
An explosion struck the Cole, as it refueled in the Yemeni port of Aden.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair arrives in Russia today for talks with Vladimir Putin on security, foreign policy, and economic issues.
They are also expected to discuss a new Russian proposal for deep cuts in US and Russian long-range missiles.
VOA's Larry James in Moscow.
The highlight of the one-day visit will be three hours of talks on Tuesday, during which Mr. Blair and Mr. Putin will focus on a wide range of issues including Russia's latest call for cutting the number of strategic nuclear warheads to below 1500.
President Clinton has said such a deal is possible, but that it will be first necessary to convince Moscow of the merits of America's proposed Missile Defense System.
The US wants to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty so it can develop such a system.
Russia believes such a move could spark a new arms race and has threatened to tear up existing weapons agreements and stop disarmament talks if the United States goes ahead.
On Sunday Mr. Putin called on the Russian parliament to quickly ratify the amended Conventional Forces in Europe Treaty.
That treaty requires Russia to make further non-nuclear weapons reductions in some areas of the country including breakaway Chechnya.
President Putin acknowledged that Russia is still violating its commitment in Chechnya, but he said it is only a temporary situation which has the ultimate aim of cutting armaments in the region.
He also thanked the 29 other signatories to the treaty for their understanding.
He said Russia is fully behind the agreement that, he said, is an efficient instrument of ensuring security in Europe for years to come.
The original treaty was signed in 1990 and led to the destruction of thousands of heavy weapons by NATO and the former Warsaw Pact.
Tony Blair became the first western leader to come to Russia to meet the new President last March even before Mr. Putin was elected.
The Russian leader returned the favor by making London one of his first foreign destinations after taking office.
The two have already met four times this year.
Analysts here in Moscow believe Britain can play a useful role as a bridge to both Europe and the United States.
Trade is also expected to figure significantly in the talks.
Britain ranks as the third largest investor after the United States and Germany with just slightly more than $1 billion invested in Russia.
Larry James, VOA News, Moscow.
More than 50 people are dead in Nigeria, after a leaking oil pipeline burst into flames outside the commercial capital, Lagos.
The blast and resulting fire Thursday, ripped through an area near a fuel-loading depot owned by the state-run Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
Witnesses report seeing burnt bodies littering the charred grounds while many other victims are being treated for injuries sustained in the blaze.
A spokeswoman for the Petroleum Company says the fire was caused by vandals.
The Voice of America presents differing points of view on a wide variety of issues.
Next, an editorial expressing the policies of the United States government.
For nearly 20 years, the world has faced the challenge posed by AIDS.
Since 1988, the first day of December has been designated by the United Nations as World AIDS Day.
This is the time to disseminate information and faster cooperation in the battle against AIDS, the number one cause of infectious disease in the world.
The picture of the epidemic is bleak.
According to a new UN study, in the past year over five million people have been infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
Since the beginning of the epidemic, about 22 million people have died of the disease.
While infections among adults are decreasing, infections among children are increasing.
Many of these cases are in sub-Saharan Africa where infected mothers are transmitting the virus to their babies during delivery.
Africa accounts for more than four-fifths of the world's AIDS-related deaths.
In some African countries, one out of four adults is infected with HIV.
But Eastern Europe has seen the biggest explosion of new infections.
In Russia, the rate of infection has more than doubled this year to 300,000.
South and Southeast Asia are other high-risk areas with five and three quarter million adults and children now living with HIV or AIDS.
In too many places, discussion of AIDS is taboo and the disease is shrouded in mystery and misinformation.
But as the grim statistics make clear, it is critical that the governments and citizens of those nations most affected by AIDS, do their part to recognize the scope of the epidemic and act decisively to confront it.
As President Bill Clinton said, we must work together to break the silence, to fight the stigmatization and protect the rights of those living with HIV and AIDS, and to help those infected find the care and treatment they need.
We must pledge to stay the course in our crusade until the world is finally freed from the shadow of this devastating epidemic.
Welcome to another hour of news and information on the Voice of America.
I'm David Chadwick, with VOA News now.
The death toll in Colombia from three days of heavy fighting between soldiers and rebels now stands at more than 100.
At least 54 soldiers and 50 guerillas have died in clashes around the northwestern cities of Bagado and Dabeiba.
Nearly all of the buildings, government buildings in those two cities, have been reportedly destroyed.
The clashes began Wednesday, when the rebel revolutionary armed forces of Colombia launched attacks on a number of northwestern towns.
An army helicopter went down close to the border with Panama, killing all 22 soldiers on board.
In South Asia, authorities in Bangladesh's Southwestern port of Mongla have called on the Army to control riots that have left at least four people dead and 58 injured.
Officials say the trouble began when striking dock workers tried to storm the port authority offices and police fired to disperse them.
The demonstrators are demanding that more people be hired to load and unload goods at the port.
Beginning early next year, visitors to Yosemite National Park in California will see some changes.
A new plan is aimed at protecting the giant Sequoia trees, scenic valleys, and waterfalls from the impact of four million tourists a year.
Under the new plan, visitors will have very limited access to the park by car.
The 343 million-dollar plan will create a new shuttle bus system to alleviate traffic congestion.
It will also remove roads from meadows, create more hiking trails, and restore campsites damaged by a 1997 flood.
Yosemite spokesman Scott Gediman says while these measures have been controversial, the preservation effort will not sacrifice visitor enjoyment.
And so we certainly do not want to limit access or will not limit access to the National Park, but we need to design the facilities, design parking areas, design the infrastructure in a way that we can handle these large amounts of people.
Yosemite is not alone in seeking new management strategies to preserve natural areas.
Grand Canyon National Park in Arizona is putting in a light rail system.
And Zion National Park in Utah has just established a new shuttle bus system.
With environment briefs, I'm Roseanne Skirble.
President Clinton has urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to order the release on humanitarian grounds of a US businessman convicted of spying.
A White House spokesman says the two leaders spoke by telephone today, after the Russian government's pardon commission recommended the release of Edmond Pope.
Earlier, a senior Russian official said Edmond Pope could be home by Christmas.
The former US naval intelligence officer was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison Wednesday, on charges he illegally obtained a classified information on a Russian torpedo.
Colombia's second largest Marxist rebel army has released forty-two soldiers and police officers.
Government officials say the National Liberation Army freed the captives today in Northern Colombia.
The forty-two prisoners were captured two years ago during clashes with the guerilla group.
Hardly a day passes without news photos of the police dragging limp protesters from some building or thoroughfare in one of our cities.
Of recent note are the activities of the pro- and anti-abortionists, anti-nuclear activists, animal rights protesters, college students concerned about racism, anti-apartheid groups, various self-styled "environmentalists" and those dissatisfied with the pace of the war against AIDS.
Maybe he didn't start it, but Mohandas Gandhi certainly provided a recognizable beginning to non-violent civil disobedience as we know it today.
The Mahatma, or "great souled one," instigated several campaigns of passive resistance against the British government in India.
Unfortunately, according to Webster's Biographical Dictionary, "His policies went beyond his control and resulted . . . in riots and disturbances" and later a renewed campaign of civil disobedience "resulted in rioting and a second imprisonment."
I am not a proponent of everything Gandhi did, but some of his law breaking was justified because India was then under occupation by a foreign power, and Indians were not able to participate fully in decisions that vitally affected them.
It is difficult, however, to justify civil disobedience, non-violent or not, where citizens have full recourse to the ballot box to effect change.
Where truly representative governments are safeguarded by constitutional protections of human rights and an independent judiciary to construe those rights, there is no excuse for breaking the law because some individual or group disagrees with it.
There may be a few cases where the law breaking is well pinpointed and so completely non-invasive of the rights of others that it is difficult to criticize it.
The case of Rosa Parks, the black woman who refused to sit at the back of the bus, comes to mind as an illustration.
But most cases of non-violent civil disobedience are not nearly so benign.
The public has a tendency to equate lawful demonstrations with non-violent civil disobedience.
It is true that both are non-violent, but there is a fundamental difference between them.
Lawful demonstrations, such as peaceful picketing and other assemblages that do not disturb the peace or cause a public nuisance or interfere with the rights of others, are rights guaranteed by any truly free system of government.
Civil disobedience, violent or non-violent, is intentional law breaking.
The subject of this discussion is non-violent civil disobedience; but, before we get on with that, let me make just a few tangential remarks about lawful demonstrations.
They are useful to call public attention to grievances, but they have little value in educating anyone about the issues in dispute.
The delight of television in dramatic confrontation encourages overuse of slogans chanted through bullhorns, militant gestures, accusatory signs and other emotionally inspired tactics.
Civilized discourse and an environment where compromise can begin are lost in a hostile posture abetted by superficial media interviews.
At best, demonstrations are overused and boringly uninformative; at worst, they can become the stimuli that lead to law breaking.
Demonstrations are particularly apt to degenerate into criminal conduct when they leave the site of the grievance and become mobile.
Petty criminals and street people looking for excitement attach themselves like remora to the fringes of the crowd and use the protest as an excuse for rock throwing, auto trashing, arson, window breaking, looting, pocket picking and general hooliganism.
Soon the whole purpose of the demonstration is lost in mob mania.
There are better ways to promote a cause.
Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to justify.
Some find no harm in the misdemeanors of trespass, minor property destruction, blocking traffic and the like.
They say these are small prices to pay for galvanizing action for the all-important cause.
The crimes may appear small, but the prices can be huge.
Here are two cases to illustrate.
Assume a neighborhood demonstration to protest speeding on a certain road or a careless accident involving a police car.
The protesters lie down in the street, blocking traffic, and will not move until the authorities carry them away.
Assume that someone caught in the jam has a heart attack.
There is no way to get an ambulance in quickly to move him to a hospital.
He dies.
The demonstration was non-violent and involved only a simple misdemeanor, but its impact on that individual was violent and terminal.
Assume that a TV network is airing a celebrity interview program with a live audience.
The politician appearing is highly controversial and has recently generated a good deal of rancor amid certain groups.
In a planned protest against his appearance, several members of the studio audience chain themselves in front of the TV cameras in such a way that the program cannot continue.
The network must refund money to the advertisers and loses considerable revenue and prestige.
The demonstrators have been non-violent, but the result of their trespasses has been to seriously impair the rights of others unconnected with their dispute.
It might be alleged that TV has done more than its share to popularize and promote non-violent civil disobedience, so the second situation hypothesized above would be simply a case of "chickens coming home to roost."
Or maybe the TV network would lose nothing.
Geraldo or Phil would probably pull up another camera and interview the chained protesters.
Let us look for a moment at another type of non-violent civil disobedience that only harms other people indirectly, yet does irreparable damage to the nation as a whole.
I am referring to those young men who chose to disobey their country's call to arms during the Vietnam war and fled to Canada or some other sanctuary to avoid combat.
Their cowardly acts of civil disobedience, which they tried to hide under the cloak of outrage at a war they characterized as "immoral," weakened the national fabric and threw additional burdens on those who served honorably in that conflict.
Even more at fault are those leaders in and out of government who urged and supported their defections, thereby giving great help and comfort to the enemy propagandists.
It is amazing that the ensuing mass executions in Vietnam and Cambodia do not weight more heavily on minds so morally fine-tuned.
Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought and died in Vietnam.
Under the guise of "healing the wounds of the nation," President Carter pardoned thousands of draft evaders, thus giving dignity to their allegations of the war's "immorality."
The precedent having been set, who can complain if future generations called upon to defend the U.S. yield to the temptation to avoid the danger of combat by simply declaring the war immoral and hiding until it is over?
Finally, I think it important to point out the extraordinarily high visibility of non-violent civil disobedience in these days of intensive media coverage.
Give television a chance to cover live any breaking of the law, and no second invitation will be required.
This brings into question the motives of those who lead civil disobedience demonstrations.
Do they want the spotlight for themselves or for their cause?
Here is a good rule of thumb: If the movement produced the leader, the chance that he is sincere is much greater than if the leader produced the movement.
In either case, ask yourself whether you have become better informed on the issues under protest by watching the act of civil disobedience.
If you have not, it is probable that a thorough airing of the dispute by calm and rational debate would have been the better course.
Mr. Agnew was vice president of the U.S. from 1969 until he resigned in 1973.
As the leading candidate for president of his country in next year's election, Mario Vargas Llosa ought to be in an enviable position.
But his country is Peru, where political visibility, especially for a believer in democracy and free enterprise -- a right winger in Latin American eyes -- makes a man a target for assassination.
For almost any Peruvian these days, to show an interest in public office is a heroic gesture; for Mr. Vargas Llosa especially so, since he already has achieved a high position in the world's eyes as a writer.
Published everywhere to universal acclaim, doted on like a movie star in the Hispanic world from Barcelona to Ushuaia, Mr. Vargas Llosa could live comfortably on his royalties and console his political conscience with the thought that Peru is a hopeless mess not of his making and that he already did his best to reform it with his magnificently cinematic novel about the years of military dictatorship of his youth, "Conversation in the Cathedral."
But, after some hesitation, he is back on the stump and also still writing important novels about Peru.
"The Storyteller" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 246 pages, $17.95), splendidly translated by Helen Lane, first appeared in Spanish in 1987 before the Peruvian economy had reached its present state of virtual collapse.
And in any case the story takes place a bit earlier than that, when the guerrilla war in the highlands had not yet made internal travel a gamble with destiny.
Even still, the very first sentence of this fable that weaves together Peru's most advanced and most primitive cultural strands speaks of "my unfortunate country."
The narrator may be talking about the depredations of the Shining Path Maoists among the Indians of the Andes, or he may be referring to the plunging inti, Peru's rubber currency, or the corrupting effect of the cocaine trade.
But he is swiftly drawn into a tangle of memories about a less newsworthy and more exotic part of Peru: its corner of the Amazon jungle.
This narrator is a foil for Mr. Vargas Llosa, a cosmopolitan writer with one well-tailored leg in journalism.
He is in Florence to shake himself free of Peru and get some writing done, just as Mr. Vargas Llosa has gone to Paris and now goes frequently to London for the same purpose.
But this narrator happens upon some photographs in a gallery, pictures taken in Peruvian Amazonia of the untamed and nomadic Machiguenga tribe.
And they remind him of his own experiences with that unhappy scattered culture and of his friend at Lima's University of San Marcos, Saul Zuratas.
Saul was a high-strung student of ethnography, a Jew marked doubly as an outsider because of a huge wine-dark birthmark on his face, for which people called him Mascarita, Mask Face.
Saul knew about the Machiguengas from his studies, and through him the narrator became interested in this most recalcitrant and un-Westernizable of all the indigenous peoples who had come under the Spanish yoke.
Saul, meanwhile, came to believe that anthropology, even at its most benign, was as insidious a form of cultural imperialism as the superficially more blatant activities of Christian missionaries.
Saul mysteriously disappears.
This is what we know at the end of the opening section of "The Storyteller."
The next voice we hear sounds like this: "There was no evil, there was no wind, there was no rain.
The women bore pure children.
If Tasurinchi wanted to eat, he dipped his hand into the river and brought out a shad flicking its tail . . ."
And this: "Moving, walking.
Keeping on, with or without rain, by land or by water, climbing up the mountain slopes or climbing down the ravines."
The speaker is never identified.
He tells his stories in his majestically simple way, in a "language" all his own.
There are creation myths and cosmologies and hunting stories -- a whole culture is contained within these dreamy narratives.
It is as though Mr. Vargas Llosa had recorded a storytelling session at a Machiguenga campfire.
And this is just the effect he hopes to have on the reader, as he alternates chapters in his "own" voice with chapters somehow "borrowed" from the Machiguenga storyteller.
For most of the book, there is no direct connection between its urban and its Amazonian modes.
But the contrast between them becomes a living thing through the brilliant contrast of narrative styles that Mr. Vargas Llosa creates.
He controls this counterpoint like a novelistic Bach, reaching an audacious extreme in a hilarious chapter in which the "Vargas Llosa" voice relates his adventures as an inept television newsman.
But the joke turns serious when a reportage takes him to Amazonia and he encounters the missionaries who know more than anyone else about the Machiguengas.
By this point, the narrator has become obsessed with finding out about the Machiguenga storytellers, who, he had heard years before, functioned like cultural glue for a tribe split into many small bands in constant motion through the jungle.
The storytellers traveled among the bands, reminding them of their identity.
But why would no Machiguenga the narrator meets during his reportage even admit that there were storytellers?
The narrator eventually deduces the extraordinary answer, which is confirmed in a literally Kafkaesque manner by a storyteller in the next chapter.
I am trying to give away as little as possible, but this is not really a mystery or some kind of jungle thriller.
It will be read for the brilliant clash of styles of narration and the even more brilliant way that they have been tied together into a large metaphor for literature and its function in society.
It was a parent's ultimate nightmare.
As the crippled jet prepared for an emergency landing, Sylvia Tsao wrapped her 23-month-old son, Evan, in blankets and, following cabin-crew orders, placed him on the floor.
She held him down tightly, trying to protect him.
"Suddenly, the world seemed to end," she told investigators later.
Crashing into a cornfield, United Airlines' Flight 232 flipped over, and she lost her grip on her son.
"I saw for an instant my son's body floating and flying" toward the back of the plane, Ms. Tsao recalled.
When the plane stopped moving, she frantically tried to find him.
But Evan died of smoke inhalation.
July's Sioux City crash has fueled an emotionally charged debate.
Safety advocates and members of Congress, calling babies "the neglected population," are stepping up a campaign for the mandatory use of infant safety seats on all flights.
But the Federal Aviation Administration is reluctant to require separate seats for babies because of the added cost for traveling parents.
Some FAA officials note that few infants have been killed in plane crashes, raising the question of whether safety seats really are needed.
A 1981 Harvard Medical School study that scrutinized accidents in the late 1970s concluded that perhaps three babies would have been saved in a five-year period if safety-seat use had been required.
The National Transportation Safety Board will take a close look at the issue during four days of hearings that begin today on the broader issue of what caused the crash that killed 112 people.
Infants', toddlers' and young children's safety should no longer be ignored as if they don't count," Mrs. Tsao wrote to the board in advocating use of the safety seats.
All 50 states require that small children be strapped into safety seats in cars.
On planes, FAA rules dictate that children two years old and over have their own tickets and be strapped into regular seats, just as adults are.
Babies under two may sit on laps and fly for free.
But it is almost impossible to keep hold of a baby during an air crash, or even in severe turbulence.
During the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson of Cincinnati lost her grip on her baby as the plane lurched and tipped over.
Another passenger heard one-year-old Sabrina's cry and pulled her from an overhead luggage compartment.
The FAA encourages the use of safety seats, but in the past many parents have run into problems trying to use them, even when the plane was only half-full or they had bought an extra ticket especially for the baby.
When Vanessa Merton, an associate dean at Pace University School of Law, decided to take her young son to Europe last spring, she called four carriers to ask about their policies on car seats.
The people acted like I was transporting heroin, she says.
One reservation agent told her -- incorrectly -- that the airline barred the use of the seats on flights.
After the Sioux City crash, Lori Michaelson bought a car seat for her daughter for the flight home to Cincinnati.
But on one leg of the trip, she was ordered by a flight attendant to take Sabrina out of the seat and hold her during takeoff and landing -- the most dangerous parts of any flight.
Airlines say that such mistakes are decreasing in the aftermath of Sioux City, but proponents of the safety devices say they still get complaints from parents.
People are told one thing on the phone, another at check in, another at the gate, and another on the plane," says Stephanie Tombrello, executive director of the Los Angeles Area Child Passenger Safety Association, which petitioned the FAA in June for mandatory use of child-safety seats.
The Association of Flight Attendants, the main flight attendants' union, is strongly backing that request.
The FAA argues that requiring safety seats for all babies might actually diminish, not enhance, safety.
As part of such a rule, officials say, parents would probably be required to buy an extra ticket for the baby.
The increased cost of flying would inevitably encourage some families to drive rather than fly, they say.
Commercial airlines have the lowest accident rate of all transportation modes -- much lower than cars, for example.
Anthony Broderick, the FAA's acting Executive Director for Regulatory Standards and Compliance, contends that the current rule is the best approach because it allows parents to make their own decision on whether to use a safety seat.
But he admits that the agency is in "a very uncomfortable position."
He says the agency soon will propose that airlines be prohibited from denying the use of safety seats.
(Most airlines don't prohibit their use.)
He says the agency also will seek public comment on whether the seats should be required.
Walter Coleman, Vice President of Operations for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for the major airlines, describes the call for safety seats as "legitimate" and says the group is studying the issue.
But privately some airline officials fear that if parents must buy extra tickets for babies, whole families will stop flying.
Others worry that the FAA might write a rule forcing airlines to pick up part of the tab for increased infant safety.
Generally, airlines say they welcome the use of a government-approved safety seat and will even allow the restraint to take up a regular seat for free if the flight isn't crowded.
Most car seats made in recent years are certified for use on aircraft and are so marked.)
But space can only be guaranteed if a ticket is purchased.
What the industry really wants is some kind of device that would protect babies without taking up an extra seat.
But no one has come up with anything that is safer in a crash than the current practice of bundling babies up and trying to pin them to the floor.
Parents are advised against holding the infants, for fear that in an accident the babies could be crushed by the adult's weight.
Proponents of safety seats are turning up the heat on the FAA.
Yesterday, Rep. James Lightfoot, an Iowa Republican, sent FAA Administrator James Busey a letter signed by 56 House members urging the agency to require infant safety seats.
If the FAA refuses, Rep. Lightfoot says, he will push legislation to require the change.
It is a peaceful time in this part of western India.
The summer crop is harvested, winter sowing has yet to begin.
Farmers in loose turbans and fancy earrings spend their afternoons laughing and gossiping at the markets.
One could imagine such a lull in the lives of the Arabs before the quadrupling of oil prices.
For just as the Arabs were in the 1960s, the farmers of Sidhpur are on the brink of global power and fame.
The Arabs had merely oil.
These farmers may have a grip on the world's very heart.
Or, at least, its heart disease.
That is because Sidhpur has a near-monopoly on the world's supply of flea seed, also known as flea wort or, in Western parlance, psyllium: a tiny, tasteless, obscure seed that, according to early research, may reduce cholesterol levels in the blood.
Ever since the link to cholesterol was disclosed, Americans have begun scarfing up psyllium in their breakfast cereals.
If further research proves the seed's benefits, this dusty farm district could become the epicenter of a health-food fad to rival all fads since cod-liver oil.
This seed's not grown anywhere else in India, or anywhere else in the world," says T.V. Krishnamurthy, a vice president of Procter & Gamble India Ltd., a major psyllium buyer and promoter.
The proper climatic conditions don't exist in many places in the world."
Arvind Patel, a processor and exporter of the seed, raves: "If psyllium takes the place of oat bran, it will be huge."
Whether psyllium makes Sidhpur's fortune depends on cholesterol-fearing Americans, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and, of course, the outcome of further research.
Only one thing is certain here: Pysllium is likely to remain solely an export item from Sidhpur for a long time.
Local farmers say it is as good a cash crop as mustard or fenugreek, a legume.
But they have no desire to eat a bowl of psyllium each morning, and, perhaps, little need: lean, frugal vegetarians, the farmers are innocents in the clogged, treacherous world of cholesterol.
Psyllium is an annual herb, Plantago ovata, that has been used for centuries by folk doctors here, mainly as a laxative and anti-diarrheal.
As such, the soluble fiber has an almost fanatic following in northern India.
I can assure you, attests a 25-year-old lawyer in New Delhi, with a meaningfully raised eyebrow, "from personal experience, it works."
A prominent businessman in Bombay gives a similar testimonial: "I have been taking it daily since 1961."
Folk doctors also prescribe it for kidney, bladder and urethra problems, duodenal ulcers and hemorrhoids.
Some apply it to gouty joints.
The plant has a hairy stem that produces flowers and diminutive seeds.
It is the seed's colorlessness and size -- 1,000 of them weigh only 1.5 grams, or about as much as two paper clips -- that explain the historical allusions to fleas.
The translucent husk of the seed is removed, sifted and crushed; the seed itself is fed to animals.
Some 90% of the crop, which was worth $26 million last year, is exported.
For decades, psyllium husk has been the main ingredient in such laxatives as Procter & Gamble Co.'s Metamucil, the top-selling brand in the U.S., and Ciba-Geigy Corp.'s Fiberall.
But some time ago, researchers discovered that soluble fibers also lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Cincinnati-based P&G took an interest; it ordered two studies on psyllium and cholesterol.
One of the studies, done at the University of Minnesota, tested 75 people with raised cholesterol levels.
After 16 weeks, the group that took three daily teaspoons of Metamucil saw a significant dip in their general cholesterol levels, and an even larger reduction in levels of low-density lipoproteins, the so-called bad cholesterol.
In late 1987, P&G asked the FDA for approval to market Metamucil as the first non-prescription, cholesterol-lowering product in the U.S.
In April, the psyllium bandwagon got more crowded.
General Mills Inc., the food giant, launched a breakfast cereal called Benefit, containing psyllium, oat, wheat and beet bran; the words, "reduce cholesterol" were prominently displayed on its package.
In September, Kellogg Co. launched a competing psyllium-fortified cereal called Heartwise.
Suddenly, on television, in advertisements and on their cereal boxes, Americans were inundated with news about the obscure seed.
The flood of claims and counter-claims worried consumers and actually hurt sales of the new cereals.
This month, the Food and Drug Administration expressed concern that Americans might someday, in various forms, ingest too much psyllium.
Currently, there is a lull in the psyllium war.
The FDA has asked Kellogg and General Mills to show research that their cereals are safe.
It also ordered P&G to produce more studies to buttress its claims that Metamucil can lower cholesterol.
But the agency hasn't yanked psyllium off store shelves.
If the FDA approves the new uses of psyllium, other companies are expected to rush to market with psyllium products.
It's going to be a sensational thing," says Mr. Krishnamurthy of P&G in Bombay.
Says psyllium exporter Mr. Patel: "I just got back yesterday from the U.S.
In the newspapers, on the radio and TV, psyllium is everywhere."
But the news of the boom has yet to trickle down to the farmers.
They only know of one use for the crop, as a laxative, and with psyllium prices currently languishing in the wake of a bumper crop, they think of the seed as a marginal crop, something to grow between summer wheat crops.
Psyllium's not a good crop," complains Sooraji Jath, a 26-year-old farmer from the village of Lakshmipura.
You get a rain at the wrong time and the crop is ruined.
Even at the Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export Promotion Council, the government agency that promotes the seed, the psyllium boom is distant thunder.
The staff brags about psyllium's hefty contribution to American regularity, without quite grasping the implications of the research on cholesterol.
The council's annual report has psyllium on its last page, lumped with such unglamorous export items as sarsaparilla and "Nux vomica," a plant that induces vomiting.
In one way, the psyllium middlemen -- the buyers and exporters -- are glad to keep news of the boom to themselves.
They want psyllium prices low for their purchases next year.
But there's a catch.
Sidhpur and adjacent districts are the only places in the world where psyllium is grown in large quantities.
This is partly due to the particular demands of the crop.
Psyllium needs sandy soil, dew during the first few weeks, and then total dryness when its seeds are maturing.
Small crops are grown in Pakistan, France, Spain, Italy, Belgium and Brazil, but their quality can't compare to that of Indian psyllium.
Big buyers like Procter & Gamble say there are other spots on the globe, and in India, where the seed could be grown.
It's not a crop that can't be doubled or tripled,says Mr. Krishnamurthy.
But no one has made a serious effort to transplant the crop.
In Sidhpur, it is almost time to sow this year's crop.
Many farmers, too removed to glean psyllium's new sparkle in the West, have decided to plant mustard, fennel, cumin, fenugreek or castor-oil seeds.
Mr. Jath is thinking of passing up psyllium altogether this year in favor of a crop with a future such as cumin or fennel.
Maybe I'll plant castor-oil seeds.
His brother, Parkhaji, whose head is swathed in a gorgeous crimson turban, nods vigorous assent.
So when next year's psyllium crop is harvested in March, it may be smaller than the 16,000 metric tons of the past few years -- right at the crest of the psyllium boom.
And the world could experience its first psyllium shortage.
Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega may have accomplished over the weekend what his U.S. antagonists have failed to do: revive a constituency for the Contra rebels.
Lawmakers haven't publicly raised the possibility of renewing military aid to the Contras, and President Bush parried the question at a news conference here Saturday, saying only that "if there's an all-out military offensive, that's going to change the equation 180 degrees."
But Mr. Ortega's threat over the weekend to end a 19-month cease-fire with the rebels seeking to topple him, effectively elevated the Contras as a policy priority just as they were slipping from the agendas of their most ardent supporters.
Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) said yesterday on NBC-TV's "Meet the Press" that Mr. Ortega's threat was "a very unwise move, particularly the timing of it."
The threat came during a two-day celebration in Costa Rica to highlight Central America's progress toward democracy in the region, attended by President Bush, Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and 14 other Western Hemisphere leaders.
Mr. Bush returned to Washington Saturday night.
Mr. Ortega announced on Friday that he would end the cease-fire this week in response to the periodic Contra assaults against his army.
Saturday, he amended his remarks to say that he would continue to abide by the cease-fire if the U.S. ends its financial support for the Contras.
He asked that the remaining U.S. humanitarian aid be diverted to disarming and demobilizing the rebels.
Not only did Mr. Ortega's comments come in the midst of what was intended as a showcase for the region, it came as Nicaragua is under special international scrutiny in anticipation of its planned February elections.
Outside observers are gathering in Nicaragua to monitor the registration and treatment of opposition candidates.
And important U.S. lawmakers must decide at the end of November if the Contras are to receive the rest of the $49 million in so-called humanitarian assistance under a bipartisan agreement reached with the Bush administration in March.
The humanitarian assistance, which pays for supplies such as food and clothing for the rebels amassed along the Nicaraguan border with Honduras, replaced the military aid cut off by Congress in February 1988.
While few lawmakers anticipated that the humanitarian aid would be cut off next month, Mr. Ortega's threat practically guarantees that the humanitarian aid will be continued.
Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) said yesterday on "Meet the Press": "I would hope after his {Mr. Ortega's} act yesterday or the day before, we'd have unanimous support for quick action on remaining humanitarian aid."
Sen. Dole also said he hoped for unanimous support for a resolution he plans to offer tomorrow denouncing the Nicaraguan leader.
While renewing military aid had been considered out of the question, rejected by Congress and de-emphasized by the Bush administration, Mr. Ortega's statement provides Contra supporters with the opportunity to press the administration on the issue.
The administration should now state that if the February election is voided by the Sandinistas . . . they should call for military aid," said former Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams.
In these circumstances, I think they'd win."
Sen. Mitchell said that congressional Democrats intend to honor the March agreement to give non-lethal support to the Contras through the February elections, although he added that the agreement requires that the Contras not initiate any military action.
Mr. Ortega's threat to breach the cease-fire comes as U.S. officials were acknowledging that the Contras have at times violated it themselves.
Secretary of State James Baker, who accompanied President Bush to Costa Rica, told reporters Friday: "I have no reason to deny reports that some Contras ambushed some Sandinista soldiers."
Mr. Baker's assistant for inter-American affairs, Bernard Aronson, while maintaining that the Sandinistas had also broken the cease-fire, acknowledged: "It's never very clear who starts what."
He added that the U.S. has cut off aid to some rebel units when it was determined that those units broke the cease-fire.
In addition to undermining arguments in favor of ending Contra aid, Mr. Ortega's remarks also played to the suspicions of some U.S. officials and conservatives outside the government that he is searching for ways to manipulate or void the February elections.
Administration officials traveling with President Bush in Costa Rica interpreted Mr. Ortega's wavering as a sign that he isn't responding to the military attacks so much as he is searching for ways to strengthen his hand prior to the elections.
Mr. Abrams said that Mr. Ortega is seeking to demobilize the Contras prior to the elections to remove any pressure to hold fair elections.
My sense is what they have in mind is an excuse for clamping down on campaigning" by creating an atmosphere of a military emergency, he said.
A frozen mountaintop in Tibet may offer an important clue about whether the Earth is warming perilously.
Researchers at Ohio State University and Lanzhou Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology in China have analyzed samples of glacial ice in Tibet and say temperatures there have been significantly higher on average over the past half-century than in any similar period in the past 10,000 years.
The ice samples are an important piece of evidence supporting theories that the Earth has warmed considerably in recent times, largely because of pollutants in the air, and will warm far more in the century ahead.
A substantial warming would melt some of the Earth's polar ice caps, raising the level of the oceans and causing widespread flooding of heavily populated coastal areas.
If you can use data to reconstruct what happened in the past, you have much more confidence in predictions for the future," said Lonnie Thompson, a research scientist at Ohio State who dug for and analyzed the ice samples.
To compare temperatures over the past 10,000 years, researchers analyzed the changes in concentrations of two forms of oxygen.
These measurements can indicate temperature changes, researchers said, because the rates of evaporation of these oxygen atoms differ as temperatures change.
Analysis of ice from the Dunde ice cap, a glacial plateau in Tibet 17,000 feet above sea level, show that average temperatures were higher in 1937-87 than in any other 50-year period since before the last Ice Age, Mr. Thompson said.
Some climate models project that interior regions of Asia would be among the first to heat up in a global warming because they are far from oceans, which moderate temperature changes.
But the ice-core samples aren't definitive proof that the so-called greenhouse effect will lead to further substantial global heating, Mr. Thompson acknowledged.
According to greenhouse theories, increased carbon dioxide emissions, largely caused by burning of fossil fuels, will cause the Earth to warm up because carbon dioxide prevents heat from escaping into space.
Skeptics say that if that's the case, temperatures should have risen fairly uniformly over the past century, reflecting the increase in carbon dioxide.
Instead, the Dunde ice-core record shows increasing temperatures from 1900 through the early 1950s, decreasing temperatures from the late 1950s through the mid-1970s, then higher temperatures again through last year.
Other temperature data show similar unexplained swings.
Climate varies drastically due to natural causes, said Mr. Thompson.
But he said ice samples from Peru, Greenland and Antarctica all show substantial signs of warming.
An enormous turtle has succeeded where the government has failed: He has made speaking Filipino respectable.
The 6 1/2-foot-tall turtle, Pong Pagong, is a character who stars in the children's television show "Batibot."
He speaks only in Filipino.
"Batibot," which started in 1983 as a hybrid of the U.S. program "Sesame Street," has developed into a distinctly Philippine effort.
Radio programs and books have followed the daily television show.
In the process, "Batibot," an archaic Filipino word meaning "strong" or "enduring," has become a powerful advocate of the use of the Filipino language.
It impresses on ordinary, young Filipinos that there's nothing to feel inferior about in using their own language," says Randy David, a sociologist and host of a popular television talk show.
When we started the program six years ago, the use of Filipino was deemed unwise by the predominantly middle class," says Lydia Brown, the program's creator.
Now, she says, "it's no longer an issue."
The success of "Batibot" stands in marked contrast to many academic and government attempts to promote Filipino as a national language.
Filipino -- once known as Pilipino -- is predominantly Tagalog, the Malay-based language spoken in a part of the country's principal island of Luzon.
Resistance to a national language comes primarily from members of the country's elite, who generally prefer English.
But while better-off Filipinos are quick to cite the logic in using a language as widespread as English, they are often slow to reveal that they are prejudiced against Filipino, say advocates of the native language.
For the middle and upper-middle class {Filipino} is declasse, says Bien Lumbera, a Philippine-studies professor at Quezon City's University of the Philippines.
There's also resentment.
Other opponents of Filipino come from non-Tagalog regions.
They argue that their own languages should have equal weight, although recent surveys indicate that the majority of the country's population understands Filipino more than any other language.
There are seven major languages and more than 70 dialects in the country.)
What tongue to speak is an emotional mine field in the Philippines.
It is entrenched in the country's colonial bonds to the U.S., in Philippine class structure, in the regional loyalties of its people and in its island geography.
As they did when the Philippines was a colony of the U.S., teachers for the most part teach in English, even though it is a foreign language for most Philippine children.
As a result, they often speak one language at home, another at school.
Mrs. Brown calls the modern-day cultural ambivalence to Filipino a "language schizophrenia."
The issue has been simmering for years.
It doesn't take much to provoke an intense debate.
When President Corazon Aquino, whose command of Filipino is spotty, announced last year that the language would be used in official communications, there was an uproar from many legislators, who continue to conduct debates mostly in English.
But many proponents of Filipino see resistance to the language finally crumbling.
They believe the media, including "Batibot," have played a crucial role.
According to chief scriptwriter Rene Villanueva, "Batibot" doesn't set out to advance the cause of Filipino.
"It's not as if we're teaching language per se," he says, "We're just using it."
These days, "Batibot" is produced in a converted lumberyard on a shoestring budget of $3,000 a one-hour segment.
It is shown weekdays on two of the country's five networks.
With an audience totaling more than 400,000, "Batibot" consistently ranks in the country's top-four most-watched daytime programs.
But advertising revenue is inadequate.
Periodically, there are threats that the program will fold.
"Batibot" lacks the polish of "Sesame Street."
Sound stages echo.
Acting sometimes falls flat.
There are only two large puppets in the program: Pong Pagong and a monkey named Kiko Matsing.
But the production is the equal of any local program.
And the show's creativity makes up for any technological deficiencies.
The program isn't afraid to tackle controversial topics such as nuclear weapons and the environment.
Not that the language war is won, even on "Batibot."
During one recent episode, all the advertisements were in English.
The Canadian government, with a view to becoming more politically active in Latin America, is expected to announce tomorrow its application to join the Organization of American States, a Washington-based regional agency.
The expected Canadian move has been welcomed by the Bush administration even though Canada has opposed such U.S. actions as the trade embargo against Cuba, the invasion of Grenada and the military support for Nicaragua's Contra guerrillas.
Latin American countries have long urged Canada to join the OAS in the hopes that it would be a counterweight to the U.S., which for many years tended to dominate the 32-nation organization.
Even though the U.S. also has supported Canadian membership, it hasn't been a Washington priority.
The fact that we might not side with the Americans may be a reason why Canada's membership in the OAS hasn't been, over the years, an item high on the U.S. agenda," said Allan Gotlieb, former Canadian ambassador to the U.S.
The Canadian application is expected to be announced in San Jose, Costa Rica, by Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, who is attending a centenary celebration of Costa Rican democracy.
Canada has a larger and more beneficial role to play in the hemisphere," Mr. Mulroney said recently.
Some Canadian political commentators have opposed Canada's joining what they see as a U.S.-dominated organization.
Canada could do plenty of things to get serious about Latin America without running the risk of getting caught in the cross fire" between the U.S. and Latin American members of the OAS, said Jeffrey Simpson, a columnist in Toronto's Globe & Mail newspaper.
Canada, at times, could be an awkward OAS partner for the U.S. if its United Nations voting record is an indication.
In U.N. General Assembly votes last year, Canada voted the same as the U.S. only 63% of the time.
France voted the same as the U.S. 76% of the time, West Germany 79% and Britain 83%.
Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberal research group, said that Latin American countries would be "profoundly disappointed" if Canada were to follow the U.S. lead in the OAS.
Latin Americans see Canada as a non-interventionist power that respects their sovereignty," he said.
The OAS, which tries to promote peace and economic development within the Americas, is attempting to find a settlement of the current Panama political crisis.
Cuba has been suspended from OAS membership, but the organization's members are discussing Cuba's reinstatement.
Early this century, diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach.
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones.
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu.
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes, searching for that unusual glint.
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's diamond kingpins, do their work.
Last year, 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats, which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat, or one-fifth gram.
Oh yes, the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards.
"If there's diamonds out there, we'll get to them," says Les Johns, De Beers's engineering manager.
Here, wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world's most inhospitable diamond dig, lies the earth's most precious jewel box.
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa's interior, then in the cold surf of the ocean, and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98% of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality.
While other mines might yield more carats, a higher percentage of them go to industrial use.
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault, it has been turned into one.
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908, the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area, a designation normally reserved for military operations.
When the Germans lost World War I, they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer, patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers.
Today, no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers's stingy approval.
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa.
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes, proving diamonds aren't forever.
Oranjemund, the mine headquarters, is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents.
Jackals roam the streets at night, and gemsbok, hardy antelope with long straight horns, wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers.
On most days, the desert's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag.
The wind, stinging with sand, never seems to stop.
Still, miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming.
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds.
There are six video rental shops, three restaurants, one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling.
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world.
Last year, when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course, the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood.
"Nothing is too good for our golf course," says Tony George, a mining engineer.
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month's elections freeing the country from South African control, De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine's productive life for another 25 years, from the current estimate of 10.
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes.
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters; a whirring ferris wheel-like excavator, with buckets instead of seats, chews through layers of compacted sand; tracks and conveyor belts, shuttling sand to the screening plants, criss-cross the beach.
Then there is the artificial sea wall, 600 yards long and 60 yards thick, jutting into the ocean.
Made of sand, it receives around-the-clock maintenance against the battering waves.
When the mining in front of the wall is complete, it is moved northward.
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard.
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier, but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood.
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that, inexplicably, held against the waves.
The Caterpillar people aren't too happy when they see their equipment used like that," shrugs Mr. George.
They figure it's not a very good advert.
Despite all these innovations, most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named "bedrock sweepers" who toil in the wake of the excavators.
Laboring in blue and gray overalls, they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices, and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds.
But should they spy one, the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value.
For these workers at the bottom of the mine's pay scale, this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail.
Still, employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two.
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie.
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe.
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail.
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security.
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms.
The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China," an FDA spokesman said yesterday.
The agency won't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until "satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent" bacterial contamination.
On May 19, the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi, New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms.
In subsequent tests, the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated.
The outbreaks were traced to Staphylococcus aureus, a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables.
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March.
In 1987, China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms, valued at $47 million, to the U.S.
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken "many effective measures" to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes.
He predicted the problem will be solved "very soon."
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the so-called Society of Orange Workers, all seems normal in South Africa's abnormal society.
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back.
Over at Conradies, the general store, a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages.
Down the street, a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants.
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers' office -- just about the largest building in town, save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa's neat racial order is awry.
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes.
White women serve tea and coffee, and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards.
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows.
There isn't a black worker in sight.
Not in the kitchen, or the storeroom or the book shop.
If we want to have our own nation, then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves," says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr., son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers, founded in 1980.
They do indeed want their own nation.
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa, with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races, blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress.
But here in Morgenzon, a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal, the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady.
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands, a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa's racial problems isn't the abolition of apartheid, it's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races.
Here, then, is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid's last stand.
Their idea is to create a city, first, and then an entire nation -- without blacks.
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa.
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe.
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland, an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa, is a mainstream desire of the right-wing, which embraces about one-third of the country's five million whites.
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland.
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice.
Thus, farmer Johan Fischer, his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease, crawls around under his planter, tightening bolts and fixing dents.
On almost every other farm in South Africa, black workers do the repairs.
But not here.
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields, sows his own corn and sunflowers, and feeds his own sheep.
Over at the fiberglass factory, four white workers assemble water tanks on their own, and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road.
On Main Street, Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop, then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family.
Down by the stream, a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course.
If whites want to play there by themselves, says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden, whites should also build it by themselves.
"If we want to survive as a people," he says, "we have to change our way of life.
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others."
In their quest to perfect apartheid, the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny: The master can't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever.
If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it, but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration, then these are two contradictions that can't go on forever," says Mr. Verwoerd.
He is sitting in his living room, beneath a huge portrait of his late father, Hendrik F. Verwoerd, apartheid's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966.
Somewhere, the son sighs, things went terribly wrong with apartheid; today, whites even rely on blacks to police their separation.
People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it.
But my father meant it to mean real separation, says the son.
The Orange Workers speak sincerely.
We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong," says Pieter Bruwer, the Orange Workers' chief scribe and pamphleteer.
We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly.
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom.
According to Mr. Verwoerd, the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal, even before the blacks.
Then, when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908, the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town; blacks could work there, but they had to leave at night.
Today, Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads.
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks, and many houses and storefronts are empty.
There are few factories and no mines.
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation, unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa.
So far, about 150 Orange Workers have moved here, spending nearly $1 million buying up property over the past three years.
Still, complete and total segregation remains elusive.
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area.
Despite the Orange Workers' intention to put them all out of work, they are in no hurry to leave.
A young man called July (that's when he was born), who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office, points at the white walled building and says matter-of-factly, "We're not allowed in there, that's all I know."
The 650-or-so local whites who aren't Orange Workers are more troubled.
Try as they might, they just can't conceive of life without black workers.
Impossible, impossible," say the Conradies, an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades.
We can't do without their help, says Mrs. Conradie.
Oh no.
We need them and I thank God for them.
Over at the Shell station, owner Rudi van Dyk, who doubles as Morgenzon's mayor, worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation.
What they want us to do just isn't practical, he says, noting that he employs 16 blacks.
I couldn't afford to hire 16 whites.
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary wouldn't know how to handle money."
Back at the Verwoerd house, Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr.
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics, Morgenzon will boom.
We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation," says Mr. Verwoerd.
By populating a place now, we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account."
Curiously, he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC, which his father outlawed in 1960.
The ANC won't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations, says Mr. Verwoerd.
Likewise, no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners.
He apologizes for sounding pushy.
"Look," he says, "If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot, that's their choice.
We'll leave them alone.
We just want to have our own cup of tea.
And they will even serve it themselves.
When Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the abortive coup in Panama, was buried, his body bore several gunshot wounds, a cracked skull and broken legs and ribs.
They were the signature of his adversary, Panamanian leader Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The rebel officer's slow and painful death, at the headquarters of Panama's Battalion-2000 squad, was personally supervised by Gen. Noriega, says a U.S. official with access to intelligence reports.
Leaping into rages, sinking into bouts of drunkenness and mistrust, Mr. Noriega has put to death some 70 of his troops involved in the coup, according to U.S. officials monitoring crematoriums and funeral parlors in Panama City.
He is now changing the place he sleeps every night, sometimes more than once a night.
His meals are most often prepared by women he trusts -- his full-time mistress, Vicky Amado, and her mother, Norma.
And he is collecting the names of those who telephoned the coup-makers to congratulate them during their brief time in control of his headquarters.
More enemies to be dealt with.
In the two weeks since the rebellion, which the U.S. hesitantly backed, Mr. Noriega has been at his most brutal-and efficient-in maintaining power.
Yet, while the failed coup is a major U.S. foreign policy embarrassment, it is merely the latest chapter in a byzantine relationship between Mr. Noriega and Washington that stretches back three decades.
America's war on the dictator over the past two years, following his indictment on drug charges in February 1988, is the legacy of that relationship.
Before American foreign policy set out to destroy Noriega, it helped create him out of the crucible of Panama's long history of conspirators and pirates.
For most of the past 30 years, the marriage was one of convenience.
In 1960, for example, when Mr. Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, he was detained by Lima authorities for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute, according to a U.S. Embassy cable from that period.
The woman had nearly died.
But U.S. intelligence, rather than rein in or cut loose its new spy, merely filed the report away.
Mr. Noriega's tips on emerging leftists at his school were deemed more important to U.S. interests.
From that point on, the U.S. would make a practice of overlooking the Panamanian's misadventures.
The U.S. has befriended and later turned against many dictators, but none quite so resourceful.
The 55-year-old Mr. Noriega isn't as smooth as the shah of Iran, as well-born as Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, as imperial as Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines or as bloody as Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier.
Yet he has proved more resilient than any of them.
And out of necessity: the U.S. can make mistakes and still hope to remove him from power, but a single error on his part could cost him his life.
The U.S. underestimated Noriega all along, says Ambler Moss, a former Ambassador to Panama.
He has mastered the art of survival.
In keeping with America's long history of propping up Mr. Noriega, recent U.S. actions have extended rather than shortened his survival.
Mr. Noriega might have fallen of his own weight in 1988 because of Panama's dire economic situation, says Mr. Moss, but increasing external pressure has only given him additional excuses for repression, and a scapegoat for his own mismanagement.
If the U.S. had sat back and done nothing, he might not have made it through 1988," Mr. Moss contends.
Perhaps most important, Mr. Noriega's allies have intervened to encourage in some cases, to demand -- that the dictator maintain his grip of the throne.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen. Noriega was negotiating with the U.S. to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
"He is cornered," says the Rev. Fernando Guardia, who has led Catholic Church opposition against Noriega.
The Americans have left him without a way out.
It is easy to fight when you don't have any other option.
His chief advantage in the fight: his intimate knowledge of American ways and weaknesses.
Mr. Noriega often tells friends that patience is the best weapon against the gringos, who have a short attention span and little stomach for lasting confrontation.
The U.S. discovered the young Tony Noriega in late 1959, when he was in his second year at the Chorrillos Military Academy in Lima, according to former U.S. intelligence officials.
The contact occurred through Mr. Noriega's half-brother, a Panamanian diplomat based in Peru named Luis Carlos Noriega Hurtado.
Luis Carlos, knowing that helping the Americans could advance the career of any Panamanian officer, relayed Tony's reports on the leftist tendencies he observed among his fellow students and, more important, among his officers and instructors.
A spy was born.
It was a heady experience for the pockmarked and slightly built Mr. Noriega, who was known to his friends as Cara la Pina -- pineapple face.
Born the illegitimate son of his father's maid, he was raised on the mean streets of the central market district of Panama City.
Tony was four years older than most of his fellow cadets, and gained admission to the academy because his brother had falsified his birth certificate.
He considered himself intellectually superior to his Peruvian peers, many of whom were wayward sons sent by their well-off families to the highly disciplined, French-modeled academy as a sort of reform school.
In his peaked military cap and neatly pressed, French-made uniform, Noriega felt more respected and powerful than ever in his underprivileged life, friends from the period say.
He had an elegant uniform with gold buttons in a country where there was a cult of militarism, where officers were the elite with special privileges," recalls Darien Ayala, a fellow student in Peru and a lifelong friend.
Mr. Noriega's relationship to American intelligence agencies became contractual in either 1966 or 1967, intelligence officials say.
His commanding officer at the Chiriqui Province garrison, Major Omar Torrijos, gave him an intriguing assignment: Mr. Noriega would organize the province's first intelligence service.
The spy network would serve two clients: the Panamanian government, by monitoring political opponents in the region, and the U.S., by tracking the growing Communist influence in the unions organized at United Fruit Co.'s banana plantations in Bocas del Toros and Puerto Armuelles.
United Fruit was one of the two largest contributors to Panama's national income.
Satisfying its interests was a priority for any Panamanian leader.
Mr. Noriega's initial retainer was only $50 to $100 a month, plus occasional gifts of liquor or groceries from the American PX, a former intelligence official says.
It was modest pay by American standards, but a healthy boost to his small military salary, which fellow officers remember as having been $300 to $400 monthly.
"He did it very well," recalls Boris Martinez, a former Panamanian colonel who managed Mr. Noriega and his operation.
He started building the files that helped him gain power.
A National Guard job assumed by Capt. Noriega in 1964 -- as chief of the transit police in David City, capital of the Chiriqui Province -- was tailor-made for an aspiring super-spy.
By pressuring taxi and bus drivers who needed licenses, he gained a ready cache of information.
He knew which local luminaries had been caught driving drunk, which had been found with their mistresses.
This proved particularly valuable to the Panamanian government in 1967, when union leaders were planning a May Day march that the government feared could turn violent.
Mr. Noriega had learned that a local union leader was sleeping with the wife of his deputy.
So he splashed the information on handbills that he distributed throughout the banana-exporting city of Puerto Armuelles, which was ruled by United Fruit Co.
The campaign so divided union leaders that the government found them far easier to control.
"It was like a play on Broadway," recalls Mr. Martinez.
Noriega managed the whole thing.
He was superb.
Noriega was an expert at bribing and blackmailing people.
During his years in Chiriqui, however, Mr. Noriega also revealed himself as an officer as perverse as he was ingenious.
Rodrigo Miranda, a local lawyer and human-rights monitor, recalls an intoxicated Noriega visiting prisoners in their cells at the 5th Zone Garrison headquarters in David, where he had his offices.
Mr. Noriega would order them all to take off their clothes and run around the courtyard naked, laughing at them and then retreating to his office.
People started wondering if something was wrong with him, Mr. Miranda recalls.
But through this period, so far as the U.S. military was concerned, Mr. Noriega was a model recruit.
He signed up for intelligence and counter-intelligence training under American officers at Fort Gulick in Panama in July 1967, according to a copy of a 1983 resume with details Mr. Noriega has since classified as secret.
He flew to Fort Bragg, N.C., in September of that year for a course in psychological operations, returning to the School of the Americas in Panama for a two-month course called "military intelligence for officers."
Some American officers interpreted his eagerness and studiousness as a sign of loyalty, but they did so falsely.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's so-called G-2 in 1970 after providing populist dictator Torrijos the critical support to defeat a coup attempt against him a year earlier.
He became Gen. Torrijos's inseparable shadow, and the holder of all Panama's secrets.
Mr. Noriega, by now a lieutenant colonel, expanded his contacts to include the Cubans -- not to mention the Israelis, the Taiwanese and any other intelligence service that came knocking.
When U.S. diplomats complained to the CIA of Col. Noriega's moonlighting, intelligence experts always insisted that his allegiance was first to the Americans.
Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the United States," recalls Francis J. McNeil, who, as deputy assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, first ran across reports about Mr. Noriega in 1977.
Some of us wondered how our intelligence people could put so much stock in his information when he was just as close to the Cubans."
Even at this early stage, drugs caused additional concerns.
During the Nixon administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration became dismayed at the extent of the G-2's connections to arrested drug traffickers.
One DEA agent drew up a list of five options for dealing with Col. Noriega, one of which was assassination.
The head of the DEA at the time, John Ingersoll, scotched the assassination plan.
But he did fly to Panama to scold dictator Torrijos on the drug ties of Panamanian officials, including Mr. Noriega.
Mr. Ingersoll later recalled that Gen. Torrijos seemed afraid to act on the concerns of the U.S.
"Everybody was afraid of him," Mr. Ingersoll says.
Mr. Noriega became an even greater threat in 1976, when U.S. intelligence services discovered that he had been buying recordings of electronically monitored conversations from three sergeants working for the U.S. Army's 470th Military Intelligence Group.
The tapes included wiretaps of Gen. Torrijos's own phone, according to American intelligence officials.
"We caught him with his hands on our cookie jar," says former CIA Director Stansfield Turner.
For the first time, the U.S. considered cutting Mr. Noriega from its intelligence payroll -- and the deliberations were intense, Mr. Turner says.
In the world of intelligence, if you want to get information, you get it from seedy characters.
The question is how much you get tied in with seedy characters so they can extort you."
Intelligence officials to this day worry whether Mr. Noriega sold sensitive information on the recordings to the Cubans or others.
Mr. Turner was troubled enough to cancel the U.S. contract with the rent-a-colonel at the beginning of the Carter administration.
The U.S. soon found new cause for concern: gun-running.
Prosecutors in Southern Florida indicted five Panamanians on charges of illegally running arms to Sandinista rebels trying to overthrow the Nicaraguan government of Mr. Somoza.
They included one of Mr. Noriega's closest friends and business partners, Carlos Wittgreen.
And the investigators were quickly closing in on Mr. Noriega himself.
At the time, though, in 1979, the U.S. was once again flirting with its longtime Latin American spy.
Mr. Noriega made plans to fly to Washington for a meeting with his counterpart at the Pentagon.
Dade County and federal authorities, learning that he intended to fly through Miami, made plans to arrest him on the gun-running charges as soon as he hit U.S. soil.
It was a Friday in June.
The Pentagon foiled the plan.
According to military officers at the time, word was passed to Mr. Noriega by his American hosts that the police would be waiting.
On Monday, U.S. officials received a routine, unclassified message from the military group commander in Panama.
Due to health reasons, Lt. Col. Noriega has elected to postpone his visit to Washington," it read.
Prosecutors in Miami received yet another setback.
Their original indictment against Mr. Wittgreen, the friend of Mr. Noriega, and the other four was dismissed on a technicality.
But now, along with re-indicting Mr. Noriega's pal, they intended to charge Mr. Noriega himself, on allegations that he was involved in the illegal trading of some $2 million in arms.
In January 1980, Jerome Sanford, as assistant U.S. attorney, was summoned to a meeting with a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent assigned to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in Miami.
Panamanian dictator Torrijos, he was told, had granted the shah of Iran asylum in Panama as a favor to Washington.
Mr. Sanford was told Mr. Noriega's friend, Mr. Wittgreen, would be handling the shah's security.
It wouldn't be a good idea to indict him -- much less Mr. Noriega, the prosecutor was told.
After prodding from Mr. Sanford, U.S. Attorney Jack Eskenazi pleaded with Justice Department officials in Washington to let the indictment proceed.
"Unfortunately," Mr. Eskenazi wrote in a letter, "those of us in law enforcement in Miami find ourselves frequently attempting to enforce the laws of the United States but simultaneously being caught between foreign policy considerations over which we have no control."
The letter, along with a detailed prosecution memo, sat on the desks of Justice officials for months before the case died a quiet death.
I think if we had been allowed to go ahead then we wouldn't have the problems we have now," Mr. Sanford says.
If he had been found guilty, we could have stopped him.
In August 1983, Mr. Noriega took over as General and de-facto dictator of Panama, having maneuvered his way to the top only two years after the mysterious death in a plane crash of his old boss Omar Torrijos.
Soon, the military became a veritable mafia controlling legal and illegal businesses.
The Reagan administration also put Mr. Noriega's G-2 back on the U.S. payroll.
Payments averaged nearly $200,000 a year from the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency and the CIA.
Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the U.S. exclusively.
During the Reagan years he expanded his business and intelligence contacts with the Cubans and the Sandinistas.
He allegedly entered into Panama's first formal business arrangement with Colombian drug bosses, according to Floyd Carlton, a pilot who once worked for Mr. Noriega and who testified before the U.S. grand jury in Miami that would ultimately indict the Panamanian on drug charges.
But Mr. Noriega was convinced the Reagan White House wouldn't act against him, recalls his close ally Jose Blandon, because he had an insurance policy: his involvement with the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Mr. Blandon says the general allowed the Contras to set up a secret training center in Panama.
Mr. Noriega also conveyed intelligence from his spy operation inside the Nicaraguan capital of Managua.
And on at least one occasion, in the spring of 1985, he helped arrange a sabotage attack on a Sandinista arsenal in Nicaragua.
Although his help for the Contra cause was limited, it was enough to win him important protectors in the Reagan administration, says Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who then served on the Senate Intelligence Committee.
Noriega played U.S. intelligence agencies and the U.S. government like a violin," he says.
An incident in 1984 suggested one additional means by which Mr. Noriega might have maintained such influence with Washington -- by compromising U.S. officials.
Curtin Windsor, then the ambassador to Costa Rica, recalls being invited to Panama by Mr. Noriega's brother Luis Carlos for a weekend of deep sea fishing and "quiet, serious conversation" on the Aswara Peninsula.
Mr. Windsor notified Everett E. Briggs, the U.S. ambassador to Panama, of the invitation.
"Briggs screamed," Mr. Windsor recalls.
He says Mr. Briggs told him he was being set up for a "honey trap," in which Mr. Noriega would try to involve him in an orgy and then record the event "with sound and video."
Mr. Briggs, on vacation after resigning his position at the National Security Council, couldn't be reached for comment.
As Mr. Noriega's political troubles grew, so did his offers of assistance to the Contras, an apparent attempt to curry more favor in Washington.
For instance, he helped steal the May 1984 Panamanian elections for the ruling party.
But just one month later, he also contributed $100,000 to a Contra leader, according to documents released for Oliver North's criminal trial in Washington, D.C.
Yet, his political setbacks mounted.
Mr. Noriega was accused of ordering in 1985 the beheading of Hugo Spadafora, his most outspoken political opponent and the first man to publicly finger Mr. Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
He then ousted President Nicholas Ardito Barletta, a former World Bank official with close ties to the U.S., after Mr. Barletta tried to create a commission to investigate the murder.
And, all the while, Panama's debt problems continued to grow.
Mr. Noriega was growing desperate.
In late 1986, he made an offer he thought the U.S. couldn't refuse.
As recounted in a stipulation that summarized government documents released for the North trial, Mr. Noriega offered to assassinate the Sandinista leadership in exchange "for a promise to help clean up Noriega's image and a commitment to lift the {U.S.} ban on military sales to the Panamanian Defense Forces."
North," the document went on, referring to Oliver North, has told Noriega's representative that U.S. law forbade such actions.
The representative responded that Noriega had numerous assets in place in Nicaragua and could accomplish many essential things, just as Noriega had helped {the U.S.} the previous year in blowing up a Sandinista arsenal."
Col. North conveyed the request to his superiors and to Assistant Secretary of State Elliot Abrams, who relayed it to Secretary of State George Shultz.
Mr. Noriega's proposal was turned down.
And Mr. Shultz curtly told Mr. Abrams that the general should be told that only he could repair his tarnished image.
The end of the marriage was at hand.
Within weeks the unfolding Iran-Contra scandal took away Mr. Noriega's insurance policy.
The death of CIA Director William Casey and resignation of Oliver North allowed anti-Noriega political forces to gain influence.
Public protests against him were triggered in June 1987 due to charges by Diaz Herrera, his former chief of staff, that Mr. Noriega had stolen the 1984 election and had ordered the killing of Messrs. Spadafora and Torrijos.
Few American officials were willing any longer to defend him.
Lawyers in Miami -- this time working virtually without impediment -- prepared to have him indicted on drug charges in February 1988.
During negotiations with American officials in May 1988 over proposals to drop the U.S. indictments in exchange for his resignation, Mr. Noriega often asked almost plaintively how the Americans, whom he had helped for so many years, could turn against him.
Now, neither side -- the U.S. nor Mr. Noriega -- has an easy out.
President Bush has sworn to bring him to justice.
Mr. Noriega believes he hasn't any alternative but to continue clutching to power.
It is a knock-out battle -- perhaps to the death.
In the end, is Mr. Noriega the political equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, created by a well-intentioned but misguided foreign power?
Not quite, Sen. Leahy contends.
For short-term gains, people were willing to put up with him.
That allowed him to get stronger and stronger, he says.
I don't think we created him as much as we fed him, nurtured him and let him grow up to be big and strong."
The nations of southern Africa know a lot about managing elephants; their herds are thriving.
But the nations of Europe and North America have decided they know better.
At this week's U.N. conference in Lausanne, they imposed a global ivory ban that seeks to overturn local policies.
A Zimbabwean delegate argued that the ban would guarantee the extinction of the elephant."
Legitimate ranchers, who have an interest in preserving the herds, would go out of business.
Poachers would control the underground trade.
Many delegates were willing to craft a compromise, but U.S. delegate Constance Harriman and others thundered that down.
The Greens from the First World wanted a morality play, not a negotiation.
Fortunately, the nations of southern Africa haven't totally surrendered their sovereignty.
Five countries announced they would not honor what one Zimbabwean delegate wryly called the "made in Switzerland" solution.
In fact, they seemed a mite resentful.
The director of Zimbabwe's Wildlife Department described American conservationists as "fat little puppies from urban environments who don't know a thing about Africa."
That's not fair; they're not all fat.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev wants to bring the nation's reformist press back into line, blaming it for contributing to the many problems he faces and even suggesting that one liberal editor resign.
Mr. Gorbachev's comments, made at a meeting with Soviet national editors and media executives Friday, indicate his growing frustration with the nation's mounting problems.
According to people who attended, he didn't advocate an end to glasnost, his policy of openness.
But he made clear that the press should show greater responsibility in its reporting and cut back on criticism of his reforms.
The text of his remarks hasn't been published, and editors say they have no instructions as to whether it will be.
Accounts of previous such meetings with media and other groups have been printed, sometimes after a delay of several days.
Although glasnost has given the government-controlled media here much greater freedom to report and criticize, Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders still regard newspapers and TV as important propaganda tools they can use at will.
According to participants at the meeting and Soviet journalists who were later briefed by their editors, Mr. Gorbachev blamed the press for fueling a nationwide mood of despondency.
In particular, he complained about some articles this summer that openly discussed the possibility of a coup or civil war in the Soviet Union, and accused the media of fueling panic buying of goods by printing stories about impending shortages.
He singled out the daily Izvestia and the weekly Argumenty i Fakty, and also gave stinging criticism of Yuri Afanasyev, a leading reformist historian who has written articles attacking the Communist Party.
Among other things, Mr. Gorbachev questioned whether Mr. Afanasyev should remain in the party.
The meeting lasted a little under two hours and was attended by most members of the ruling Politburo.
There was no other speaker apart from the Soviet leader, and those attacked weren't given the opportunity to defend themselves.
Mr. Afanasyev, who isn't an editor, didn't attend.
According to participants, Mr. Gorbachev was particularly incensed by an article on the front page of Argumenty i Fakty this month that examined the popularity of members of the Soviet Parliament.
The piece was based on a survey of 1,500 readers' letters and contained some criticism of Mr. Gorbachev himself.
The newspaper wrote that readers assessed his role both positively and negatively.
It said many thanked the Soviet leader for his "self-control, modesty, culture and ability to hear a speaker out."
But others criticized him, "for imposing his opinion on other deputies, giving commentaries to many speeches, holding elections with no choice of candidate, putting pressure on the voting process and maneuvering between the right and left wings" of the Parliament.
All this, the paper quoted readers as saying, "has seriously weakened his authority."
The Soviet leader apparently suggested to Argumenty i Fakty's editor, Vyacheslav Starkov, that he should resign.
The comment, which Mr. Starkov relayed to his staff, has sparked anger and bitterness at the paper.
Mr. Starkov has been summoned to see the Kremlin's ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, in the near future, and may discover then if he is to be fired.
Izvestia was criticized for a front-page article last Wednesday that took a sharp look at the Parliament's activities.
It attacked the level of a debate on the private-sector cooperative movement, saying "the discussion was more like a riot than a civilized exchange of points of view."
And it questioned the speed with which the Parliament was adopting new legislation, often with a minimum of debate.
Speaking to foreign reporters, Ivan Laptev, Izvestia's editor, sought to play down Mr. Gorbachev's criticism, but he acknowledged that his paper had been singled out.
The Parliament yesterday approved legislation that imposes new restrictions on the cooperative movement, enabling local authorities to set ceilings for prices and preventing the "speculative" sale of goods in short supply for prices higher than that charged by the state.
Walter Sisulu and the African National Congress came home yesterday.
After 26 years in prison, Mr. Sisulu, the 77-year-old former secretary-general of the liberation movement, was dropped off at his house by a prison services' van just as the sun was coming up.
At the same time, six ANC colleagues, five of whom were arrested with him in 1963 and sentenced to life imprisonment, were reunited with their families at various places around the country.
And as the graying men returned to their homes, the ANC, outlawed in South Africa since 1960 and still considered to be the chief public enemy by the white government, defiantly returned to the streets of the country's black townships.
A huge ANC flag, with black, green and gold stripes, was hoisted over the rickety gate at Mr. Sisulu's modest house, while on the street out front, boys displayed the ANC colors on their shirts, caps and scarves.
At the small four-room home of Elias Motsoaledi, a leading ANC unionist and a former commander in the group's armed wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, well-wishers stuck little ANC flags in their hair and a man tooted on an antelope horn wrapped in ANC ribbons.
"I am happy to see the spirit of the people," said Mr. Sisulu, looking dapper in a new gray suit.
As the crowd outside his home shouted "ANC, ANC," the old man shot his fists into the air.
"I'm inspired by the mood of the people."
Under the laws of the land, the ANC remains an illegal organization, and its headquarters are still in Lusaka, Zambia.
But the unconditional release of the seven leaders, who once formed the intellectual and organizational core of the ANC, is a de facto un-banning of the movement and the rebirth of its internal wing.
"The government can never put the ANC back into the bottle again," said Cassim Saloojee, a veteran anti-apartheid activist on hand to welcome Mr. Sisulu.
Things have gone too far for the government to stop them now.
There's no turning back.
There was certainly no stopping the tide of ANC emotion last night, when hundreds of people jammed into the Holy Cross Anglican Church in Soweto for what became the first ANC rally in the country in 30 years.
Deafening chants of "ANC" and "Umkhonto we Sizwe" shook the church as the seven aging men vowed that the ANC would continue its fight against the government and the policies of racial segregation on all fronts, including the armed struggle.
And they called on the government to release Nelson Mandela, the ANC's leading figure, who was jailed with them and remains in prison.
Without him, said Mr. Sisulu, the freeing of the others "is only a half-measure."
President F.W. de Klerk released the ANC men -- along with one of the founding members of the Pan Africanist Congress, a rival liberation group -- as part of his efforts to create a climate of trust and peace in which his government can begin negotiations with black leaders over a new constitution aimed at giving blacks a voice in national government.
But Pretoria may instead be creating a climate for more turmoil and uncertainty in this racially divided country.
As other repressive governments, particularly Poland and the Soviet Union, have recently discovered, initial steps to open up society can create a momentum for radical change that becomes difficult, if not impossible, to control.
As the days go by, the South African government will be ever more hard pressed to justify the continued imprisonment of Mr. Mandela as well as the continued banning of the ANC and enforcement of the state of emergency.
If it doesn't yield on these matters, and eventually begin talking directly to the ANC, the expectations and promise raised by yesterday's releases will turn to disillusionment and unrest.
If it does, the large number of right-wing whites, who oppose any concessions to the black majority, will step up their agitation and threats to take matters into their own hands.
The newly released ANC leaders also will be under enormous pressure.
The government is watching closely to see if their presence in the townships leads to increased anti-government protests and violence; if it does, Pretoria will use this as a reason to keep Mr. Mandela behind bars.
Pretoria hasn't forgotten why they were all sentenced to life imprisonment in the first place: for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
In addition, the government is figuring that the releases could create a split between the internal and external wings of the ANC and between the newly freed leaders and those activists who have emerged as leaders inside the country during their imprisonment.
In order to head off any divisions, Mr. Mandela, in a meeting with his colleagues before they were released, instructed them to report to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka as soon as possible.
The men also will be faced with bridging the generation gap between themselves and the country's many militant black youths, the so-called young lions who are anxious to see the old lions in action.
Says Peter Mokaba, president of the South African Youth Congress: "We will be expecting them to act like leaders of the ANC."
They never considered themselves to be anything else.
At last night's rally, they called on their followers to be firm, yet disciplined, in their opposition to apartheid.
We emphasize discipline because we know that the government is very, very sensitive," said Andrew Mlangeni, another early Umkhonto leader who is now 63.
We want to see Nelson Mandela and all our comrades out of prison, and if we aren't disciplined we may not see them here with us."
We don't know who is winning the drug war in Latin America, but we know who's losing it -- the press.
Over the past six months, six journalists have been killed and 10 kidnapped by drug traffickers or leftist guerrillas -- who often are one and the same -- in Colombia.
Over the past 12 years, at least 40 journalists have died there.
The attacks have intensified since the Colombian government began cracking down on the traffickers in August, trying to prevent their takeover of the country.
The slaughter in Colombia was very much on the minds of 450 editors and publishers from Latin America, the United States, the Caribbean and Canada attending the 45th general assembly of the Inter-American Press Association in Monterrey, Mexico, this week.
On Tuesday the conference got word of another atrocity, the assassination in Medellin of two employees of El Espectador, Colombia's second-largest newspaper.
The paper's local administrator, Maria Luz Lopez, was shot dead, and her mother wounded, while her car was stopped for a red light.
An hour later, the paper's circulation manager, Miguel Soler, was shot and killed near his home.
The drug lords who claimed responsibility said they would blow up the Bogota newspaper's offices if it continued to distribute in Medellin.
They bombed the Bogota offices last month, destroying its computer and causing $2.5 million in damage.
El Espectador has been a special target because of the extraordinary courage of its publisher and his staff.
At Monterrey, publisher Luis Gabriel Cano, although shaken by the murders, issued a statement saying: "We will not cease our fight against drug trafficking.
They want to terrify the press and in particular El Espectador because it has always been a torchbearer in this war."
This comes from a man whose brother, Guillermo, was murdered in 1986.
The publishers in Monterrey command no battalions, but they agreed to express their outrage with editorials in today's editions.
Many will use a common editorial.
A final statement yesterday said: While some advances are being made in nations throughout the hemisphere, the state of press freedom in the Americas still must be regarded as grim as long as journalists and their families are subject to the crudest form of censorship: death by assassination."
The report charged that Panama's Manuel Noriega is not only in league with the drug traffickers but also is bullying the press as never before.
Noriega has closed every independent newspaper, radio and television station and arrested, tortured or forced into exile a long list of reporters," the statement declared.
It added: "In Cuba, public enemy No. 1 of press freedoms in the hemisphere, repression of journalists both Cuban and foreign is worse than ever."
And in Nicaragua, promises of press freedom by the Sandinistas "have not materialized."
As it happens, the four countries cited, Colombia, Cuba, Panama and Nicaragua, are not only where the press is under greatest attack but also are linked by the drug trade and left-wing politics.
Noriega is close to Castro and may once have been his agent.
Sandinistas Thomas Borge and the Ortega brothers are Castro proteges; he backed their takeover of Nicaragua.
In Colombia, the drug-financed guerrillas trying to seize the country and destroy democracy include M-19, which Castro has clearly backed.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. attorney handling drug indictments in Florida, doesn't think for a minute that Castro's much publicized trials of high officials engaged in the drug trade mean he has broken off with the Medellin drug cartel.
If the cartel succeeds in blackmailing the Colombian authorities into negotiations, the cartel will be in control and Fidel can exploit his past relationships with them," he told the Journal's David Asman recently.
The struggle against the drug lords in Colombia will be a near thing.
This week, the government arrested Jose Abello Silva, said to be the fourth-ranking cartel leader.
He will probably be extradited to the U.S. for trial under an extradition treaty President Virgilia Barco has revived.
Later, another high-ranking trafficker, Leonidas Vargas, was arrested and 1,000 pounds of dynamite seized.
Mr. Barco has refused U.S. troops or advisers but has accepted U.S. military aid.
President Bush has agreed to meet within 90 days with Mr. Barco, President Alan Garcia of Peru and President Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia to discuss the drug problem.
It might not be a bad idea to do that sooner, rather than later.
After the Panama fiasco, they will need some reassurance.
Certainly, the Colombian press is much in need of that.
FEDERAL NEGARIT GAZETTE OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
and Year No.101 ADDIS ABABA 5 thAugest, 2016
Proclamation No.980/2016
Commercial and Licensing Proclamation Page  9194
Registration Proclamation No. 980/2016
WHEREAS,  it  has  become  necessary  to put in place a fair, modern, fast and accessible system  of  commercial  registration  and  business  licensing services; to close loopholes in legislation and working procedures the  business  community  and  the  society  obtain  the  services  they require  and  expect  from  the  commercial  system,  to  increase the societies satisfaction and contribute to the  comprehensive economic changes in the nation; and,  hence, enable registration is  found  necessary
WHEREAS,  It commercial to support licensing activities  with  modern  technology  in  order  to  make them  suitable  for  data  management, to  combat illegality and make data accessible to the government, the society and concerned authorities; and It is found imperative that the commercial system  maintains transparency, accountability and good governance and, in so doing,  realize the nation’s vision; principles of
NOW,  THEREFORE,  this  Proclamation has been promulgated in pursuance of Article 55/1/ of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
Short Title
PART ONE
GENERAL
This  Proclamation  may  be  cited  as  “Commercial  Registration Proclamation No. 980/2016”.  and the Licensing
Definitions
In  this  Proclamation  unless  the  context  requires otherwise:
“Commercial  Code”  means  the  Commercial Code of Ethiopia;
“business  person”  means  any  person  who professionally and for gain carries on any of  the  activities  specified  in  the  Commercial  Code  or  who  dispenses  services,  or  who carries  on  those  commercial  activities designated as such by law;
“commercial  activity”  means  any  activity carried  on  by  a  business  person  as  defined under sub-article (2) of this Article;
“service”  means  any  commercial  dispensing  of services for consideration other than salary  or wages;
“domestic trade” includes wholesale or retail of goods or the dispensing of services or the  supply  of  live  animal  to  the  market  after  buying  from  producer  or  directly  after  fattening  in Ethiopia as may be appropriate;
“foreign trade” means the exporting from or  importing into Ethiopia of goods and services  for sale;
“commercial agents” means a person not bound  to  a  business  person  by  a  contract  of  employment  and  carrying  out  independent  business activity, who is entrusted by a business person  to  represent  him  permanently  in  a  specified  area  and  to  make  agreements  in  the name and on behalf of the business person;
“goods” means any moveable goods that are which  any  commercial  activity  is  conducted  between persons, except monies in any form  and securities;
“commercial representative” means any person  who is not domiciled in the country where the  head office of the business organization or the  business person he represents is situate, bound  to  such  business  organization  or  business  person  by  a  contract  of  employment  and  entrusted  with  the  carrying  out  of  any  trade  promotion activities on behalf and in the name  of  the  business  organization  or  the  business person he represents, without being a business  person himself;
“Trade  Name”  means  a  name  that  a  given business  person  uses  for  his  business  or known by the society as such;
“name  of  business”  means  a  name  that  is used  by  a  business  organization for  commercial  registration  and  by  which  such  business organization is recognized as a legal  person by the registering office or third party;
“valid  business  license”  means  a  business license issued or renewed in the budget year pursuant  to  this  Proclamation  or  a  valid  business  license  which  may  be  renewed without this Proclamation; pursuant penalty to
“industry”  means  being  any  commercial activity, includes the manufacturing of goods and  inputs  used  to  produce  goods  using  motor-power-driven  equipments  or  other equipments,  engineering  services,  any  other  service  provision  activity  and  research  and  dissemination activities;
“manufacturing”  includes  any  formulation, alteration,  assembling  or  processing  or  agricultural development or mine exploration  and development or operation activity carried out by using industry;
“engineering  service”  means  repairing  or maintaining  equipments  of  industrial  use  or electrical  or  electronic  equipments  or  other similar equipments, construction consultancy, construction management, consultancy on the engineering erection consultancy services, engineering  design  services,  supervisory services and is inclusive of the likes; equipments, predesigned and of
“domestic investor” means an Ethiopian or a foreign  national  permitted  by  the  relevant organ  to  be  deemed  as  domestic  investor, who invests his capital in business activities;
“foreign  investor”  means  a  foreign  national or a business organization who brings capital into  the  country  and  invested  in  a  business sector  permitted  in  accordance  with  the Investment Proclamation or has invested in a business  sector  entirely  owned  by  a  foreign national  or,  in  a  business  established  in partnership with Ethiopian national;
“unfair  trade  practice”  means  any  act  of violation  of  any  provision  of  trade  related laws;
“agricultural development” means a business activity  engages  in  the  production  of  any  plant  or  animal  or  fisheries  development  or animal by-products;
“commercial registration” means registration to be made pursuant to the Commercial Code and this Proclamation;
“registering  office”  means undertakes authority registration and trade name registration;
“importer”  means  any  person  who  imports goods or services from abroad into Ethiopia;
“exporter”  means  any  person  who  exports
“special goods and services from Ethiopia to abroad; of registration”  means  taxpayer’s  identification number issued by the concerned government office to  a  business  persons,  business organization or commercial representative; identification number
“wholesaler”  means  any  person  who  sells goods  to  retailers  or  governmental  and  non-governmental  organizations  or  cooperatives by wholesale after having bought such goods from producers or importers;
“retailer” means any person who sells goods to consumers or end users after buying such goods or wholesaler; producers,
“federal  public enterprise”  means an enterprise established in accordance with the relevant  law  or  a  business  organization whose  shares  are  totally  owned  by  the Federal Government;
“regional  public  enterprise”  means  an enterprise  established in  accordance  of regional state laws or a business organization whose  shares  are  totally  owned  by  the Regional States;
“basic  goods  or  services”  means  goods  or services  related the  daily  needs  of consumers,  the  shortage  of  which  in  the market may lead to unfair trade practice or a good  or  services  that  is  announced  as  basic goods or services through public notices;
“certificate  of competence”  means a certificate  issued  by  the  concerned  sectoral government  offices  to  a  certain  relevant commercial  activities  in  accordance  with directives the  Ministry  upon verifying  that  the  required  competence  is fulfilled  pursuant  to  this  Proclamation  and other relevant laws; issued  by commerce
“chamber  of sectoral associations”  means  chambers  established  at each  hierarchy  by  business  persons  for  the observance  of their  common interests pursuant to the law of the country;
“sectoral  associations”  means  associations established  by  business  persons  engaged  as manufacturers  or  service  providers  in  the same  commercial  activity  or  based  on  the same  gender  or  in  any  other  manner  to support commercial activities;
“franchise  agreement”  means  an  agreement concluded  for  consideration  between  the franchiser  and  the  franchisee  in  order  to undertake  business  activities  by  using  the trade  name  of  the  known  product  or  service in order to share the nature and experience of the work under the leadership of the owner of the  products  and  the  service  that  have  got recognition; License agricultural incorporating
“Ethiopian  Business Issuing Category”  means  a  business  license  issuing category and industrial  products  and  various  service business in  which  commercial activities are undertaken at the national level;
“property”  means  movable  and  immovable property  and  includes  intellectual  property rights; sectors as  written
“administrative  measure”  includes  measures such sealing, cancelation,  suspension  or  other  similar measures the  relevant authority; reprimand,
“transaction at similar level” means a type of transaction  between/among  wholesalers  or between/among retailers;
“relevant  sector  office”  means  executive office  empowered  to  issue  certificate  of competence  or  carry  out  other  similar  activities;
“company”  means business organization; a limited liability
“holding  company”  means  a  company incorporating  two  or  more  limited  liability companies  and special registration  certificate  and  managed  by  the holder; issued  with  a
“boarder trade” means a type of commercial activity through which a persons or business persons  residing  at  boarder  areas  undertake their  commercial  activities  through  bilateral agreements  or  unilateral  decisions  of  the countries  sharing  border  with  Ethiopia pursuant  to  the  border  trade directive  issued by the Ministry, including crossing the border of the country;
“budget year” means the period from Hamle 01  to  Sene  30,  according  to  the  Ethiopian calendar  or  a  period  on  the  basis  of  the approved  Memorandum  and  Articles  of Association of the business organization or a period determined in another manner;
“inspector”  means  an  officer  designated  by the  relevant  authority  to  inspect  that  the commercial  activities  are  carried  out  in accordance with law;
“relevant  authority”  means  the  Ministry  of Trade  or  Regional  organs  administering commercial activities;
“Ministry or Minister” means the Ministry of Trade or the Minister of Trade;
“region” means any of those regions specified under Article 47(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes the Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa Cities Administrations;
“person”  means  any  natural  person  or juridical body;
any expression in  a  masculine  gender includes the feminine.
Scope of application
This Proclamation shall be applicable to any business persons, sectoral associations, commercial representatives and any other person engaged in commercial activity other than those specified under Article 21(4) of this Proclamation.
Powers and duties of the relevant authority
The Ministry shall, pursuant to this Proclamation, establish and administer a central commercial register and trade name register which has nationwide application; and make open and accessible to the public at large.
The Ministry shall undertake commercial registration and trade name registration.
The regional organs administering commercial activities and the Investment Commission may undertake commercial registration and trade name registration when delegated by the Ministry.
The Ministry shall enter the commercial registration and the trade name registration data into the central data base; and the regional organs administering commercial activities and the Investment Commission shall transfer to the central database the data they registered through delegation.
The Ministry shall issue certificates to organs upon which it confers legal personality under special condition and to entities that are issued special certificates.
The Ministry shall register and issue certificates to sectoral associations established at federal level and regional organs administering commercial activities shall register sectoral associations established at regional levels and issue certificates of legal personality.
The Ministry shall issue licenses for those business categories to which licenses are issued at federal level; and regional organs administering commercial activities shall issue licenses for business categories to which licenses are issued at regional level.
The relevant authority shall provide trade related information to the concerned organs and to other persons who submit requests as deemed necessary.
The Ministry shall prepare directives for Ethiopian business licensing categories and implement or cause implementation of same.
The Ministry shall, in consultation with the concerned sectoral offices, identify business categories requiring certificate of competence and coordinate formulation of criteria and issuance of certificate of competence; issue certificates of competence to those business categories fall under its jurisdiction.
The relevant authority shall take administrative measures against persons or business persons who contravene this Proclamation, the regulations and directives issued hereunder; and where deemed necessary cause legal measure to be taken by other organs.
The relevant authority shall make pre and post license monitoring and controlling to ensure that business persons carry out their business activities as appearing on the certificates issued.
The relevant authority shall provide capacity building and other supports to the business community and concerned offices.
The relevant authority shall assign inspectors to supervise the observance of this Proclamation, the regulations and directive issued hereunder.
The Ministry shall monitor and control the execution of the delegation it conferred as per this Proclamation.
The relevant authority shall implement or cause implementation of the provisions of this Proclamation, regulations and directives fall under its mandate and undertake other similar functions.
PART TWO COMMERCIAL REGISTER
Registration in the Commercial Register
No person shall obtain any kind of business license without being registered in commercial register.
Any person shall be registered in the commercial register at the place where the head office of his business is situated;
Any person shall register in the commercial register only once even though he conducts different kinds of business activities in different regions.
Any person who opens branch offices at various places shall register these branch offices at his original registration before commencing business and immediately notify the registering office situated at the places where the branch offices are to be opened.
When any person is being registered in the commercial register pursuant to Commercial Code, it shall be effected by verifying that the company name entered in the commercial register shall not cause conflict of interest against another business person.
Founders or members of a business organization shall sign their memorandum and articles of association at the Document Authentication and Registration Agency, according to standardized samples of memorandum and articles of association sent to the same office by the registering office, before applying for commercial registration, except any amendments to these signed and registered memorandum and articles of association.
Founders or members of a business organization shall, before signing the memorandum and article of association, apply to the registering office and get verification that another business person has not occupied the name of the business organization.
Where the successors and the spouse of a sole proprietor who was engaged in a business, do not want to form a business organization to resume the business, one of the successors or the spouse can be registered in the commercial register according to the power of attorney given to him by the successors and/or the spouse.
The agreement of founders or members of the business organization on the valuation of contribution in kind shall be stipulated in the memorandum of association or in the amendment of the memorandum of association.
An application for commercial registration shall be submitted before the commencement date of commercial activity by filling a prescribed form and attaching documents specified under the regulations and directives issued for the implementation of the Proclamation.
Foreign business persons engaging in mining sector, federal public enterprises, commercial representatives, foreign business persons, foreign business persons that engage in business by winning international bids, foreign business person desirous of acquiring a local business in its present condition and engage in business, associations authorized to engage in business under other laws, and sectoral associations to be organized at federal level as well as foreign branch offices of chambers of commerce whose engagement is found to be important by the Minister shall be registered by the Ministry.
Regional public enterprises and sectoral associations organized at different hierarchies of the regions shall be registered by regional organs administering commerce.
Any person who wants to engage in business category to which the license is issued by the Ministry, may directly apply to the Ministry for commercial registration.
An objection filed in accordance with law shall bar a sole proprietor or a business organization from registration in the commercial register.
Validity of Commercial Registration and Legal Personality of Business Organizations
Business organizations shall attain legal personality upon registration.
Business organizations shall be publicized on a newspaper having nationwide circulation at the time of their establishment.
The commercial register shall be open to the public at large; third parties are also entitled to look into the register.
Any commercial registration shall be valid as of the date of the applicant’s registration in the commercial register in accordance with the provisions of this Proclamation.
Forwarding of Information and Documents Relating to Registration
The regional organs administering commercial activities or the Ethiopian Investment Commission, upon conducting commercial registration pursuant to this Proclamation shall immediately forward the documents of the registration to the data base of the Ministry.
The registering office, before entering into the commercial register the business organization or the commercial representative applying for registration, shall request in writing the tax collecting authority to assign taxpayer’s identification number.
The tax collecting authority shall notify the registering office the taxpayer’s identification number assigned to a business organization under establishment or a commercial representative.
The registering office shall enter into the commercial register the taxpayer’s identification number assigned by the tax collecting authority to the business person or the commercial representative applying for registration as special identification number of registration.
10. Alterations or Amendments to a Commercial Registration
Any alternation or amendment on commercial organization registration shall be registered with the registering office within 60 days after its authentication by a notary.
Where the application for registration of alternation or amendment on commercial registration is accepted, the registering office shall issue confirmation of acceptance of the alteration or amendment to the commercial registration and notify the applicant and concerned entities in writing details of the alteration or amendment entered into the commercial register. Until written confirmation is issued, it shall not be recognized that the alteration or amendment submitted is entered in the commercial register.
The registering office may cancel any alteration or amendment already entered in the commercial register if it believes that it was registered inappropriate and shall notify the applicant in writing the detail grounds of the cancellation.
Requirements stated in this Proclamation for commercial registration shall be applicable for alternations or amendments to a commercial registration, as appropriate.
Original copies of memorandum and articles of associations of business organizations to which amendments and alterations are made shall be authenticated by the notary when they are submitted to registering office pursuant to this Proclamation.
Cancellation of Commercial Registration
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Commercial Code, the registering office may cancel a commercial registration, without any precondition, where:
the business person abandons his business activity for any reason;
an administrative measure is taken or court decision is passed on the business person not to continue with his business;
the business person was registered by submitting false information or document;
the business person is found to have violated this Proclamation or regulations and directives issued for the implementation of this Proclamation;
the business person fails to obtain a business license within one year after being entered in the commercial register.
Where a business person engaged in manufacturing or engineering or other similar investment commercial activities after getting registered pursuant to paragraph (e) of sub- article (1) of this Article is able to produce sufficient and acceptable evidence to justify the causes of incompletion of investment activities and for not obtaining business license, his registration may remain valid if he applies within two years during which business license renewal period runs and gets approval.
Any business person whose commercial registration is cancelled pursuant to sub- article (1)(a) of this Article may conduct the same registration again at anytime.
The registering office shall, before cancelling the commercial registration pursuant to paragraph (b) of sub-article (1) of this Article, send a written letter to a business person at his registered address and give him opportunity to submit his objection, if any.
Where the business person, within 30 days after receipt of the letter, fails to submit his objection or his objection is not legally valid, or it is not possible to find the business person at his registered address, the commercial registration shall be cancelled from the register.
The business person whose registration is cancelled pursuant to paragraph (b), (c) and (d) of sub-article (1) of this Article may be reregistered after one year to be counted from the date of cancellation of his registration, unless there is administrative measure or court decision which prevents such re- registration.
Cancellation of registration of business organization shall come into force one month after publication of notice of cancellation on a newspaper having wider circulation at the expense of the applicant; in the case of sole proprietor, however, the cancellation shall become effective as of the date of its entry into the register and without the need to publicize.
If a business license of a business person is cancelled, his commercial registration shall also be cancelled, unless other additional business licenses are issued based on the same commercial registration.
Issuance of Substitute Certificate of Commercial Registration
Any business person whose certificate of commercial registration is lost or damaged may obtain a substitute certificate of registration pursuant to the criteria set forth in the regulations issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Issuance of Copies of Entries
Any person or business person requesting a copy of entry made in commercial register, a copy of an extract of entry, a certificate of no entry or a certificate of cancellation or registration shall submit a written application to the registering office.
For the application lodged pursuant to sub- article (1) of this Article, the registering office shall, upon payment of the prescribed service fee, immediately provide the information if it is subject to disclosure.
PART THREE REGISTRATION OF TRADE NAME
Trade Name
Trade name of a sole proprietor shall include the individual’s first name, his father’s and grand-father’s names; where the a sole proprietor’s name has already been registered, his great grandfather’s name shall be added; if the great-grand father’s name already registered, the individual’s mother’s name shall be added; if the mother’s name is also found to have been occupied by other sole proprietor, a different identification shall be used.
Trade name of a general partnership shall be given pursuant to the Commercial Code by specifying the commercial sector of engagement.
Trade name of a limited partnership shall be given pursuant to the Commercial Code by specifying the commercial sector of engagement.
Trade name of a share company shall be decided by the shareholders pursuant to the Commercial Code by specifying the commercial sector of engagement.
The trade name of a private limited company shall be decided by the shareholders pursuant to the Commercial Code by specifying the commercial sector of engagement.
Registration of Trade Name
Any business person shall cause registration of his trade name at the place where his commercial registration is conducted.
Any business person shall cause registration of his trade name at the place where he obtains a business license.
Name of a business organization may be registered as trade name if it meets the requirements provided in this Proclamation for trade name.
Where the applicant is a foreign business organization, such applicant shall submit to the registering office, accompanied with his application, notarized certificates of commercial and trade name registrations or other legally acceptable evidence issued from the country where the business organization is registered.
The name of business organization shall appear on the certificate of commercial registration; whereas the trade name shall appear on a separate certificate of the business license.
Application for registration of trade name shall be submitted by filling the form prepared for the same purpose and be accompanied by documents specified in the regulations.
Causes Preventing Registration of Trade Name
The registering office shall refuse registration of trade name on the following grounds:
where the trade name requested for registration is identical to a trade name or name of business organization previously registered or has misleading similarity to such name;
where the trade name requested for registration is identical or misleadingly similar to the name of government institution, religious institution, a political party, a nation, nationality, peoples, tribes and clans, any other business organization or association, organizations of nations or states, charities and societies;
where the trade name includes the name of a celebrity and no written consent of such celebrity is submitted along;
where the trade name requested for registration does not include the sector of business;
where the trade name requested for registration is renowned in Ethiopia or around the world even though it is not registered in Ethiopia and no written permission issued to use the name;
where the trade name is contrary to commendable conduct or ethical values;
Where the trade name has been used by the business person for a long time, but is not permitted for registration pursuant to this Proclamation and was not registered, the registration of such trade name may be effected by the decision of the relevant authority.
The Ministry shall issue directive for the implementation of the provisions of this Article.
Effect of Entry of a Trade Name in the Trade Name Register
The registration of a trade name shall be a prima facie evidence of entitlement to use that trade name.
The mere prior registration of name of business organization or a trade name shall not prevent the registration of the same trade name for a business with an entirely different nature.
Cancellation of a trade name
The registering office may cancel a trade name registration on the following grounds:
where the business person that has caused the registration applies for its cancelation;
where it is proven that the trade name was fraudulently or erroneously registered;
where the commercial registration and business license of the business person is cancelled in accordance this Proclamation;
where a court of law renders decision by nullifying the registration of a trade name ;
where alteration or amendment are introduced into the trade name in accordance with the provisions of this Proclamation;
where a business organization is dissolved and wound-up.
The registering office shall, before cancelling the registration of the trade name pursuant to paragraph (b) of sub-article (1) of this Article, send a written letter to a business person at his registered address and give him opportunity to submit his objection, if any.
Where the business person, within 30 days after receipt of the letter, fails to submit his objection or his objection is not legally valid, or it is not possible to find the business person at his registered address, the trade name shall be cancelled from the register.
Where the former user of the trade name whose registration is cancelled applies to obtain evidence of prove of the cancellation, the registering office shall issue such evidence upon payment of appropriate service fees.
The business person may reclaim the trade name registration cancelled pursuant to paragraph (a) of sub-article (1) of this Article.
The business person whose trade name registration is cancelled pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c) of sub-articles (1) of this Article may be reregistered after one year to be counted from the date of cancellation of his registration, unless there is administrative penalty or court decision which prevents such re-registration.
Alternations or changes to a trade name
Substitute Certificate of Trade Name Registration
The provisions of the regulations issued pursuant to this Proclamation shall apply for any business person who applies to obtain a substitute certificate of trade name registration.
PART FOUR BUSINESS LICENSE
Power of Issuing Business license
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Proclamation and other relevant laws the appropriate authority shall issue business license.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub- article (1) of this Article, the relevant authority shall issue business license based on the detailed Ethiopian Business License Issuing Categories to be determined in the directive of the Ministry.
The relevant authority and other organs authorized to issue licenses shall specifically state the business category under which the license is issued and its identification number while issuing business license.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article (1) of this Article, relevant government organs shall issue business licenses in compliance with this Proclamation and other relevant laws for the following businesses:
prospecting and mining of minerals;
various water works services, excluding water works construction services;
banking, insurance and micro finance services;
air transport services and other aviation services;
commercial activities involving the use of radioactive materials and radiation emitting equipment;
telecommunication services;
the business or generating or transmitting or distributing or selling electricity;
repairing and maintain of arms and firearms and sale of explosives;
sea and inland water ways transportation services;
multimodal transport services; broadcasting services.
Government organs authorized to issue business licenses for the types of businesses listed under sub-article (4) of this Article shall, when issuing and renewing business license, make sure that the requirements provided for in this Proclamation and the regulation and directives issued hereunder are met.
Obtainment of Business license
No person shall engage in a business activity without having a valid business license.
A business person having a valid business license pursuance to this Proclamation shall not be required to obtain additional business license for branches he open for the same type of business activity.
A business person licensed to engage in manufacturing business shall not be required to obtain a business license to wholesale his products only at the same address of his manufacturing facility or at such other address of his registration.
A business person licensed to engage in a manufacturing business shall not be permitted to sell his products on retail; provided, however, that types of products in respect of which retail sales is permitted shall be determined by a regulations to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
A licensed importer shall not be required to obtain a separate business license to wholesale products he import at his address of business registered at the time of commercial registration.
No licensed importer shall retail goods he import; provided, however, based on type of business and national significance, types of products in respect of which retail sales is permitted under special condition shall be determined in a regulations to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
Application for business license
Any person desiring to engage in a commercial activity shall submit to the appropriate authority an application for business license by completing application form prepared for this purpose accompanied with important documents prescribed in the regulations issued by the Council of Ministers.
Issuance of Business license
Where an application for business license is submitted to the relevant authority pursuant to this Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder, it shall issue a business license to the applicant upon payment of appropriate service fee by ascertaining that the requirements set are fulfilled and that the business activity intended to be carried on is not prohibited by law.
Where the relevant authority ascertains that the application for business license is not submitted by fulfilling the requirements provided in this Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder, it shall reject the application and notify the applicant in writing the reasons for rejecting the application.
Where the successors and the spouse of a sole proprietor person who was engaged in a business, do not want to form a business organization to resume the business, a business license can be issued in the name of one of the successors or the spouse in accordance with the power of attorney given to him by the other successors and/or the spouse after being registered in the commercial registered pursuant to this Proclamation.
Rights of a Business Person Issued Business license
Any person issued with a business license shall have the following rights:
to engage in a business activity within the scope the business license and in compliance with this Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder and provisions of other laws related to business activity;
not be compelled to obtain additional business license for branches he opens to engage in a similar business;
to obtain information on commercial registration and licensing service;
to alter or amend commercial registration, trade name and business in accordance with this Proclamation;
to carry out other similar activities that are permitted the Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder.
Obligations of a Business Person Issued Bussiness License
Any person issued with a business license shall have the following obligations:
carry on the various business activities for which business licenses have been issued in a separate places or premises, where carrying on such activities at the same place or premises endangers public health and safety or property;
display a price list for his goods and services by posting such list in a clearly noticeable place in his business premise or by affixing price tags on the goods;
comply with the obligation that the nature of the business activity demands, fulfill standards and render service;
display his business license in clearly noticeable places within the business premises, or in case of branch business offices display copies of business license affixed with seal of the licensing authority;
shall not assign his business license to the benefit of any person, pledge or lease it out;
shall not make use of his business license, where administrative or court decision is passed to dissolve a business organization or to ban a sole proprietor;
shall notify to the registering office within one month in case of change of his business address;
shall provide information requested by concerned offices with respect to his business;
shall not transact at similar level; and
shall comply with administrative measures taken by concerned authorities and other obligations provided for in other laws.
Renewal of Business license
A business license shall be renewed in six months period within the fiscal year between from Hamle 01 until Tahsas 30 or in his registered budget year.
The business license of private limited companies three forth of whose registered capital is lost shall not be renewed; provided, however, the license may be renewed upon presentation of authenticated minutes to prove that 50 % of the registered loss has been deposited by the shareholders.
A business person desirous to renew his business license shall fill the form prepared for the same purpose and submit accompanied with documents specified in the regulations issued hereunder.
The holder of a business license who has failed to have it renewed within the time specified in sub-article (1) of this Article shall have it renewed within the time from Tir 01 to Sene 30 by paying, in addition to renewal fee, Birr 2,500 (two thousand five hundred) for the month of Tir and Birr 1,500 (one thousand five hundred) for each subsequent month of delay.
A business license not renewed within the period of renewal with penalty as determined in sub-article (4) of this Article shall be cancelled by the relevant authority.
Where a business license is cancelled pursuant to sub-article (5) of this Article and the justification presented by business person as force majeure that prevented him from renewing his license is accepted by the relevant authority, he can obtain his business license upon payment of the penalties prescribed under sub-article (4) of this Article within one year after the cancellation.
Where renewal of the business license is not permitted pursuant to sub-article (4) of this Article, the business person may obtain the same business license without penalty one year after cancellation of the business license.
Period of Validity of a Business license
A business license issued pursuant to this Proclamation shall remain valid provided that it is renewed and is not cancelled pursuant to the provisions of the Proclamation.
Without prejudice to Article 27(6) of this Proclamation, the business license shall be invalid, if not renewed within six months after the expiry of the budget year in which it has been issued or renewed upon payment of the appropriate fee,.
Suspension of Business license
A relevant authority may suspend business license on the following grounds:
Where the business person fails to meet occupational, health and sanitation, environmental protection, accident prevention standards and qualities of goods and services;
Where the business person fails to discharge obligations of a business person clearly specified in this proclamation;
Where the business person fails to provide information accurately and timely upon the request of the relevant authority;
Where it is verified that the license was issued or renewed based on falsified document;
Where the license is used by the holder for an unauthorized purpose;
Where the business person is unavailable at the registered address;
Where the business person is found to have violated the Commercial Code, the Proclamation, the regulations and directives issued hereunder,
the license may be suspended by the authorized official;
In the case of suspension of business license on the grounds of violation of the provisions of this Proclamation, regulations or directives issued hereunder; when a relevant sector office verifies violation of provisions of the Commercial Code or a court of law passes an order of suspension, the business facility shall be immediately sealed;
When business license is suspended due to violation of the provisions of this Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder, the relevant authority shall notify the holder of the business license in writing the cause of the suspension and measures that need to take within reasonable period of time to rectify the shortcomings that led to the suspension.
Where the defects caused the suspension of the business license is rectified within the time prescribed under sub-article (3) of this Article, the suspension shall be lifted and the business license become valid.
The suspension of certificates of competence by relevant competence assuring institutions shall entail suspension of the corresponding business license without any precondition.
Cancellation of Business licenses
A relevant authority may cancel business license on the following grounds:
where the business person terminates his business activity by his own choice;
where it is verified that the business license was issued or renewed based on falsified document;
where the business person has utilized the business license for an unauthorized purpose;
where the business person fails to rectify defects that resulted in the suspension of his business license within the time given;
where the business person is declared bankrupt;
where the business person fails to have his license renewed under the provisions of this Proclamation;
where the commercial registration of the business person is cancelled under this Proclamation.
A business person who had terminated his business activities under paragraph (a) of sub-article (1) of this Article and returned his license within the statutory timeframe of renewal of licenses may obtain the license again at any time of his choice; provided, however, if he had failed to return the business license before expiry the period of renewal without to pay penalty, he shall only be allowed to obtain the business license again after a year has elapsed since expiry of the period of renewal without penalty.
The relevant authority, before deciding to cancel the business license pursuant to paragraph (b), (c) and (d) of sub-article (1) of this Article, shall notify the business person at his registered address by a letter to submit his objection in writing, if any; if the objection of a business person is not found to be satisfactory or the business person fails to submit his objection within 30 days of receipt of authority’s letter, his license shall be cancelled. Under such circumstances, he shall only be able to obtain the same business license after two years.
A business person who terminates his business activities but does not return the business license within the statutory period of renewal shall be allowed to obtain another business license for a commercial activity included in the same business category he had issued license and cancelled after one year of expiry of the period of renewal without penalty.
Where a business person whose business license is returned or cancelled is desirous of obtaining the same business license again he shall submit confirmation letter of settlement of tax liability for the period the returned or cancelled business license was valid.
Cancellation of certificates of competence by competence assuring institutions shall entail cancellation of the corresponding business license without any precondition.
Obtainment a Substitute Business license
A business person who has his business license lost or damaged may obtain a substitute business license when he meets with his application the requirements provided for in the regulations issued hereunder.
A business person whose license is damaged shall return such damaged when he applies for a substitute.
The relevant authority to which the application is made under sub-article (1) of this Article shall require presentation of evidence from appropriate body or police and upon payment of appropriate fee issue the substitute business license.
Issuance of Business license Upon Transfer of a Business
A business may be transferred to another person through sale, donation, inheritance or in a similar manner.
A business may be transferred pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article, provided that it is published on a newspaper having nationwide circulation by the expense of the business person and no objection is lodged against or any suspension order issued after one month of publication.
Tax clearance evidence from the tax collecting authority for the period the license had been in use shall be presented before the transfer of a business.
The relevant authority shall verify appropriate information, make sure the former business license is returned and issue the same business license to the business person to whom the business is transferred.
Where the relevant authority rejects the application made under this Article, shall notify the applicant in writing and the reasons thereof.
PART FIVE
Commercial Representative
Any person interested to engage as a commercial representative shall get registered on the commercial register of the Ministry before commencing his business and obtain a special certificate.
Any person desires to obtain a special certificate of commercial representative shall meet the requirements specified in the regulations issued hereunder and submit accompanied with his application.
Any person issued with the special certificate of commercial representative shall:
only be allowed to promote in Ethiopia the products and services of the company he represents;
conduct market survey and trade expansion that could help the company in investing in Ethiopia in the future;
promote Ethiopian export products in the country where the company he represents is stationed.
A commercial representative shall, on behalf of company he represents, not engage in supply goods or services to customers and clients or shall not enter contracts with the customers.
A commercial representative shall not work on behalf of other business persons, in any manner, other than the business person he represents.
Any person who has been issued a special certificate commercial representative shall meet the requirements specified in the regulations issued hereunder for renewal and have his certificate renewed.
The provisions of this Proclamation regarding issuance of substitute business license, renewal and cancellation, as appropriate, shall be applicable on a commercial representative.
Holding Company
Private limited companies intending to establish holding company shall do so in a manner that it would not disturb competition and shall be registered with the Ministry.
The holder company shall jointly and severally liable with its member companies to claims of third parties.
The holder company shall keep annual financial records and other information, including that of its member companies; and shall provide access to such documentation whenever requested by relevant authority.
The existing special certificate of registration shall be altered by notifying to the registering office when members are terminating or new members are joining a holding company.
A holder company shall submit detailed information about itself and the member companies and get registered upon fulfillment of the criteria determined in the regulations issued hereunder and obtain a special certificate of registration as a holding company.
The requirements for registration for holding companies shall be determined in regulations to be issued hereunder.
Boarder Business
Special boarder business license shall be issued by the Ministry or by offices delegated by the Ministry.
Special boarder business license shall be issued based on boarder trade accords or by unilateral decision pertaining to limited types of products only.
The procedures for issuance of special boarder business licenses shall be determined in regulations to be issued hereunder.
Foreign Trade Exhibition
The conditions to grant permission to hold foreign trade exhibitions shall be determined in regulations to be issued by the Ministry.
Franchise Registration
The registration of the franchise shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of the regulations issued hereunder.
The franchisee shall function on the same standard as the franchiser.
Clients shall obtain the same product and service from the franchisee as they would have gotten from the franchiser.
Sole Importer and Distributor
It shall be prohibited to operate as sole importer or distributor.
Notwithstanding sub-article (1) of this Article, based on the type of business and its national significance, the Council of Ministers may issue regulations on sectors of business in which sole importation or distribution may be allowed.
Duties of a Commercial Agent
Commercial Agent shall have the following duties:
promote the products of the company he represents;
promote products of our country in foreign markets;
participate in international tenders legally representing the company and follow up performances;
execute contracts on behalf of the company he represents.
Branch Offices of Foreign Chambers of Commerce
Foreign chamber of commerce may open its branch office in Ethiopia upon presenting certificate of legal personality issued in the country of registration, memorandum and article of association submitted there and their detailed activities in Ethiopia and upon approval getting registered with the Ministry. However; foreign investors who invest in Ethiopia and from an association, that association shall register by the authority that legally established to administrate investment at federal level.
The branch offices of foreign chambers of commerce shall be only entitled to engage in activities that are similar with that of the local chambers of commerce.
The branch offices of foreign chamber of commerce shall work in cooperation and jointly with local chambers of commerce and sectoral associations.
Managers of Business Organizations
No person shall be allowed to serve as manager of more than one business organization at the same time.
Certificate of Competence
The relevant sector offices shall issue directive on criteria for issuance of certificate of competence for types of business activities that need competence certificate as determined in the regulations issued pursuant to this Proclamation; and issue the certificate competence.
Government offices authorized to issue certificates of competence under the provisions of this Proclamation, regulation and directives issued hereunder and on other laws shall issue certificates of competence accordingly.
Where there is change in address or criteria corresponding to the certificate of competence issued, the previously issued certificate of competence shall be changed by new certificate of competence by indicating the new address or new criterion.
Certificate of competence shall be obtained as prerequisite to obtain a business license for business license determined by directive to have certificate of competence.
Without prejudice to the provision of sub- article (4) of this Article, the Ministry shall determine, in consultation with other sector offices, the business sectors which do not require certificate of competence as prerequisite for issuance of business license.
Sector offices shall consult concerned business persons engaged in the sector while determining criteria for certificates of competence.
Determination of Export and Import Goods
The Ministry may, for the national interest with the approval of the Council of Ministers, ban importation into or exportation from Ethiopia of certain goods and services.
The Ministry may, pursuant to regulations to be issued hereunder, give permit for persons who have no import or export licenses to import or export goods.
Supply and Control of Services and Spare Parts
A business person or an agent engaged in the import and sale of agricultural, industrial and construction machineries and mechanical appliances and motor vehicles, shall during the life span of such machinery, appliances and motor vehicles shall:
keep minimum stock of spare parts in its mercantile establishment at all times in the quantity of at least the minimum level set by the Ministry in consultation with appropriate government institutions, so long as the spare parts are not out of manufacture or the said spare parts are sufficiently available from other sources;
provide maintenance and repair services to buyers at all times and at appropriate prices.
A business person failing to comply with the provision of sub-article (1) of this Article shall be liable to administrative measures and criminal punishments.
Inspectors
Inspectors deployed by a relevant authority shall show their identification cards and special identification cards pertaining to their inspection duties issued by the authority as they inspect business establishment.
Inspectors shall only inspect business establishments at government working hours.
Without prejudice to the provision of sub- article (2) of this Article, inspectors that inspect business establishments during out of working hours shall possess a letter issued by the relevant authority for such purpos
Administrative Measures
The relevant authority shall take administrative measures provided in this Proclamation and the regulations issued hereunder against any person who violates the provisions of this Proclamation, regulation and directives issued hereunder.
Grievances against administrative measures
Any person aggrieved by the decisions of relevant authority on matters covered in this Proclamation, regulation and directives issued hereunder may submit his grievance to the head of the relevant authority within 10 days.
The head of relevant authority to which the petition is submitted shall notify his decision to aggrieved person in writing within five days; if the head of relevant authority fails to notified such decision within the specified time, the aggrieved person may lodge his petition to a court of law having jurisdiction.
Any person aggrieved by the decision given or if the head of relevant authority fails to notify pursuant to sub-article (2) of this Article may lodge appeal in connection with his grievance to regular court having jurisdiction only on issues of law.
Duty to Cooperate
Any person shall have duty to cooperate with relevant authority for the enforcement of the Commercial Code, the Proclamation, the regulations and directives issued hereunder.
Penalty
Any person who prepared or used false certificate of commercial registration, business license or special certificate of commercial representation shall, without prejudice to the confiscation of his merchandise, service provision and manufacturing equipments, be punished with fine from Birr 150,000 (one hundred fifty thousand) to Birr 300,000 (three hundred thousand) and with rigorous imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.
Any person engaged in business activity without having a valid license or any business person who has been engaged in a business out of the scope of his business license shall, without prejudice to the confiscation of merchandise, service provision and manufacturing equipments, be punished with fine from Birr 150,000 (one hundred fifty thousand) to Birr 300,000 (three hundred thousand) and with rigorous imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.
Any person or business person who undergoes or attempts to undergo commercial or trade name registration or obtains or attempts to obtain business license or special certificate of commercial representation upon presentation of false documents or uses or attempts to use such documentation for renewal of his business license or the special certificate of commercial representation shall, without prejudice to the confiscation of any benefits he may have earned, be punished with fine from Birr 60,000 (sixty thousand) to Birr 120,000 (one hundred twenty thousand) and with rigorous imprisonment from 7 (seven) years to 12 (twelve) years.
Any business person who have transferred his business license to a third party by way of sale, lease, donation or in a similar fashion shall be punished with fine from Birr 50,000 (fifty thousand) to Birr 100,000 (one hundred thousand) and with rigorous imprisonment from 5 (five) years to 10 (ten) years; if the business license has been transferred to a foreign national the fine shall be from Birr 200,000 (two hundred thousand) to Birr 300,000 (three hundred thousand) and the imprisonment shall be from 7 (seven) years to 15 (fifteen) years.
Any business person who has fails to notify change of his business address to the registering office within the period specified in the regulations issued hereunder shall be punished with fine from Birr 5,000 (five thousand) to Birr 10,000 (ten thousand) and with simple imprisonment not exceeding three months.
Any business person who fails to notify the registering office within 30 days changes that warrant amendments in the commercial registration pursuant to this Proclamation shall be punished with fine from Birr 5,000 (five thousand) to Birr 10,000 (ten thousand) and with simple imprisonment not exceeding three months.
Any business person who refuses to provide information or attempts to obstruct the duties of workers or supervisors sent by a relevant authority as part of activities for the enforcement of this Proclamation, regulations or directives issued hereunder shall be punished with fine from Birr 5,000 (five thousand) to Birr 10,000 (ten thousand) and with simple imprisonment not exceeding three months.
Any person who violates the other provisions of this Proclamation shall be punished with fine from Birr 10,000 (ten thousand) to Birr 30,000 (thirty thousand) and with simple imprisonment from one year to three years.
Transitory Provision
Notwithstanding Article 51(1) of this Proclamation, administrative issues pending before the coming into force of this Proclamation shall be resolved pursuant to Business Registration and Licensing Proclamation No. 686/2010 (as amended);
Inapplicable Laws
The Business Registration and Licensing Proclamation No. 686/2010 (as amended) is hereby repealed.
No, law or customary practice, inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall have effect with respect to matters governed by this Proclamation.
Power to Issue Regulations and Directives
The Council of Ministers may issue Regulations necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Ministry may issue directives necessary for the proper implementation of this proclamation and regulations issued under sub article (1) of this article.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force upon the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazeta.
Done at Addis Ababa 5th day of Augest, 2016
MULATU TESHOME (Dr.) PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
CONTENT
Proclamation No. 975/2016
Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Center of Excellence Project, Ratification Proclamation Page 9192
PROCLAMATION No. 975/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE LOAN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
WHEREAS, a Financing Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the International Development Association stipulating that the International Development Association provide to the Government of Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia a Credit in an amount Equivalent 17,400,000 SDR (Seventeen million and four hundred thousand) Special Drawing Rights for financing the Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence project was signed in Addis Ababa on the 15th day of June, 2016.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with of Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Ratification of the Agreement
The Financing Agreement Credit number 5794-ET signed in Addis Ababa on 15th June 2016 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and International Development Association is hereby ratified.
Power of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation is hereby empowered to undertake all acts necessary for the utilization of the Credit amount of equivalent 17,400,000 SDR (Seventeen million and four hundred thousand SDR ) Special Drawing Rights in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the financing Agreement.
EffectiveDate
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Addis Ababa, this 3rd day of August , 2016.
International Development Association Financing Agreement for the Small and Medium Enterprise Finance Project, Ratification Proclamation Page 9190
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE LOAN AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
WHEREAS, A Financing Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the International Development Association stipulating that the International Development Association provide to the Government of Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia a Credit in an amount not exceeding 144,800,000.00 SDR (one hundred forty four million and eight hundred thousand SDR) Special Drawing Rights for financing the Small and Medium Enterprise Finance Project, was singed in Addis Ababa on the 15th day of June, 2016.
WHEREAS, the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said Financing Agreement at its session held on 7th the day of July ,2016.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Financing Agreement Credit number 5793-ET signed in Addis Ababa on 15th June 2016 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and International Development Association is hereby ratified.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE FINANCING AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
WHEREAS, Additional Financing Agreement, between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and International Development Association stipulating that the International Development Association provide to the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia a Credit in an amount of 142,000,000 SDR (one hundred forty two million SDR) Special Drawing Rights for financing Electricity Network Reinforcement and Expansion Project was singed in Addis Ababa on the 15th day of June , 2016.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with of Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
ShortTitle
This Proclamation maybe cited as the “International Development Association Additional Financing Agreement for Electricity Network Reinforcement and Expansion Project Ratification Proclamation No. 973/2016.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Financing Agreement Credit number 5814-ET signed on 15th June 2016 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and International Development Association is hereby ratified.
Power of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation is hereby empowered to undertake all acts necessary for the utilization of the Credit amount of 142,000,000 SDR (One hundred forty two million SDR) Special Drawing Rights in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the financing Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
International Development Association Financing Agreement for Development Response to Displacement Impact project, Ratification Proclamation.........................................page 9181
A PROCLAMTION TO RATIFY THE FINANCING AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND INTERNTAIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIAATION
WHERE AS, additional financing Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the International Development Association provides to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia a Credit in an amount of 71,000,000 SDR (seventy one million) Special Drawing Rights for financing Development Response to Displacement Impact Project ,was signed in Addis Ababa on the 15th day of June ,2016,
WHERE AS, the House of the Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said agreement at its session held.
NOW THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This proclamation may be cited as “International Development Association Financing Agreement for Development Response to Displacement Impact project, Ratification Proclamation No. 972/2016 ".
Ratification of the Agreement
The Financing Agreement Credit Number 5832-ET signed on 15th June, 2016 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the International Development Association is hereby ratified.
Power of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO AMEND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF ETHIOPIAN FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the Federal Government Ethiopian Financial Administration Proclamation;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Amendment
The Federal Government of Ethiopia Financial Administration Proclamation No.648/2010 is hereby amended as follows:
Sub-articles(11),(12),(13),(14),(18)and (23)of Article 2 of the Proclamation are deleted and replaced by the following new sub-articles (11), (12), (13), (14), (18) and (23):
11/‘grace period means the thirty days period commencing on Hamle 1 of the Ethiopian Calendar during which invoices received for capital activities of a program, sub-program or project carried out in the previous fiscal year may be paid from the previous fiscal year’s capital budget of the program, sub-program or project;
supplementary budget means budget approved to collect additional revenue beyond the revenue already approved for activities of the Government to be carried out in a fiscal year or in situations where budget is required for an activity of the Government to which expenditure budget is not approved or where the expenditure budget approved for an activity is not sufficient;
‘Ministry’ or ‘Minister’ means the Ministry or the Minister of Finance and Economic Cooperation respectively;
‘other receivables’ means any amount owing to the Federal Government other than tax or interest or penalty on tax;
‘remission’ means the discharge or release from taxes, interests and penalties on taxes or other receivables;
‘budget transfer’ means an authorized transfer of budget from one public body to another public body, between and among programs, sub-programs, projects or main activities of recurrent expenditure administered by public bodies as well as from contingency budget;”
The following new sub-articles (32) and (33) are added after sub-article (31) of Article 2 of the Proclamation and the existing subsequent sub-article (32) is re-numbered as sub-article (34):
‘tax’ means, for the purpose of this Proclamation, any direct or indirect tax levied or to be levied by the law of the Federal Government;
The following new sub-article (2) is added following sub-article (1) of Article 5 of the Proclamation and the existing subsequent sub- articles are re-numbered as from sub-article (3) up to (12), respectively:
“2/decide on the organization of the financial administration departments within public bodies, in consultation with the concerned public body and the Ministry of Public Service and Human Resource Development;”
Sub-article (3)of Article 5 of the Proclamation (as re-numbered) is deleted and replaced by the following new sub-article (3):
“3/lead, coordinate and ensure harmonization of the financial relations between the Federal and Regional Governments;”
The following new sub-article (13)is added following sub-article (12)of Article 5 (as re- numbered) of the Proclamation:
“13/setup an independent audit committee either for each public body separately or for group of public bodies, as the context requires, which supports the functions of internal audits.”
Paragraph (b) of sub-article (2)of Article 6 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new paragraph (b):
“b) ensuring that the internal audits are carried out independently, efficiently, effectively and economically;”
The following new sub-article (1) is added under Article 7 of the Proclamation and the existing subsequent sub-articles (1) and (2) are re-numbered as sub-article (2) and (3), respectively:
“1/The head and professional staffs of internal audits of public bodies shall be accountable to the Minister. The details shall be determined by a directive to be issued by the Ministry.”
The following new sub-articles (4) and (5) are added following sub-article (3) of Article 10 of the Proclamation:
“4/The Minister may allow a public body to expend internally collected revenue taking into consideration the special nature of the work of the public body; the details of which shall be provided by the directive of the Ministry.
Sub-articles (2) and (3) of Article 13 of the Proclamation are deleted and replaced by the following new sub-articles (2), (3) and (4):
Notwithstanding to the provision of sub-article (2) of this Article, the Minister may for good cause remit from an interest paid or to be paid on tax.
The Minister may for good cause remit any tax or other receivable up to an amount determined by a Regulation issued by the Council of Ministers.”
Sub-articles(1) and (2) of Article 14 of the Proclamation are deleted and replaced by the following new sub-articles (1) and (2):
“1/ A remission of the types provided under Article 13 of this Proclamation may be total or partial or conditional or unconditional and may be granted:
before, after or pending any suit for the recovery of the tax, interest and penalty on tax or other receivable in respect of which the remission is granted;
before, or after any payment of the tax, interest and penalty on tax or other receivable has been made or enforced by process or execution;
with respect to a tax or other receivable in any particular case or class of cases and before the liability for it arises.
Where a remission granted in accordance with this Article is on tax paid, the amount of tax remitted shall be set off against the tax payable by the payer in future tax years.”
The following new sub-article (3) is added following sub-article  of Article  of the Proclamation:
Gender issues shall be taken into consideration during public budget preparation.”
Sub-article (1)of Article 24 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new sub- article (1):
transfer budget between items of expenditure within a program or sub-program;
transfer the budget approved for a program, sub program or project of the public body to finance pending obligations pertaining to capital expenditure of a program, sub program or project approved in previous years for which no budget is allocated in the current fiscal year;
transfer budget to a program created where programs under a public body merge or split.”
Article 25 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 25:
Budget Transfers between Public Bodies “The Minister may authorize the transfer of budget from one public body to another public body under the following conditions:
where it is necessary to transfer unspent budget approved for one public body for that fiscal year to meet shortfall in another public body’s budget, provided that such additional budget is needed for a previously approved program, sub- program, project or main activities of recurrent expenditure.
where a budget is requested to finance pending obligations of a program, sub- program, project or main activities of recurrent expenditures approved in previous years for which no budget is allocated in the current fiscal year.
where it is necessary to transfer a budget from one public body to the other due to merge or split of programs of a public body.”
Article 28 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 28:
The amount disbursed pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall be deducted from the annual budget to be approved by the House of peoples’ Representatives.”
Grace Period for Capital Budget
Payments of invoices in connection with capital expenditure of a program, sub-program or project carried out in a fiscal year may be made in the 30 days period following the end of the fiscal year on the account of the capital budget of the program, sub-program or project of the preceding fiscal year.”
The following new Article 41 is added following Article 40 of the Proclamation and the existing subsequent Articles from 41 up to Article 79 are re- numbered as Article 42 up to 80, respectively:
Debt Management Strategy
Debt management strategies shall be developed by the Minister based on the overall objective of borrowing appropriate amounts at appropriate times and in a way that balance minimization of cost with stability and taking into consideration the level of debt and the ability to repay.
Borrowing shall take into account non- interest costs, such as the different marketing costs which are incidental to borrowing. These include the various commissions, fees and other administrative costs of registers and fiscal agents.
Debt shall be managed in such a manner as to prevent any negative impacts on the general economy, such as creating instability in monetary policy or balance of payments.
Short-term borrowing shall be based upon reliable current information on the government’s balance in the banking system, exchange market activity, and budget estimates of fiscal inflows and outflows.”
Article 48 of the Proclamation (as re-numbered) is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 48:
Set-Off
Without prejudice to the relevant provisions of the tax laws, Public Money due to the Federal Government shall not be set-off against an amount claimed from the Government.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article (1) of this Article, the Minister may set-off the debt owed by creditors to the Government against confirmed debt owed by the Government to such creditors.
The amount set-off in accordance with sub- article of this Article shall be shown in the financial report of the government.”
Sub-article (1) of Article 50 (as re-numbered) of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new sub-article (1):
The Minister may guarantee the performance of an obligation provided that such guarantee is in compliance with the Regulation to be issued by the Council of Ministers.”
Article 57 of the Proclamation (as re-numbered) is deleted and replaced by the following new Article 57:
The following new Articles 71,72 and 73 are added following Article 70 of the Proclamation(as re- numbered); and the existing subsequent Articles are again re-numbered as Articles 74 to 83, respectively:
71. Co-ordination of Activities
There shall be co-ordination of activities among the concerned public bodies to make more effective the financial administration system set by this Proclamation, the Regulation and Directives issued hereunder.”
Administrative Penalties
Where any person appointed to or employed by a public body, who should have but failed to submit or ensure the submission of plans or financial report to the Ministry or external auditor, failed to take corrective measures based on audit findings of internal or external audit or ensure that such measures are taken, in accordance with this Proclamation, the Regulation and Directives issued hereunder, as the case maybe, breaches duty and shall be liable to administrative penalty of Birr 5,000 to 10,000.
The administrative penalty to be imposed pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall be for each instance of breach of duty; provided, however, if a person has been penalized for failing to discharge his duty for more than three times the Minister shall request the Prime Minister Office or Ministry of Public Service and Human Resource Development, as the case maybe, to dismiss such person.
The Minister shall impose and cause the enforcement of the administrative penalties provided for under sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article and issue a directive for proper implementation thereof.
Using Electronic Methods
To enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the public finance administration system introduced by this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued hereunder, the Minister shall promote the extensive use of electronic methods.”
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Framework Agreement on Cooperation in the Military Field between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and Government of the Republic of Turkey Ratification Proclamation.........................................page 9185
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COOPERATION IN THE MILITARY FIELD BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
WHEREAS, the framework Agreement on Cooperation in the Military field between the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and Government of the Democratic Republic of Turkey has been signed in Ankara, on the 25th day of April, 2006;
WHEREAS, the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said agreement at its session held on the-7th day of July 2016;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Framework Agreement on Cooperation in the Military Field between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Turkey Ratification Proclamation No. 969/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Framework Agreement on Cooperation in the Military Defense Field signed in Ankara, on the 25th day of April, 2006 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and Government of the Republic of Turkey is hereby ratified.
Implementing Organ
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the fields of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries Ratification Proclamation..............................................Page 9169
WHEREAS, the Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the Fields of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries has been signed in Addis Ababa on the 18th day of January, 2012;
WHEREAS, the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said Agreement at its session held on 30th the day of June ,2016;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with of Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Implementing Organ
The Ministry of Livestock and fishery is hereby empowered to implement the Agreement in Cooperation With other relevant authority.
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar on Conducting Bilateral Consultations Ratification Proclamation...................Page 9165
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDINGBETWEEN THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE MINISTRY OFFOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE STATE OF QATAR ONCONDUCTING BILATERAL CONSULTATIONS
WHEREAS,the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar on Conducting Bilateral Consultations was signed in Addis Ababa on the 5th day of November, 2012;
WHEREAS,the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said Memorandum of Understanding at its session held on the 30th day ofJune 2016;
NOW, THEREFORE,in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar on Conducting Bilateral Consultations Ratification Proclamation No.967/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs the State of Qatar on Conducting Bilateral Consultations signed in Addis Ababa on the 5th day of November, 2012, is hereby ratified.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is hereby empowered to implement this Memorandum of Understanding.
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Republic of Kenya Cooperate in the Area of Civil/Public Service Ratification Proclamation .................page 9157
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA TO COOPERATE IN THE AREA OF CIVIL/ PUBLIC SERVICE
WHEREAS, the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of Republic of Kenya to Cooperate in the Area of Civil/Public Service was signed in Addis Ababa on the 21st day of November ,2012;
WHEREAS, the House of People’s Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified this Agreement at its Ordinary session held on 30th day of 2016.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
RatificationoftheMemorandumofUnderstanding
The Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Republic of Kenya to Cooperate in the Area of Civil/Public Service, signed on the 21st day of November ,2012, is hereby ratified.
ImplementingOrgans
The Ministry of Public Service and Human Resource Management is hereby empowered to implement the Memorandum of Understanding.
EffectiveDate
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
CONTENTS
PROCLAMATION No.958/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE
COMPUTER CRIME WHEREAS, information and communication technology plays a vital role in the economic, social and political development of the country;
WHEREAS, unless appropriate protection and security measures are taken, the utilization of information communication technology is vulnerable to various computer crimes and other security threats that can impede the overall development of the country and endanger individual rights;
WHEREAS, the existing laws are not adequately tuned with the technological changes and are not sufficient to prevent, control, investigate and prosecute the suspects of computer crimes;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to incorporate new legal mechanisms and procedures in order to prevent, control, investigate and prosecute computer crimes and facilitate the collection of electronic evidences;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Computer Crime Proclamation No.958/2016”.
Definitions
In this Proclamation unless the context otherwise requires:
“Computer crime” means
A crime committed against a computer, computer system, computer data or computer network;
A conventional crime committed by means of a computer, computer system, computer data or computer network; or
Illegal computer content data disseminated through a computer, computer system, or computer network;
“data processing service” means the service of reception, storage, processing, emission, routing or transmission of data by means of computer system and includes networking services;
“computer or computer system” means any software and the microchips technology based data processing, storage, analysis, dissemination and communication device or any device that is capable of performing logical, arithmetic or routing function and includes accessories of that device;
“computer data” means any content data, traffic data, computer program, or any other subscriber information in a form suitable for processing by means of a computer system;
“computer program” means a set of instructions or commands expressed in words, codesor schemes which are capable of causing a computer system to perform or achieve a particular task or result;
“traffic data” means any computer generated data relating to a chain of communication by means of a computer system indicating the communication’s origin, destination, route, time, date, duration, size or types of underlying service;
“content data” means any computer data found in the form of audio, video, picture, arithmetic formula or any other form that conveys the essence, substance, meaning or purpose of a stored or transmitted
“network” means the interconnection of two or more computer systems by which data processing service can be provided or received;
“computer data security” means the protection of a computer data from deleting, changing, and accessing by unauthorized person, compromising its confidentiality or any other damage;
“access” means to communicate with, to enter in, store in, store data in, retrieve, or obtain data from, to view, to receive, move or copy data from a computer system, or otherwise make use of any data processing service thereof;
“service provider” means a person who provides technical data processing or communication service or alternative infrastructure to users by means of computer system;
“Public prosecutor” means lawyer appointed by the Attorney General and administered by public prosecutors administration regulation and included the Attorney General and the deputy attorney generals;
“investigatory organ” mean a person legally invested with the power of investigation;
“regional state” means any state referred to in Article 47(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and for the purpose this Proclamation it includes Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa city administrations;
“police” mean Federal Police or Regional State Police to whom the power of the Federal Police is delegated;
“Agency” mean Information Network Security Agency;
“person” means a physical or juridical person;
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
PART TWO
COMPUTER CRIMES SECTION ONE CRIMES AGAINST COMPUTER SYSTEM AND COMPUTER DATA
Illegal Access
Whosoever, without authorization or in excess of authorization, intentionally secures access to the whole or any part of computer system, computer data or network shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years or fine from Birr 30,000 to 50, 000 or both.
Where the crime stipulated under sub-article (1) of this Article is committed against:
a computer system, computer data or network that is exclusively destined for the use of a legal person, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from three years to five years and fine from Birr 30,000 to 50,000;
a critical infrastructure, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from five years to ten years and fine from Birr 50,000 to 100,000.
Illegal Interception
Whosoever, without authorization or in excess of authorization, intentionally intercepts non-public computer data or data processing service shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 50,000.
Where the crime stipulated under sub-article (1) of this Article is committed against:
a computer data or data processing service that is exclusively destined for the use of a legal person, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from five years to ten years and fine from Birr 50,000 to 100,000.
a critical infrastructure, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years and fine from Birr 100,000 to 200,000.
Interference with Computer System
Whosoever, without authorization or in excess of authorization, intentionally hinders,impairs, interrupts or disrupts the proper functioning of the whole or any part of computer system by inputting, transmitting, deleting or altering computer data shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment from three years to five years and fine not exceeding Birr 50,000.
where the crime stipulated under sub-article (1) of this Article is committed against:
a critical infrastructure, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from ten years to fifteen years and fine from Birr 100,000 to 200,000 or, in serious case, rigorous imprisonment from fifteen years to twentey years and fine from Birr 200,000 to 500,000.
Causing Damage to Computer Data
Whosoever, without authorization or in excess of authorization, intentionally alters, deletes, suppresses a computer data, renders it meaningless, useless or inaccessible to authorized users shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding three years and fine not exceeding Birr 30,000.
Where the crime stipulated under sub- article (1) of this Article is committed against:
a computer data that is exclusively destined for the use of a legal person, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from three years to five years and fine from Birr 30,000 to 50,000;
a critical infrastructure, the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from five years to ten years and fine from Birr 50,000 to 100,000.
Criminal Acts Related to Usage of Computer Devices and Data
Whosoever, knowing that it can cause
damage to computer system, computer data or network, intentionally transmits any computer program exclusively designed or adapted for this purpose shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years or fine not exceeding Birr 30,000.
Whosoever, knowing that it is to be used for the commission of unlawful act specified under Articles 3 to 6 of this Proclamation, intentionally imports, produces, offers for sale, distributes or makes available any computer device or computer program designed or adapted exclusively for the purpose of committing such crimes shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 50,000.
Whosoever possesses any computer devices or data specified under sub-article (1) or (2) of this Article with the intention to further the commission of any of the crimes specified under Articles 3 to 6 of this Proclamation shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years or fine from Birr 5,000 to 30, 000.
Whosoever, without authorization or in excess of authorization, intentionally discloses or transfers any computer program, secret code, key, password or any other similar data for gaining access to a computer system, computer data or network shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years or in serious cases with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 50,000.
excess of authorization, intentionally discloses or transfers any computer program, secret code, key, password or any other similar data for gaining access to a computer system, computer data or network shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years or in serious cases with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 50,000.
Where the crime stipulated under sub- article (4) of this Article is committed negligently, the punishment shall be simple imprisonment not exceeding one year and fine not exceeding Birr 10,000.
Aggravated Cases
Where the crime stipulated under Article 3 to 6 of this Proclamation is committed:
against a computer data or a computer system or network which is designated as top secrete by the concerned body for military interest or international relation, or
while the country is at a state of emergency or threat,the punishment shall be rigorous imprisonment from fifteen years to twenty five years.
SECTION TWO
COMPUTER RELATED FORGERY, FRAUD AND THEFT
Computer Related Forgery
Whosoever falsifies a computer data, makes false computer data or makes use of such data to injure the rights or interests of another or to procure for himself or for another person any undue right or advantage shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years and fine not exceeding Birr 30,000 or in a serious cases with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding ten years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 100,000.
Computer Related Fraud
Whosoever fraudulently causes a person to act in a manner prejudicial to his rights or those of third person by distributing misleading computer data, misrepresenting his status, concealing facts which he had a duty to reveal or taking advantage of the person’s erroneous beliefs, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine not exceeding Birr 50,000.
Whosoever, with fraudulent intent of procuring any benefit for himself or for another person, causes economic loss to another person by any change, deletion or any other damage of computer data shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 50,000 or in serious cases with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding ten years and fine from Birr 10,000 to 100,000.
Electronic Identity Theft
Whosoever, with intent to commit criminal act specified under Article 10 of this Proclamation or for any other purpose produces, obtains, sales, possesses or transfers any data identifying electronic identity of another person without authorization of that person shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years or fine not exceeding Birr 50,000.
SECTION THREE
ILLEGAL CONTENT DATA
Obscene or Indecent Crimes Committed Against Minors
Whosoever intentionally produces, transmits, sales, distributes, makes available or possesses without authorization any picture, poster, video or image through a computer system that depicts:
a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct; or
a person appearing to be a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct; shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment from three years to ten years.
Whosoever entices or solicits a minor for sexual explicit conduct by transmitting or sending erotic speeches, pictures, text messages or videos through computer system shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment from five years to ten years.
Crimes against Liberty and Reputation of Persons
Whosoever intentionally:
intimidates or threatens another person or
his families with serious danger or injury by disseminating any writing, video, audio or any other image through a computer systems shall be punishable, with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years or in a serious cases with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years.
causes fear, threat or psychological strain on another person by sending or by repeatedly transmitting information about the victim or his families through computer system or by keeping the victim’s computer communication under surveillance shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years or in serious case with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding ten years.
disseminates any writing, video, audio or any other image through a computer system that is defamatory to the honor or reputation of another person shall be punishable, upon complaint, with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years or fine not exceeding Birr 30,000or both.
Crimes against Public Security
Dissemination of Advertisement through computer system
Whosoever, with intent to advertise or sell any product or service, disseminates advertisement messages through e-mail or related computer address without prior consent from the recipient shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years and fine not exceeding Birr 30,000. or, in serious case, with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine not exceeding Birr 50,000.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub- article (1) of this Article, dissemination of commercial advertisement through email account shall not be punishable provided that:
the advertisement contains valid identity and address of the sender, and valid and simple way for the recipient to reject or unsubscribe receipt of further advertisement from the same source.
Criminal Liability of Service Providers
A service provider shall be criminally liable in accordance with Articles 12 to 14, of this Proclamation for any illegal computer content data disseminated through its computer systems by third parties, if it has:
directly involved in the dissemination or edition of the contentdata;
upon obtaining actual knowledge that the content data is illegal, failed to take any measure to remove or to disable access to the content  data; or
failed to take appropriate measure to remove or to disable access to the content data upon obtaining notice from competent administrative authorities.
SECTION FOUR
OTHER OFFENCES
Failure to Cooperate and Hindrance of Investigation
Whosoever:
fails to comply with the obligations provided for under of Article 24(2) Article 25(6), Article 30 (2), Article 31(2) or Article 32 (4) of this Proclamation shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding one year or fine not exceeding Birr 10,000;
intentionally hinders the investigation process of computer crimes conducted pursuant to this Proclamation shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years and fine not exceeding Birr 50,000.
the penalty shall be fine from Birr 50,000 to 500,000 for a crime punishable with fine;
when the penalty provided for is imprisonment, the penalty shall be:
a fine not exceeding 50,000 Birr for a crime punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding three years,
a fine not exceeding 100,000 Birr for a crime punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years,
a fine not exceeding 150,000 Birr for a crime punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding five years,
a fine not exceeding 200,000 Birr for a crime punishable with rigorous imprisonment not exceeding ten years,
a fine of up to the general maximum laid down in sub-article (1) of this Article for a crime punishable with igorous imprisonment exceeding ten years.
Where fine is expressly provided as punishment for a crime, it shall be five fold.
PART THREE
PREVENTIVE AND INVESTIGATIVE MEASURES
Principle
The prevention, investigation and evidence procedures provided in this Part and Part Four of this Proclamation shall be implemented and applied in a manner that ensure protection for human and democratic rights guaranteed under the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and all international agreements ratified by the country.
General
Computer crime prevention and investigation shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Without prejudice the provisions of this Part, for issues not clearly covered in this law,the provisions of the Criminal Code and other relevant laws shall be applicable to computer crimes.
Investigative Power
The public prosecutor and police shall have joint power to investigate criminal acts provided for in this Proclamation. And the public prosecutor shall lead the investigation process.
Where requested to support the investigation process, the Agency shall provide technical support, conduct analysis on collected information, and provide evidences if necessary.
Retention of Computer Data
Without prejudice to any provision stipulated in other laws, any service provider shall retain the computer traffic data disseminated through its computer systems or traffic data relating to data processing or communication service for one year.
The data shall be kept in secret unless the court orders for disclosure.
Real-time Collection of Computer Data Without prejudice special provisions stipulated under other laws,
to prevent computer crimes and collect evidence related information, the investigatory organ may, request court warrant to intercept in real-time or conduct surveillance, on computer data, data processing service, or internet and other related communications of suspects, and the court shall decide and determine a relevant organ that could execute interception or surveillance as necessary.
Sub-article (1) of this Article shall only be applicable when there is no other means readily available for collecting such data and this is approved and decided by the Attorney General.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub- article (1) and (2) of this Article, the Attorney General may give permission to the investigatory organ to conduct interception or surveillance without court warrant where there are reasonable grounds and urgent cases to believe that a computer crime that can damage critical infrastructure is or to be committed.
The Attorney General shall present the reasons for interception or surveillance without court warrant under sub-article (3) of this Article to the President of the Federal High Court within 48 hours, and the president shall give appropriate order immediately.
Any irrelevant information collected pursuant to sub-articles (1) to (4) of this Article shall be destroyed immediately upon the decision of the Attorney General.
Any service provider shall cooperate when requested to carry on activities specified under sub-articles (1) and (3) of this Article.
Without prejudice sub-article (5) of this Article, any information collected in accordance with this Article shall be kept confidential.
Protection of Computer, Computer System or Infrastructure from Danger
Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that a computer crimeis to be committed and it is necessary to prevent and control the crime, provide early warning to citizens, to minimize the risks or for effectiveness of the investigation, the Agency, in collaboration with the investigatory organ, and upon court warrant, may conduct sudden searches, conduct digital forensic investigation, provide appropriate security equipment or take other similar measures on computers, computer systems or infrastructures that are suspected to be attacked or deemed to be the sources of attack.
For the implementation of the provision of sub-article (1) of this Article,as may be necessary and upon request, concerned organs shall have duty to cooperate.
Duty to Report
Any service provider or government organ who has knowledge of the commission of the crimes stipulated in this Proclamation or dissemination of any illegal content data by third parties through the computer system it administers shall immediately notify the Agency, accordingly report to the police about the crime and take appropriate measures.
The Agency may issue a directive as to the form and procedures of reporting.
Arrest and Detention
With out prejudice the provisions stipulated in special laws,
where there are reasonable grounds to believe that a computer crime is committed or under commission, police may arrest suspects in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Where the investigation on the person arrested pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article is not completed, remand may be granted in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code; provided, however, the overall remand period may not exceed four months.
PART FOUR
EVIDENTIARY AND PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS
General
Computer crime proceedings and collection of evidence shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Without prejudice to the provisions of this Part, the General Part provisions of the Criminal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code shall be applicable to computer Crimes.
Order for Preservation of Computer Data
Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that a computer data required for computer crime investigation is vulnerable to loss or modification, the investigatory organ may order, in writing, a person to preserve the specified data under his control or possession.
The person ordered under sub-article (1) of this Article shall immediately take necessary measures to secure the specified computer data and preserve it for three months and keep such order confidential.
The investigatory organ may order only a one-time extension for another three months up on the expiry of the period stipulated under sub-article (2) of this Article.
Order for Obtaining of Computer Data
Where a computer data under any person’s possession or control is reasonably required for purposes of a computer crime investigation, the investigatory organ may apply to the court to obtain or gain access to that computer data.
If the court is satisfied, it may, without requiring the appearance of the person concerned, order the person who is in possession or control of the specified computer data, to produce it to the investigatory organ or give access to same.
Access, Search and Seizure
Where it is necessary for computer crime investigation, the investigatory organ may,upon getting court warrant, search or access physically or virtually any computer system, network or computer data.
Where the investigatory organ reasonably believes that the computer data sought is stored in another computer system and can be obtained by same computer system, the search or access may be extended to that other computer system without requesting separate search warrant.
In the execution of search under sub- article (1) or (2) of this Article, the investigatory organ may:
seize any computer system or computer data;
make and retain a copy or photograph data obtained through search;
maintain the integrity of the relevant stored data by using any technology;
render inaccessible the stored data from the computer system on which search is conducted; or
recoverdeleteddata.
In the execution of search, the investigatory organ may order any person who has knowledge in the course of his duty about the functioning of the computer system or network or measures applied to protect the data therein to provide the necessary information or computer data that can facilitate the search or access.
Where the investigatory organ finds the functioning of a computer system or computer data is in violation of the provisions this Proclamation or other relevant laws, it may request the court to order for such computer data or computer system to be rendered inaccessible or restricted or blocked. The court shall give the appropriate order within 48 hours after the request is presented.
Where the search process on juridical person requires the presence of the manager or his agent, the investigatory organ shall take appropriate measure to do so.
Admissibility of Evidences
Any document or a certified copy of the document or a certified printout of any electronic record relating to computer data seized in accordance with this Proclamation may be produced as evidence during court proceedings and shall be admissible.
Original Electronic Document
Any electronic record which is obtained upon proof of the authenticity of the electronic records system or by which the data was recorded or stored shall be presumed original electronic document.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of this Article, the electronic printout which is obtained using a secured system under regular operation shall be considered original electronic evidence.
Where the authenticity of an electronic record is not proved, any evidence that shows the following fact shall be admissible.
the computer system was operating properly or the fact of its not operating properly did not affect the integrity of the electronic record; or
it is established that the electronic record was recorded or stored by a party to the proceedings who is adverse in interest to the other litigant party seeking to introduce it; or
it is established that the electronic record was recorded or stored in the usual and ordinary course of business by a person who is not a party to the proceedings and who did not record or store it under the control of the party seeking to introduce the record.
Presumption of Courts
When assessing the admissibility of evidence in accordance with this Proclamation, the court may have regard to the procedure, standard or manner in which a similar computer system is functioning.
Burden of proof
Public prosecutor has the burden of proofing material facts regarding the cases brought to the court in accordance with the standards stipulated in law.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub- article (1) of this Article, upon proof of basic facts of the case by the public prosecutor if the court believes necessary to shift the burden of proofing to the accused, the court may do so.
PART FIVE
INSTITUTIONS THAT FOLLOW UP CASES OF COMPUTER CRIME 38.Public Prosecutor and Police Following up
Cases of Computer Crime
A Public prosecutor or investigative officer empowered to follows up computer crime cases in accordance with the powers conferred by law shall have the responsibility to enforce and cause to enforce the provisions of this Proclamation.
The Attorney General and Police empowered in this Proclamation may organize separate specialized task units when necessary to follow up computer crimes.
Duty of the Agency
The Agency shall have duty to establish online computer crimes investigation system and provide other neccessary investigation technologies
Jurisdiction
The Federal High Court shall have first instance jurisdiction over computer crime stipulated under this Proclamation.
The judicial jurisdictions stipulated under Article 13 and Article 17 (1) (b) of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Criminal Code shall include computer crimes.
Establishment of Executing Task Force
The Federal High Court shall have first instance jurisdiction over computer crime stipulated under this Proclamation.
The judicial jurisdictions stipulated under Article 13 and Article 17 (1) (b) of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Criminal Code shall include computer crimes.
The Task Force shall,for the prevention and control computer crimes, develop national discussion forum, discuss on occasional dangers materialized and provide recommendation thereof, design short and long term plans to be performed by the respective institutionsas well as put in place synchronized system by coordinating various relevant organs.
PART SIX
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
International Cooperation
The Federal Attorney General shall cooperate or enter in to an agreement with the competent authority of another country in matters concerning computer crime, including the exchange of information, joint investigations, and extradition and other assistances in accordance with this Proclamation and agreements to which Ethiopia is a party and within the limits of the country’s legal system.
For the effective implementation of this Proclamation, the investigatory organ may exchange information with institutions of another country having similar mission, perform joint cooperation in other forms or sign agreement with institutions of another country, when necessary.
Any information or evidence obtained pursuant to this Article shall apply for the purpose of prevention or investigation of computer crimes.
Suspension, Confiscation or Blockage of Computer System or Asset
The court, in sentencing an offender under this Proclamation, may give additional order for the suspension, confiscation or removal of any computer system, data or device or blockage of data processing service used in the perpetration of the offence.
The property or proceedings of the accused that he directly acquired through the computer crime for which he has been convicted shall be confiscateif the accused is convicted through a final decision;
Other relevant laws shall be applicable for the implementation of this article.
Power to Issue Regulationand Directive
The Council of Ministers may issue regulations necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Agency may issue directives necessary for the effective implementation of this Proclamation.
Repeal and Inapplicable Laws
Articles 706 to 711 of the Criminal Code of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and article 5 of Telecom Fraud Offence proclamation no. 761/2012 are hereby repealed.
No proclamation, regulations, directives or practices shall, in so far as they are inconsistent with this Proclamation, be applicable with respect to matters provided for by this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of its publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Proclamation No. 957/2016
Ethiopian Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation Proclamation............................................................page 9132
PROCLAMATION NO. 957/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE ETHIOPIAN AIR CRAFT ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT INVESTIGATION
WHEREAS, it is necessary to establish strong system that could prevent the aircraft accidents by an independent investigation and analyze the causes and contributing factors, and provide prompt safety recommendations based on its findings so as to sustain the country’s ever increasing air transport service in a safe and secure manner;
WHEREAS, it is a duty of the country to fulfill its international commitments particularly to establish aircraft accident and serious incident investigation organ in accordance with Annex 13 of the 1944 Chicago Convention,;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to proclaim the procedures of execution and implementation of aircraft accident and serious incident investigation by law;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
PART ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Ethiopian Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation Proclamation No. 957/2016”.
Definition
In this Proclamation unless the context requires otherwise:
“aircraft” means any machine that can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air other than the reactions of the air against the earth's surface;
“accident” means an occurrence associated with the operation of an air craft which takes place between the times any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all persons have disembarked, in which:
a person is fatally or seriously injured as a result of:
being in the aircraft, or
direct contact any part of the aircraft, including parts which have become detached from the air craft, or
the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure which:
adversely affects the structural strength, performance or flight characteristics of the aircraft, and
would normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component, except for engine failure or damage, when the damage is limited to the engine, its cowlings or accessories: or for damage limited to propellers, wing tips, antennas, tires, brakes, fairings, small dents or puncture holes in the aircraft skin: or
the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible;
Serious injury means an injury which is sustained by a person in an accident and which requires hospitalization for more than 48 hours, results in a fracture of any bone,; involves injury to any internal organ; involves, or any burns affecting more than 5 per cent of the body surface; or involves verified exposure to infectious substances or injurious radiation.
“serious incident” means an incident involving circumstances indicating that there was a high probability of an accident and associated with the operation of an aircraft which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all such persons have disembarked;
“incident” means an occurrence, other than an accident, or serious incident, associated with the operation of an aircraft, which affects or could affect the safety of operations;
“occurrence” means a condition associated with the operation of an aircraft, if the safety of the aircraft left unattended could induce an accident, serious incident or incident;
“causes” means actions, omissions, events, conditions, or a combination thereof, which lead to the accident, serious incident or incident;
“contributing factors” means actions, omissions, events, conditions, factors or a combination thereof, which, if eliminated, avoided or absent, would have prevented or reduced the probability of the accident or incident occurring, or would have mitigated the severity of the adverse consequences of the accident or incident;
“accident investigation” means a process conducted for the purpose of accident prevention which includes the gathering and analysis of information, the drawing of conclusions, including the determination of causes and, when appropriate, the making of safety recommendations;
“investigator” means a professional person delegated by the accident investigation bureau to conduct investigation;
“accredited representative” means a person designatedbyEthiopiatoanother state where the accident occurred outside Ethiopia by an aircraft registered in Ethiopia or designated by another state when foreign registered aircraft accident occurred in Ethiopia, on the basis of his qualifications, for the purpose of participating in an investigation conducted
“adviser” means a person appointed on the basis of his qualifications, for the purpose of assisting accredited representative in an investigation;
“observer” means a representative of a concerned body who has interest in the accident and authorized by the bureau to attend the investigation as an observer;
“concerned body” means Ministry, Authority, Governmental or None Governmental Organization that has direct interest in the aircraft accident or serious incident;
“air traffic control unit” means a unit that controls Area Control Centre, Approach Control Office, or Aerodrome Control Tower;
“operator” means a person engaged in or offering to engage in an aircraft operation;
“pilot-in-command” means the pilot responsible for the operation and safety of the aircraft during flight time;
“crew member” means a person assigned by an operator to duty on an aircraft during flight time;
“Convention” means the Convention on International Civil Aviation, signed at Chicago on 7 December 1944, and its Annexes;
“Annex 13” means the Annex to the Convention on International Civil Aviation Organization that contains the International Standards and Recommended Practices related to Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation;
“document” means any correspondence, memorandum, book, plan, map, drawing, diagram, pictorial or graphic, film, sound recording, video tape, electronic files and data, and any copy thereof;
“statement” means the whole or any part of an oral, written or recorded statement relating to an accident or serious incident given to the bureau;
“flight recorder” means any type of recorder installed in the aircraft for the purpose of complementing accident or serious incident investigation;
“draft final report” means draft investigation report that is sent in confidence by the Minister to accredited representatives and any other body in the opinion of the Bureau have a direct interest in the findings of the investigation to receive their comments on the report;
“safety recommendation” means recommendation of the Bureau based on investigation information for the purpose of preventing future accidents or serious incidents;
“State” means a member State of the International Civil Aviation Organization;
“State of design” means the State having jurisdiction over the organization responsible for the type design;
“State of manufacture’’ means the State having jurisdiction over the organization responsible for the final assembly of the aircraft;
“State of occurrence” means the State in the territory of which an accident or serious incident occurs;
“State of the operator” means the State in which the operator’s principal place of business is located or, the operator’s permanent residence;
“State of registry” means the State on whose register the aircraft is entered;
“Bureau” means the Ethiopian Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau organized in accordance with Article 5 of this Proclamation;
“Bureau Head” means the head of the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau who is responsible for the operation and overall conduct of aircraft accident investigation;
“Ministry or Minister ” means the Ministry of Transport or Transport Minister respectively;
“person” means any natural or juridical person;
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Scope of Application
The provisions of this Proclamation shall apply in respect of:
civil aircraft registered in the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, wherever they may be, subject to the law of any foreign State in which they may be operating;
civil airports in the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, including all technical activities such as air traffic control and the installation, operation and maintenance of communication equipment, navigation aids and surveillance meteorology.
Objective of the Proclamation
The objectives of this Proclamation shall be the following:
to conduct independent and impartial investigation on aircraft accident and serious incident occurrences;
identify safety deficiencies as evidenced by aviation occurrence investigation;
to investigate aircraft accident or serious incident with the objective to prevent accidents and not apportioning blame or liability; and
provide safety recommendations designed to eliminate or reduce any such safety deficiencies.
PART TWO
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION BUREAU
Establishment
The Ethiopian Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (herein after called the “Bureau”) is here by established under the Ministry.
Organization of the Bureau
The Bureau shall have:
the Head of the Bureau to be appointed by the Minister;
the necessary professional staffs.
Powers and Duties of the Bureau
The Bureau shall have the following powers and duties to execute its objectives:
appoint investigator in charge, institute and perform investigations, follow up the investigation and its report on aircraft accidents and serious incidents;
recommend to the Minister for appointment of accredited representative, advisor, observers and participants for the proper achievements of its objectives;
summon any person to appear in person and provide oral, written or documentary evidences and related materials for the investigation;
get unhampered access and control over a scene and surrounding of any relevant materials test and evidence from thereof;
release to the owner or dispose of wreckage and other property seized or acquired during investigation;
provide safety recommendations to the concerned bodies based on the findings of its investigation;
follow up the implementation of its safety recommendation and providing further safety recommendation where necessary;
Submit to the Minister preliminary, interim and final investigation reports on accident or serious incident;
implement and enforce the provision of this Proclamation, regulation and directives issued hereunder and relevant treaties, standards and recommended practices to which Ethiopia is a party;
carry out other activities as may be necessary for the fulfillment of its objectives.
Budget
Powers and Duties of Head of the Bureau
The Head of the Bureau shall be the chief executive officer of the Bureau and shall direct and administer the activities of the Bureau.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of this Article the head of the bureau shall:
exercise powers and duties of the bureau specified in article (7) of this Proclamation;
prepare and submit to the Minister the work program and budget of the Bureau and implement the same upon approval;
prepare and submit policies concerning aircraft accidents and serious incidents to the Minister and implement same upon approval by the minister
fulfill the necessary facilities for the purpose of the investigation.
The Head of the Bureau may delegate part of his powers and duties to employees or officers of the Bureau to the extent necessary for the efficient management of the activities of the bureau.
Powers and Duties of the Investigator in Charge
The Investigator-in-charge shall have powers and duties to:
direct and conduct the investigation under this Proclamation on behalf of the Bureau;
report to the Bureau on the investigation, including proposed findings as to causes and contributing factors, and safety recommendation related to the investigation;
be responsible for accredited representatives, participants, and appointed observers required for the investigation.
Conflict of Interest
To achieve professional independence and to ensure the credibility of the aircraft accident and incident investigation, a member of the bureau who involves in an investigation shall avoid actual and potential conflict of interest.
Powers and Duties of the Minister
The Minister shall have the following powers and duties to:
ensure aircraft accident investigations are carried out in accordance with standards and recommended practices;
initiate policy ideas related to aircraft accident and incident investigation;
approve final investigation reports and make decision to be publicized;
support and follow up the Bureau for the proper discharge of its duties and responsibilities;
delegate the investigation, in whole or in part, to another State or a regional accident investigation organization or body when deemed to be appropriate;
appoint an accredited representative, participant and advisors upon recommendation by the Bureau;
release preliminary, interim, and final accident and serious incident investigation reports.
The Minister may delegate part of its powers and responsibilities provided under this Proclamation to the Bureau.
PART THREE
INVESTIGATION JURISDICTION AND
PROCEDURE 13. Investigation Jurisdiction
The Bureau shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the conduct of safety investigations into aircraft accidents and serious incidents; provided, however, that the bureau may not investigate incidents unless recommended by the Minister or by concerned body.
The Bureau aircraft accident and serious incidents investigation process shall be functionally independent and free from any influences; administrative or judicial proceedings shall not interfere with investigations conducted under this Proclamation
If a civil aircraft accident occurred within a military reserved areas, the Bureau shall not commence the investigation unless authorized by the Ministry of Defense.
The provisions of this Proclamation shall not prevent the police force from conducting investigation in accordance with the laws conferring its power.
Procedure of Investigation
The Bureau shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that the investigation procedures and practices that it follows in relation to aircraft accidents and serious incidents are compatible with the government obligations with respect to Article 38 of the Convention, and the standards and recommended practices contained in Annex 13.
The Bureau coordinates with Governmental and other concerned non-governmental organizations regarding investigation procedures of aviation occurrences.
The investigation conducted by the Bureau shall be separate from those investigations conducted for the purpose of establishing guilt or civil and criminal liability.
Powers and Duties of Investigator in Charge
The investigator in Charge shall have the following powers and duties during the investigation of any aircraft accident or serious incident:
call and interrogate, collect information, witnesses and any person deemed important for investigation;
carryout examination of relevant material and evidence without delay;
unhampered access to and control over the scene of the accident and the wreckage;
unhampered access and control over all relevant material and evidence, including flight recorders and air traffic service records;
[[5/ require the protection and preservation of the occurrence site, aircraft and any parts thereof including all records associated with an occurrence;
require the provision of documents related with investigation, to make copies of any documents and retain any such documents until the completion of the investigation;
submit any person who directly or indirectly involved in the aircraft operation and occurrence for medical examination.
PART FOUR
NOTIFICATION OF OCCURRENCE, PROTECTION OF EVIDENCES AND PRESERVATION OF EVIDENCES
Notification of Aircraft Accident
Without prejudice to the regulations and directives issued pursuant to this Proclamation, the owner, operator, pilot-in-command, any crew member of the aircraft, an airport, air traffic controller, and any other person having knowledge of the accident or serious incident shall have obligation to report to the Bureau or to the relevant governmental body to provide information as soon as possible and by the fastest means of communication available.
Without prejudice to mandatory reporting stated under sub- article (1) of this Article voluntary reports can be submitted by any person to the bureau or to the nearest government bodies to facilitate the collection of information that may not be captured by a mandatory report.
The identity of the person who has made a report pursuant to sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article shall have legal protection not to be disclosed.
Protection and Preservation of Evidence
The aircraft which sustained accident, its wreckage or the accident site shall be protected from access by unauthorized personnel.
Where an accident or serious incident takes place, the owner, operator, and crew member shall, to the extent possible, and until otherwise instructed by the Bureau or except as otherwise required by this Proclamation, preserve and protect any evidence relevant to the reportable accident or serious incident as it is, including evidence contained in documents.
The provision of sub-article (2) of this Article shall not be construed as preventing any person from taking necessary measures to ensure the safety of any person, property or the environment.
The investigation file organized pursuant to this Proclamation shall be preserved by the Bureau for a period of not less than 20 years after the date that the investigation report was made public.
Protection of Information
When conducting the investigation of an accident or serious incident, the Bureau shall not disclose all investigation records for the purpose other than accident or serious incident investigations, including the following:
all statements taken from persons by the investigator in the course of this investigation;
opinions expressed under the analysis of information, including flight recorder information;
cockpit air borne image, records or any part or transcript from such records.
The records specified under sub-article (1) of this Article shall not be used against any of the involved persons in disciplinary, judicial or other proceedings.
Evidence of Investigators
The investigator shall not be compelled to appear as a witness in any judicial, administrative or disciplinary proceedings to establish guilt or liability in relation to aircraft accident investigation they have conducted.
Aircraft accident investigation final report shall not be used as evidence in any court proceedings to establish guilt or liability.
PART FIVE
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION REPORT
Preliminary Report
Where the weight of aircraft involved in an accident is more than 2,250 kilogram, the Bureau by notifying the Minister, shall send the preliminary report to the State of registry, the State Operator, the State of Design, the State of Manufacture and to the International Civil Aviation Organization within 30 days.
Where the weight of aircraft involved in accident is less than 2,250, the Bureau by notifying the Minister, shall send the preliminary report to all States prescribed under sub-article (1) of this Article except the International Civil Aviation Organization.
Draft Final Reports
Before releasing its final investigation report, the Bureau shall, on a confidential basis send a copy of the draft final report on its findings and any safety deficiencies that it has identified through the Minister, to each Sate involved, and concerned body.
The time limit for receiving comments shall normally be 60 days, unless otherwise agreed by the concerned States.
Where the Bureau receives comments within the time limit specified under sub-article (2) of this Article and considers the comment important, it shall incorporate the comment before releasing the final investigation report.
In accordance with the provisions of the Annex 13, the comment shall be appended unless it is included in the final report.
Final Reports
The Bureau shall complete the investigation as soon as possible within 12 months and send its final investigation report through the Minister to the concerned bodies and publicize it.
The Bureau shall not refrain from fully reporting on aircraft accident investigation report because fault or liability might be inferred from its findings.
Safety Recommendations
The Bureau shall, at any stage of the aircraft accident investigation, recommend to Civil Aviation Authority and other concerned body, any preventative action promptly to mitigate the risks upon which the safety recommendations are based.
The body to whom safety recommendation has been issued shall, within 90 days after being notified, inform the Bureau in writing the action taken on the basis of the recommendation.
Re-opening of Investigations
Where new and significant evidence is available after the investigation has been closed, the Bureau may re- open investigation.
PART SIX
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Obligation of Police Force or Security Organ
The local police force or any authorized security organ is duty bound to take control and preserve the accident place and its surroundings including the accident aircraft, its components, wreckage and related evidence until the investigator in charge takes over and control it.
Offences
Whosoever:
willfully resist or otherwise obstructs the investigation of the Bureau; or
knowingly took, damaged, concealed, altered any property or evidence from the accident aircraft body or from the accident site;
knowingly provides false or misleading information for investigation or inquiry of the Bureau, or
knowingly makes a false or misleading report pursuant to Art 16 of this Proclamation;
shall be guilty and punishable with an imprisonment not exceeding five years or with fine not exceeding Birr 500,000 or both.
Whosoever contravene the other provision of this Proclamation or any regulation issued pursuant to this Proclamation shall be guilty and punishable with fine not exceeding Birr 400,000.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The Council of Ministers may issue regulation necessary for the implementation of this proclamation
Repealed and Inapplicable Laws
Article 88 of the Civil Aviation Proclamation No. 616/2008 is hereby repealed.
No law, regulation, directive, order or practice shall, in so far as it is inconsistent with this Proclamation, be applicable with respect to matters provided for by this Proclamation.
Transitory Provision
Any matter that is in the course of investigation or that has been investigated and its final report not yet made by the Civil Aviation Authority, on the date of entering into force of this Proclamation, shall be transferred to the Bureau and finalized in accordance with this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Proclamation No. 954/2016
TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS, it has been noted that developing skilled, disciplined, motivated, adaptable and innovative human resource is vital for ensuring sustainable economic competitiveness;
WHEREAS, it is believed that the development of necessary human resource can be achieved through the provision of demand-driven technical and vocational education and training; and that it is determined in the technical and vocational education and training strategy to build human resource capacity towards that direction;
WHEREAS, it is found appropriate to prepare a national professional standards under the technical and vocational education and training system and to put in place occupational competence assessment system through which members of society obtained skill through different means may be granted national certificate of competence by undergoing comprehensive assessment and thereby to produce internationally competitive human resource;
WHEREAS, it has been found pertinent to formulate a uniform regulatory framework on the one hand and decentralized and participatory decision-making process on the other as a result of which stakeholders would be actively engaged in the technical and vocational education and training system;
NOW THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Technical and Vocational Education and Training Proclamation No. 954/2016”.
Definitions
In this proclamation unless the context requires otherwise:
“technical and vocational education and training” means a provision of technical and vocational education and training in any occupation, based on the country’s education and training policy, which is below higher education level through formal or non-formal means of training, education as well as process of assessing occupational competence and, includes assessment of occupational competence that has been acquired through non-formal means;
“comprehensive and integrated” means an education and training system in which a single qualification framework designed to work for all occupations in the various sectors in an integrated manner;
“Agency” means the Technical and Vocational Education and Training Agency established under Council of Ministers Regulation No. 199/2011;
“Ministry or Minister” means the Ministry or Minister of Education respectively;
“Stakeholders” means those play vital role in the technical and vocational education and training system and includes government organs, training institutions, enterprises, members of the civil society organs and such as other similar organs;
“Micro Enterprises” means an enterprise having a total capital, excluding building, not exceeding Birr 50,000 (fifty thousand) in the service sector or not exceeding Birr 100,000 (one hundred thousand) in the manufacturing industrial sector and engages five workers, including the owner, his family member and other employees;
“Small enterprises” means an enterprise having a total capital, excluding building, from Birr 50,001 fifty thousend one to Birr 500,000 (five hundered thousend) in the case of service sector or from Birr 100,000 ( one hundred thoused) to Birr 1,500.000 (one million and fifty thousand) in the case of urban agriculture, artisanal mining and construction sector engages from 6 to 30 workers including the owner, his family members and other employees;
“regional relevant organ” means a regional organ empowered to regulate and coordinate the technical and vocational education and training and, includes centres of competence;
“occupational competence” means the possession and application of knowledge, skills and attitudes to the standard of performance required in the workplace;
“centre of competence” means a governmental institution in charge of organizing and facilitating occupational competence assessments of technical and vocational education and training;
“occupational competence assessment” means the process of ensuring whether the occupational competence has been achieved;
“certificate of occupational competence” means a certificate of competence issued by centres of competence on behalf of the Agency, proving that the holder of the document has shown the required competence by undergoing through the assessment process;
“outcome-based assessment” means a modality of assessment through which the competence of a candidate is evaluated without considering as to how, when and where the skill has been acquired;
“cooperative training” means a mode of training delivered by the cooperation of enterprises and training institutions;
“on-the- job training” means training offered to employees of enterprises at their places of work after identifying the skill gap they encountered;
“enterprise” means production or service rendering entity established by governmental, non-governmental or private organs including micro and small enterprise that participate in cooperative training arrangements;
“development programme implementing agencies” means those government organs in charge of overall leadership towards implementing the country’s development programmes;
“leadership” means those officials who manage the training institutions;
“trainers” means a person who engages in training activity at training institution;
“trainee” means an individual who participates in a technical and vocational education and training programme that involves a cooperative training with a view to acquiring occupational competence and enhance skill, develop his professional ethics and attitude ;
“joint employment” means an arrangement of employment in which a regular employee at an enterprise or executive office shall be accepted to serve as a trainer in a technical and vocational education and training institution in addition to his regular duties;
“accreditation” means the process of issuance of work permit to training institutions after verifying, in accordance with the Regulations of the Ministry, that the technical and vocational education and training programmes offered by them have met the defined quality criteria and includes the process of verification of occupational competence assessment centres to undertake the actual assessment;
“accrediting organ” means the Agency or the regional relevant organ and includes centres of competence;
“industry extension service” means a modality of service provision to micro and small enterprises, after identifying and compiling their basic shortcomings, through training and consultancy, technological development and market linkage; and includes adaptation and transfer of best practice;
“training institution” means a public, private or non- governmental institution engaged in the provision of technical and vocational education and training programme;
“non-governmental training institution” includes all technical and vocational education and training institutions which are owned by private or non-government organizations;
“regional state” means any regional state referred to in Article 47 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes the Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa City administrative;
“person” means any natural or a juridical person;
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply on all persons who directly and indirectly participate in the technical and vocational education and training system and in particular on training institutions, enterprises, trainers and trainees and government organs empowered to implement same.
Objectives of the Technical and Vocational Education and Training System
The general objective of technical and vocational education and training is to create a competent, motivated, employable, adaptable and innovative workforce through which the country’s socio-economic development shall be enhanced.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-article (1) of this Article the technical and vocational education and training system shall have the following detail objectives:
creating , enhancing and strengthening outcome- based technical and vocational education and training system in the country;
making training institutions incubators of micro and small enterprises and capacity building centres for job creation;
developing the competitiveness of micro and small enterprises through the provision of industry extension service after identifying their skill gap;
without prejudice to powers and duties of the Ministry of Science and Technology, facilitating the identification, selection, prototyping, testing and transferring of appropriate technologies;
creating an integrated and participatory working system for all stakeholders in the technical and vocational education and training system;
establishing and developing necessary institutional set up in the technical and vocational education and training systems to implement, manage and ensure quality management system;
facilitating the expansion and provisions of relevant technical and vocational education and trainings which are crucial to national development;
integrating enterprises with the technical and vocational education and training system;
developing efficient and cost effective, a sustainable financing system and management structure for technical and vocational education and training;
ensuring equal access for women, people with special needs and people from rural community to technical and vocational education and training thereby enabling them to equally participate in socio-economic affairs of the country.
Principles
The technical and vocational education and training system shall, based on the values of the developmental state, be guided by the principles of comprehensiveness and integration, market-oriented, participatory, decentralized and ensuring accessible.
National Technical and Vocational Education and Training Qualification Framework
A national technical and vocational education and training qualifications framework shall be organized in comprehensive manner, serves to all competences in all sectors and defines the levels and requirements to each competence.
The qualification frame-work organized pursuant to sub- article (1) of this Article shall serve as the basis for a transparent, orderly and uniform application of the system.
The detailed requirements for each qualification shall be issued by the Agency in consultation with the stakeholders.
Implementation of the Technical and Vocational Education and Training System
The Federal Technical and Vocational Education and Training Agency shall have duties and responsibilities to coordinate the overall technical and vocational education and training system.
The Federal Government shall establish national standards and measurements on the technical and vocational education and training system.
Establishment of Training Institutions
Any training institution administered by the budget of the Federal Government shall be established by a regulations to be issued by the Council of Ministers; the management board will be determined by regulation.
Any training institution administered by the budget of the regional government shall be established in accordance with the laws of the regional government; the organization of the organization of the instituation management board will be detrmind by the regions lavle.
The conditions under which technical and vocational education and training institutions established by private investors or non-governmental organizations shall be determined in their memorandum and article of association.
PART TWO
OCCUPATIONAL STANDARD DEVELOPMENT AND OCCUPATIONAL COMPETENCE ASSESSMENT
Occupational Standard Development
The objective of occupational standard development is to prepare an occupational standard document in order to define and analyse the demands of the labour market and produce the necessary human resource together with the manner of ensuring sustainable development of occupational competence.
The Agency shall, in consultation with regional states, form technical committees that consist in members from stakeholders and experts having rich experience in the world of work in order to develop occupational standards.
The occupational standard shall be prepared with leading role of sectoral ministries having close relation and knowledge in the occupation.
Occupational standards together with a summary of the relevant competencies to each level of competence shall be regularly made public.
Centres of Competence
The Centres of Competence shall:
be established being accountable to the appropriate regional organ in order to effectively coordinate the occupational competence assessment;
independently operate without any interference from any other organ in the occupational competence assessment and assessment related technical issues;
accredit occupational competence assessment centres in accordance with the directive issued by the Ministry in consultation with regional relevant organ;
certify assessors who proved competent to conduct assessment.
Occupational Competence Assessment Centres
The occupational competence assessment centres shall be established by the accreditation of centres of competence.
The occupational competence assessment centres shall conduct the assessment based on the assessment tools prepared in conformity with the respective occupational standard.
Whenever necessary, mobile occupational competence assessment venues may be established in order to ensure accessibility.
Experienced experts from the world of work shall be involved in the development of the tools for competence assessment and in conducting the assessments
Occupational Competence Assessment
The occupational competence assessment shall be undertaken in accordance with the directive issued by the Ministry in order to determine whether candidates have acquired the necessary competence required in the occupation.
The occupational competence assessment shall be open to candidates who appear as competent to meet the requirements of the respective occupational standard.
Integration of Occupational Competence Assessment
Any individual who wants to obtain an occupational competence certificate shall undergo occupational competence assessment.
Any trainee who successfully completed training programmes at training institutions shall pass through occupational competence assessment in order to obtain an occupational competence certificate.
Issuance of Certificate of Occupational Competence
Any individual who proves his competence based on the outcome of an assessment shall be issued with a certificate of occupational competence by centres of competence on behalf of the Agency.
The certificate of occupational competence issued in accordance with sub-article (1) of this Article shall have nation-wide acceptance and recognition.
Development Programme Implementing Agencies and Enterprises
Whenever the Agency is convinced that development implementing agencies and enterprises have possessed the required capacity to undertake occupational standard development and occupational assessment, it shall entrust them with the responsibility to implement or follow up implementation of same.
PART THREE
HUMAN AND INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Assignment of Leaders and Trainers
Trained professionals having required competence, experience and ethical in the profession shall be given priority in recruitment of a trainer or leader for technical and vocational education and training.
Leaders and Trainers Occupational Competence Levels
There shall be levels of career development for technical and vocational education and training leadership and trainers positions.
Provision of Initial and On-the-Job Training
The technical and vocational education and training trainers and leaders at all levels shall be provided with initial and on- the-job trainings.
The trainings shall follow the approved occupational standards and the technical and vocational education and training leaders and trainers qualifications framework.
The Agency shall furnish higher education institutions engaged in the training of technical and vocational education and training trainers with up-to-date information on newly developed occupational standards with a view to enabling them redesign their programmes accordingly.
The opportunities of on-the-job technical and vocational education and training shall, in principle, be equally accessible to leaders and trainers of public, non- governmental and private training institutions. The detailed modalities of implementation shall be specified in the directive to be issued by the Ministry in collaboration with the regional relevant organ.
Requirement of Certificate of Occupational Competence for Leaders and Trainers
Any individual who wants to join technical and vocational education and training as leadership or trainer shall pass through an assessment prepared for the purpose and acquire certificate of occupational competence.
Joint Employment
Any professional who possesses certificate of occupational competence as trainer may, in addition to his regular employment, be employed as a trainer by a training institution through a joint employment arrangement.
Joint employment shall be effected with the consent of the trainer and based on the agreement of his original employer and the training institution.
Issues of status of employment, duration of employment, apportionment of working time and other related concerns of employer and the professional shall be agreed upon by the concerned parties.
Development of Training Institution and Leadership Competence
For training institutions there shall be a procedure for conducting institutional development, determination of their level as well requirements for leadership competence.
Focus Area of Research on Technical and Vocational Education and Training
Research projects in the area of technical and vocational education and training shall focus on practical issues rather than theoretical ones and shall emphasise on the following:
developing qualitative and up to standard national capacity for technical and vocational education and training research;
undertaking labour market study;
disaggregating and analyzing information collected by various stakeholders in a manner relevant for technical and vocational education and training purposes;
undertaking action research on how to transfer of appropriate technology in efficient and effective manner.
Action Oriented Research
The training institutions shall make action oriented research as an integral part of the technical and vocational education and training system as regards identification, introduction and the implementation of new working systems to resolve the problems.
Industrial Extension Service
The industry extension service shall be provided to micro and small enterprises upon identifying and documenting their main problem with a view to build their capacity on the basis of need assessment and such a service shall be provided on the basis of the following frameworks:
provision of service which is market oriented and under supportive frame work and
giving priority to the already existing enterprises and the model ones.
The detail with respect to the manner of provision of industrial extension service shall be determined by the Agency in consultation with appropriate government organs.
PART FOUR
COOPERATIVE TRAINING
Basis for cooperation
The technical and vocational education and training system shall be undertaken through the cooperative arrangement of training institutions and enterprises.
The basis for such cooperation shall be voluntarism and mutual interest.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article (2) of this Article, public enterprises and development programmes shall have the duty to engage in cooperative training.
Implementation of Cooperative Training
Cooperative training shall be organised in a manner that enable trainees to receive a fair combination of theoretical knowledge and practical skill.
The combination of theoretical and practical training may differ depending on the level and nature of the occupation and shall be conducted as specified in the respective occupational standard.
Acknowledgment of Cooperation
The Agency, the regional authorities and training institutions shall, through all available means at their disposal, disseminate and publicize the names and addresses of enterprises which have been participating in cooperative training.
PART FIVE
ACCREDITATION OF THE TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAMMES
Requirement for Accreditation
Any person who wants to commence or expand a technical and vocational education and training programme shall have obligation secure an accreditation from the appropriate accrediting organ.
Granting of Accreditation
The assessment for the purposes of granting accreditation shall be conducted in a transparent and participatory manner.
The granting of accreditation shall be conducted with a view to supporting, encouraging and progressively building the capacity of the training institutions subject to accreditation.
The requirements for renewal, suspension and revocation of accreditation and complaint handling as well as the rate of service fees to be paid by those technical and vocational education and training institutions shall be stipulated in the regulations to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
Maintenance and Dissemination of List of Accredited Programmes Offered by Training Institutions
Accrediting authorities shall maintain records of lists of programmes delivered in the training institutions they accredited and periodically update any changes thereof to training institutions within their jurisdiction and the list shall periodically be made public.
A consolidated national list of accredited programmes and training institutions deliver them shall be maintained by the Agency in cooperation with the regional authorities and periodically disseminate the same to the public through appropriate means of publication.
Technical Support and Follow-up
An expert or a team of experts assigned by the accrediting organ shall have the power to supervise training institutions to make sure that they are providing the accredited training programme in compliance with the prescribed standards. It shall, whenever necessary, provide technical assistance, advice and support.
Failure to comply with the conditions applicable to accreditation and the requirements for the prescribed level shall entail corrective measures.
PART SIX
BUDGET AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT FOR PUBLIC TRAINING INSTITUTIONS
Autonomy in Financial Management and Accountability
Without prejudice to the financial laws and regulations of the country, any public training institution shall have internal financial autonomy.
Budget
The budget of public training institutions those accountable to the Federal Government shall be allocated by the federal government based on their strategic plan.
Any federal public training institution shall be allocated with an annual budget on the basis of its strategic plan and the performance thereof.
Any federal public training institution may accept donations from third parties; provided however, that no such donation may negatively influence the standing, mission and objectives of the institution.
Any federal public training institution shall report to the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperatative and the Ministry receipt of funds from third parties and its internally generated incomes.
Determination and Collection of Training Fees
Any federal public training institution may, upon approvalbytheManagementBoardwith respect to the amount and manner of collection, collect training fees and utilize the same in compliance with the directives issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation to fulfil the objectives of the institution.
Any measure to increase the amount or to alter the manner of collection of any training fee shall be approved by the management board pursuant to sub- article (1) of this Article.
Cost-Sharing
Any trainee attending training in any federal public training institution may be required to share the costs relating to his training, assessment, transfer of technology and other related expenses.
The detail implementation and the periodical review of cost-sharing referred to in sub-article (1) of this Article shall be specified in the regulation to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
Income Generation and Utilization
Income Generation and Utilization
Any federal public training institution may, upon approval by the Management Board, undertake income-generating activities and utilize the same for the fulfilment of its mission.
The income generated by the institute pursuant to sub- article (1) of this Article may be utilized, by transferring it to the next fiscal year, in compliance with the directives issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation.
The income generating activity shall only be conducted without negatively affecting the core objective of the federal public training institutions and to fill the market gap.
Financial Management
The Heads of the federal public training institutions shall manage and direct their financial affairs in accordance with the financial law, with the principles of transparency, efficiency and efficacy.
The financial statements of any federal public training institution shall be submitted to the appropriate organ within three months from the end of the fiscal year.
An autonomous internal audit unit accountable to the head of the public training institutions shall be organized in any public training institution.
Books of Accounts
The federal public training institution shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts.
The books of accounts of the federal public training institutionshallannuallybe audited by the Auditor General or auditors assigned by him.
PART SEVEN
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Records and Documents
Any training institution shall maintain records and documents of its activities, its heads, lists of trainers with their certificate of occupational competence and trainees.
Submission of Information
Any training institution shall submit proper and up-to- date information on its activities whenever requested to do so by the accrediting organ.
Training institutions shall keep statistically supported records of number of trainee’s intake, occupational assessment result and other related information and shall communicate these records periodically to the accrediting organs.
The accrediting organ shall, unless otherwise provided by law or otherwise, maintain the confidentiality of the information submitted to it pursuant to sub-article (1) and (2) of this Article.
Adjustment of Training Fees
The conditions for adjustment of training fees by private training institutions and manner of implementation shall be determined in consultation the Ministry.
Liability
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Proclamation, regulations and directives issued hereunder shall, in accordance with the law, be civilly and criminally liable.
Power to Issue Regulations and Directives
The Council of Ministers may issue regulations necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The regional states may issue laws necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Ministry may issue directives necessary for the implementation of this Proclamation and the regulations issued in accordance with sub-article (1) of this Article.
Transitory Provisions
Accreditation permit issued pursuant to Proclamation No. 391/2004 shall be deemed to have been issued in accordance with this Proclamation.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub-article (1) of this Article, training institutions shall take adjustment measures to fully comply with the requirements of this Proclamation within one year from the effective date of this Proclamation.
Cases pending prior to the coming into force of this Proclamation shall be entertained in accordance with the provisions of this Proclamation.
The Federal Technical and Vocational Education and Training Agency Establishment Council of Ministers Regulation No. 199/2011 shall be deemed to have been issued under this Proclamation.
Repealed and Inapplicable Laws
The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Proclamation No. 391/2004 is hereby repealed.
No law, regulations, directives or practices shall, in so far as they are inconsistent with this Proclamation, have effect with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of its publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Addis Ababa on the 27th day of , 2016.
CONTENTS
Proclamation No. 945/2016
Federal Prisons Commission Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation..............................................Page 8991
PROCLAMATION No. 945/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE FEDERAL PRISONS COMMISSION ESTABLISHMENT PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the Federal Prisons Commission Establishment Proclamation;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
Amendment
The Federal Prisons Commission Establishment Proclamation 365/2003 is hereby amended as follows:
Sub-article (2) of Article 3 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new sub-article (2)
“2/ Without prejudice to its legal and professional independence, the Commission shall be accountable to the Federal Attorney General.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
CONTENTS
Proclamation No. 944/2016
Ethiopian Federal Police Commission Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation..................................................... Page 8990
PROCLAMATION No. 944/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE ETHIOPIAN FEDERAL POLICE COMMISSION ESTABLISHMENT PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the Ethiopian Federal Police Commission Establishment Proclamation;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Ethiopian Federal Police Commission Establishment (Amendment) Proclamation No. 944/2016”.
Amendment
The Ethiopian Federal Police Commission Establishment Proclamation 720/2011 is hereby amended as follows: Sub-article (2) of Article 3 of the Proclamation is deleted and replaced by the following new sub-article (2):
“2/ The Commission shall be accountable to the Prime Minister.”
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Done at Addis Ababa, this 2nd day of May, 2016.
CONTENTS
Proclamation No. 943/2016
Federal Attorney General Establishment Proclamation ..................................................................Page 8966
PROCLAMATION No. 943/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
WHEREAS, it has been found necessary to establish one strong law enforcement public prosecution institution which can comprehensively protect public and government interest and deliver uniform, effective and efficient service;
WHEREAS, it has been found necessary to re- organize institution which enforces rule of law and ensures that laws are properly organized and government works are conducted in accordance with the law;
WHEREAS, it has been found necessary to organize public prosecution institution governed by professional, institutional and public accountability, that works with transparency, participation and serves with full institutional and professional independence and win public trust;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Federal Attorney General Establishment Proclamation No. 943/2016”.
Definition
In this Proclamation unless the context otherwise requires:
“constitution” means the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia;
“federal government offices” means bodies having legal personality and administered fully or partially by the federal government budget and includes institutions administered under Addis Ababa city and Dire Dawa city administration budget and federal government public enterprises;
“federal government laws” means proclamations, regulations and directives issued by federal government organs empowered and includes international agreements ratified and acceded by Ethiopia;
“criminal law” means the provision of criminal law enacted on a proclamation by the House of Peoples Representatives;
“Attorney General” means head of the Federal Attorney General appointed by the House of Peoples Representatives;
“deputy attorney general” means deputy head of the Federal Attorney General appointed by the Prime Minister;
“public prosecutor” means lawyer appointed by the Attorney General and administered by public prosecutors administration regulation and includes the Attorney General and the deputy attorney generals appointed in accordance with Article 7 (1) of this Proclamation;
“international agreement” means an agreement concluded between Ethiopia and other State or states or an international organization in a written form whether embodied in one or more related instruments and whatever its particular designation may be and governed by international law and includes treaties, conventions, and protocols;
“police” means federal or regional police having the authority;
“person” means a physical or juridical person;
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
PART TWO
ORGANIZATION, POWERS AND DUTIES
Establishment
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Attorney General (hereinafter called the “Federal Attorney General”) is hereby established as an autonomous federal government ministerial office having its own legal personality.
The Federal Attorney General shall be accountable to the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers.
Head Office
The head office of the Federal Attorney General shall be in Addis Ababa and may have branch offices in the regional states, as may be necessary.
Objectives
The Federal Attorney General shall have the following objectives:
respecting and enforcing the constitution and the constitutional order;
ensuring rule of law;
enforcing criminal law;
enforcing civil interest of the Federal Government and the public.
Power and duties
The Federal Attorney General shall have the following power and duties:
prepares criminal justice policy by coordinating relevant bodies; coordinate, follows up and ensures its implementation when adopted;
works as principal advisor and representative of the federal government regarding law;
regarding criminal matters:
save the powers given to the police by other laws, causes criminal investigation to be started on cases falling under the jurisdiction of federal courts, follow up report to be submitted on an ongoing criminal investigation, the investigation to be completed appropriately, orders discontinuation or restart of discontinued investigation on the basis of public interest or when it is clearly known that there could be no criminal liability, ensures that investigation is conducted in accordance with the law, gives the necessary instruction;
a criminal investigation which has been started by the police needs to be notified to it; makes the necessary follow up in the course of investigation; may seek support from the police in the process of giving decision on an investigation file; informs the relevant police about decisions given on criminal case files by the public prosecutor and court; receives and gives decision on appeals presented by the police against decisions given at different level of the public prosecution;
reviews completed investigation files based on evidence and law and gives no case or closing decision where condition provided under the criminal procedure law are met;
determines guilty plea, conducts plea bargaining, decides alternative actions to be taken, follows the implementation;
follows the implementation and enforcement of judgments and orders given by courts under criminal case, applies to the court that gave judgments and orders and makes corrective action to be taken where they have not been implemented or their implementation is contrary to law;
organizes or ensures the establishment of systems for the proper execution of criminal punishments imposed by the court of law;
presents death penalty decisions to the President of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, follows the execution.
regarding civil matters:
litigates, enforces, causes enforcement,
follows and controls the process of enforcement within the federal government offices by acting as an agent of rights and interest of the public and federal government;
advises and participates with concerned bodies in contract preparation and negotiation of mega government projects; participates or advises concerned bodies in other contract preparation and negotiation when it believes that public and government interest could be affected;
institute civil suits on behalf of the federal government office; represent them in civil litigation where they sue or sued, represent them in an ongoing civil litigation by its own or together with them; gives direction to government offices on the management of the litigation; cause execution of judgment in accordance with law;
give decision for settlement of disputes arising between federal government offices through judicial means or out of court alternative dispute settlement mechanisms, and ensures the execution of the decision;
conducts litigation by representing citizens who do not have financial capacity to institute civil action under federal courts specially women, children, disabled and the elderly;
represent victims of crime who do not have financial means in litigations or negotiations for their compensation, reinstitution and protection of their civil interests emanated from the damage sustained;
represent the government in litigations and conduct negotiations in consultation with concerned bodies at international judicial or quasi judicial bodies where the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia sues or is sued, and enforce the decision thereto.
regarding legal drafting;
perform preparation of draft laws to be promulgated by the federal government; ensure that draft laws prepared by government organs are consistent with the Constitution and federal laws; provide legal opinion to concerned bodies; assist in the preparation of draft laws when so requested by the regional states;
regarding human rights:
design strategy for provision of free legal aid, follow up implementation of same, coordinate bodies engaged in the sector;
prepare national human rights action plan together with the concerned bodies, follow up implementation of same, coordinate the concerned bodies at national level; submit report to the relevant bodies;
pay visit to persons under custody at police stations and correction facilities, ensure their handling and stay is carried out in accordance with the law, cause unlawful act to be corrected; take measures or cause measures to be taken based on the law against people who are found to have transgressed the law;
provide, through various means, human rights education and legal awareness training; coordinate the concerned bodies operating in the sectors;
follow up the implementation of international and regional human rights treaties ratified or adopted by Ethiopia; give reply, in consultation with the relevant bodies, to concerns raised in connection with the implementation the treaties; prepare in collaboration with relevant bodies, national report on the implementation of treaties.
regarding legal research and training:
undertake researches and studies for an effective and efficient performance of its business;
establish, and enforce a system that enables the collection, organization, analysis and dissemination of criminal justice information;
provide training or cause provision of training and education at every level for continuous development of the attitude, knowledge and skill of public prosecutors;
organize inspection department and investigate that decisions passed by public prosecutors are in accordance with the law, identify defects based on studies and take corrective measures on the bases of findings to rectify the problems; when necessary, take measure or cause measures to be taken, based on a law, against those who are found to have breached laws and disciplinary rules, scale up good practices;
exercise the common powers and duties provided for under the Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia proclamation No. 916/2015;
own and possess property, enter into contracts, sue or be sued in its own name;
perform other activities that help to achieve its objectives or carry out its power and duties given by law.
Organization of the Federal Attorney General
The Federal Attorney General shall have: an Attorney General appointed by the House of Peoples Representatives up on recommendation by the Prime Minister and Deputy Attorney Generals appointed by the Prime Minister;
line divisions;
Management Committee;
Federal Public Prosecutors Administration Council;
public prosecutors appointed by the Attorney General upon the recommendation by the Public Prosecutors Administration Council;
necessary staffs.
Powers and Duties of the Attorney General
The Attorney General shall be the head of the Federal Attorney General and lead and administer the Federal Attorney General professionally and in accordance with the law.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-article (1) of this Article, the Attorney General shall have the powers and duties to:
exercise the powers and duties of the Federal Attorney General stipulated under Article 6 of this Proclamation;
exercise the criminal investigation and prosecution powers and duties given to the Commissioner of the Federal Ethics and Anti- corruption Commission under its establishment Proclamation No 433/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 883/2015) and the Revised Anti-corruption Special Procedure and Evidence Proclamation No. 434/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 882/2015) and other laws; and the criminal investigation and prosecution power given to the Director General of the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority under its establishment Proclamation No. 587/2008 and Customs Proclamation No. 859/2014;
revoke, change, modify, suspend, approve the decision of deputy attorney generals or refer the case for re-examination or revision by the one that has given the decision;
hire, administer and dismiss supporting staff of the Federal Attorney General in accordance with the federal civil service laws;
cause participation of freelance advisors having sufficient knowledge and experience, in accordance with directive issued, for the achievement of the objectives of the Federal Attorney General;
prepare strategic plan and budget of the Federal Attorney General, and implements same upon approval;
effect payment in accordance with the budget approved and work program of the Federal Attorney General;
represent the Federal Attorney General in its dealings with third parties;
prepare and submit to the Government performance and financial report of the Federal Attorney General;
The Attorney General may:
delegate his powers and duties, as may be necessary, to other bodies based on pre- determined system of execution, follow up and support.
Power and Duties of the Deputy Attorney Generals
Deputy attorney general፡
shall assist the Attorney General in planning, organizing, leading and coordinating in exercising his powers and duties;
shall lead and administer the line divisions to which they are assigned;
shall perform specific duties given to them by the Attorney General;
in the absence of the Attorney General, without giving delegation, the senior Deputy Attorney General shall represent and perform the duties of the Attorney General;
may delegate part of their powers and duties to public prosecutors and employees, to the extent necessary, for efficient and effective performance of activities.
Removal from position
The Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney Generals may be removed from their position by the decision of the Prime Minister.
The Administration of Public Prosecutors
The administration of public prosecutors shall be determined by regulation to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
The appointment of public prosecutors shall be based on the following basic principles;
obedience to and belief in the Constitution, Constitutional order and rule of law;
public servant;
balanced representation of nations, nationalities and peoples;
Ethiopian nationality;
strict ethical condition;
having law education and skill necessary for prosecution work;
successful completion of pre-service training given for the sector;
commitment to undertake the responsibility that public prosecution demands; and
impartiality from conditions that may influence decision making of public prosecutors.
The internal administration of public prosecutors shall be based on the following principles:
the position that public prosecutors are to be assigned shall be based on: the type of work, the process the business is administered, the expected result and the necessary organizational structures which are clearly identified and based on systems that are laid down for public accountability;
the performance of public prosecutors shall be based on systems in relation to: measured and assigned activity, efficiency and effectiveness, positive influence and public trust and other criteria determined by Public Prosecutors Administration Council;
ethical condition of public prosecutors shall be based on: constitutionality, respect for the law, impartiality and accountability;
the superior and subordinate relationship between public prosecutors shall be based on systems laid down by considering: cooperation and support, work legality, ensuring efficiency, knowledge and skill sharing;
promotion, demotion, salary and benefits of public prosecutors shall be based on: performance, effectiveness and ethical condition;
the internal transfer of public prosecutors shall be based on: the work, personal conditions, impartiality and choice of the public prosecutor;
the provision of privilege education, training and conference participation public prosecutors shall be based on: the closeness to the public prosecutor position and work, performance, composition of nationality, sex and disability, contribution for the enforcement of the powers and duties of the Federal Attorney General; contribution for effective and efficient service provision, knowledge and skill value addition to the trainee and other relevant conditions;
public prosecutors independence shall be based on systems that ensure adequate protection for public prosecutors against direct and indirect harm as a result of conducting their work;
Federal Public Prosecutors Administration Council
The Federal Public Prosecutors Administration Council accountable to the Attorney General is hereby established in accordance with this Proclamation; the members, working procedures and the details of which shall be determined by regulation to be issued by the Council of Ministers.
The Federal Public Prosecutors Administration Council shall have duty to prepare and submit to the Attorney General draft regulation that includes public prosecutors appointment, transfer, leave, service period, position, ethics, organization, structure, salary, benefits and similar matters.
Public Accountability
The Federal Attorney General shall ensure public accountability and public participation when conducting its powers and duties.
The Federal Attorney General shall prepare a public forum quarterly whereby the following sections of the society participate:
community organizations selected by the Attorney General;
business organizations and charitable organizations and associations selected by the Attorney General;
law schools of higher education institutions selected by the Attorney General;
stakeholders;
other individuals or individuals to be delegated from legal persons which are believed to be important by the Attorney General;
The public forum shall discuss problems and gaps observed on the performance of the Federal Attorney General, ethical defects, strategic and annual plans and reports on performance of plan.
The Federal Attorney General shall conduct investigation based on the opinion and inputs, takes corrective actions or rectify and informs the public forum about the status.
Budget
The Federal Attorney General shall be administered by budget allocated by the Government.
Books of Accounts
The Federal Attorney General shall keep complete and accurate books of account.
The books of accounts and financial documents of the Federal Attorney General shall be audited annually by the Federal Auditor General or by an auditor designated by him.
PARTT THREE
INDEPENDENCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Public Prosecutors Professional Independence
Without prejudice to directive issued by the Federal Attorney General, public prosecutors shall perform their work based on the law.
Without prejudice to accountability of public prosecutors provided for in the provisions of this Proclamation or other law, the Federal Attorney General and public prosecutors shall not be held legally accountable for damages caused as a result of performing their power and duty in accordance with law.
Accountability and Responsibility
The Attorney General shall be the head of public prosecutors.
Public prosecutors shall be accountable to their superior and division heads.
Public prosecutors shall be accountable by law for defects in their work performance and ethics.
Right to Lodge Complaint
Any person who has grievance against the decision of public prosecutor has the right to lodge complaint to superior public prosecutor at different levels. A superior received complaint shall expeditiously investigate and give decision.
A superior received complaint may form a committee containing relevant professionals to investigate the case.
Asuperiorconsideringthecomplaintmaysuspend, change, modify, revoke or approve the decision of the subordinate prosecutor or remand the case to the section that saw the case previously by stating his legal and factual reasons.
Right to Inform or Present Suggestion
Any person may inform or present suggestion to the Federal Attorney General in any way on any matter which falls under the power and duty of the Federal Attorney General which he believes should be corrected and rectified or his claim of ethical and legal violation which has been committed.
PART FOUR
MISCELANEOUS PROVISIONS
Attorney Generals’ Joint Council
The Attorney Generals Joint Council (hereinafter called the “Joint Council”), whereby the senior management of the Federal Attorney Generals and regional public prosecution institutions work in collaboration and jointly, is hereby established in accordance with this Proclamation.
The Joint Council shall issue joint plan on common and similar matters of the justice sector to make their performance effective, efficient and uniform.
The Attorney General shall be the chairperson of the Joint Council and heads of regional public prosecution institutions shall participate as member.
The Joint Council shall determine its meeting and working procedure.
The Attorney General shall facilitate the works and meetings of the Joint Council.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directive
The Council of Ministers may issue regulations necessary to enforce this Proclamation.
The Federal Attorney General may issue directives necessary for the enforcement of this Proclamation and regulations issued pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Proclamation.
The Federal Attorney General shall published and distributed directives issued by it with any mass media that has wider circulation.
Transfer of Rights and Duties
The powers and duties given to the Ministry of Justice under the Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation No. 916/2015 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Attorney General pursuant to this Proclamation.
The prosecution power given to the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission under its establishment Proclamation No 433/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 883/2015) and the Revised Anti-corruption Special Procedure and Evidence Proclamation No. 434/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 882/2015 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Attorney General.
The corruption crime investigation power given to the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission under its establishment Proclamation No. 433/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 883/2015) and the Revised Anti-corruption Special Procedure and Evidence Proclamation No. 434/2005 (as amended by Proclamation No. 882/2015) and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Police Commission.
The prosecution power given to the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority under its establishment Proclamation No. 587/2008 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Attorney General.
The tax and customs crime investigation power given to the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority under its establishment Proclamation No. 587/2008 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Police Commission.
The prosecution power given to the Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority under the Proclamation No. 813/2013 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Attorney General.
The crime investigation power given to the Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority under Proclamation No. 813/2013 and other laws are hereby transferred to the Federal Police Commission.
The powers, rights and duties given to the Special Public Prosecution under the Special Public Prosecution Office Establishment Proclamation No. 22/1992 are hereby transferred to the Federal Attorney General.
Duty to Cooperate
Any person who is requested to cooperate with the Federal Attorney General and public prosecutor in the execution of their powers and duties has a duty to cooperate if it is not beyond his capacity and does not cause danger.
Leaders and employees of public prosecution institutions who have been in charge before the coming into force of this Proclamation have duty to cooperate with and assist the transition based on this Proclamation.
Any member of the police shall have duty to respect and execute final and legal decision of the public prosecutor.
Criminal Liability
Any person who interferes against the Federal Attorney General and public prosecutors not to perform their work independently shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment from one year up to five years.
Any person who does not respect and enforce the decision of the Federal Attorney General and public prosecutors; or violates the duty to cooperate shall be punished with simple imprisonment not exceeding one year or fine not exceeding Birr 3000.
Any member of the police who resists and fails to execute the final and legal decision of the public prosecutor shall be punished in accordance with relevant law.
Transitory Provisions
The regulations issued by the Council of Ministers, directives or manuals issued by the Ministry of Justice, Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority, Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission and Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority which are relevant for the enforcement of the powers and duties of the public prosecution shall continue to be applicable until replaced by other regulations, directives or manuals.
The Public prosecutors working for the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission, the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority, Ministry of Justice and the Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority who are transferred to the Federal Attorney General upon satisfying the criteria shall be considered as public prosecutors appointed pursuant to this Proclamation and continue their work.
Public servants, working in the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption Commission, Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority, Ministry of Justice and Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority as support staff for prosecution departments, who are transferred to the Federal Attorney General shall continue their work as employees of the Federal Attorney General pursuant to this Proclamation.
The criminal and civil cases falling under the jurisdiction of the federal public prosecutors but pending in the hands of different federal government offices or regional public prosecutions shall continue to be heard in a manner they were started until the Federal Attorney General takes them over within six months.
Cases against public prosecutors pending under the discipline committee or other public prosecutors administration councils shall be transferred to the public prosecutors administration council established in accordance with this Proclamation;
The files, documents, seized properties and properties found under Federal Ethics and Anti- corruption Commission, Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority and Trade Competition and Consumers Protection Authority which are related to matters transferred to the Federal Attorney General shall be transferred it.
Repealed and Inapplicable Laws
A public prosecutors Proclamation No.74/1993 is hereby repealed by this proclamation.
No laws, in so far that they are inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall be applicable with respect to matters covered under this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
CONTENTS
Proclamation No.942 /2016
Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (Amendment) Proclamation ......................Page 8964
PROCLAMATION No. 942/2016
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE DEFINITION OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE ORGANS OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the Proclamation Defining the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (Amendment) Proclamation 942/2016”.
Amendment
The Definition of Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Proclamation 916/2015 is hereby amended as follows:
Paragraphs (j) and (k) of sub-article (1) of Article 14 of the Proclamation are deleted the subsequent paragraphs (l), (m) and (n) are re-organized as paragraphs (j), (k) and (l), respectively;
Article 16 of the Proclamation is deleted and the subsequent Articles from Article 17 to 42 are renumbered as Articles 16 to 41;
Paragraph (c) is added following paragraph (b) of sub-article (2) of Article 37 of the Proclamation (as renumbered)
“c) the Ethiopian Federal Police Commission.”
Sub-articles (3) and (4) of Article 37 of the Proclamation (as renumbered) are deleted and replaced by the following new sub-articles (3) and (4):
The Charities and Societies Agency shall be accountable to the Ministry of Federal and Pastoralist Development Affairs.
The following executive organs shall be accountable to the Federal Attorney General:
the Justice and Legal System Research Institute;
the Federal Prison Commission.”
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
PROCLAMATION NO. 937/2016 A PROCLAMATION ON SPECIAL GOVERNMENT BONDS
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to issue Special Government Bonds to be used for raising the capital of the Development Bank of Ethiopia;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) of the Constitution, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Special Government Bonds Proclamation No.937/2016”.
Power of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation is hereby empowered:
to issue Special Government Bonds in the amount of Birr 2,567,767,114 (Two Billion Five Hundred Sixty Seven Million Seven Hundred Sixty Seven Thousand One Hundred Fourteen Birr);
utilize the Special Government Bonds issued in accordance with this Proclamation to raise the capital of the Development Bank of Ethiopia.
PART TWO
REDEMPTION AND INTEREST
Redemption
Special Government Bonds issued in accordance with Article 2 above shall be redeemed in 10 years period after a grace period of five years.
Interest
Special Government Bonds issued in accordance with this Proclamation shall bear no interest.
PART THREE
MISCELLANEOUS
Exemption from Stamp Duty and Taxes
No Stamp duty or any other tax shall be levied on any transaction or document relating to the Special Government Bonds.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force up on its publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY
WHEREAS, the Framework Agreement for Cooperation between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay has been signed on the 2nd day of October 2014, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Framework Agreement for Cooperation between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay Ratification  Proclamation No.931 /2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Framework Agreement for Cooperation between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay signed on the 2nd day of October 2014, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry 0f Foreign Affairs
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is hereby empowered to undertake all acts necessary for the implementation of the Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TOGOLESE REPUBLIC
WHEREAS, the Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Togolese Republic has been signed on the 1st day of February 2011 in Addis Ababa;
WHEREAS, the House of Peoples’ Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified it at its session held on the 14 th day of January 2016;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Togolese Republic Ratification Proclamation No. 930/2016”
Ratification of the Agreement
The Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Togolese Republic signed on the 1st day of February 2011 in Addis Ababa is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry Foreign Affairs
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in collaboration with the relevant organs is hereby empowered to implement this Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ETHIO-SENEGALISE JOINT COMMISSION OF COOPERATION
WHEREAS, the Agreement on the creation of the Ethio-Senegalese Joint Commission of Cooperation between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Senegal has been signed in Dakar on the 4th day of December, 2006;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Ethio- Senegalese Joint Commission of Cooperation Creation Agreement Ratification Proclamation No. 929 /2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Agreement on the Creation of the Ethio- Senegalese Joint Commission of Cooperation signed in Dakar on the 4th day of December, 2006, between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Senegal, is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in collaboration with the relevant organs is hereby empowered to implement this Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL
WHEREAS, the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Senegal has been signed on the 4th day of December, 2006 in Dakar;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
ShortTitle
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between The Government Of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and The Government Of the Republic of Senegal Ratification Proclamation No 928/2016’’
Ratification of the Treaty
The Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between The Government Of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and The Government Of the Republic of Senegal signed on the 4th day of December 2006 in Dakar, is hereby ratified.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY ON MUTUAL ABOLITION OF VISAS FOR HOLDERS OF DIPLOMATIC PASSPORTS
WHEREAS, the Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Turkey on Mutual Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic Passports has been signed in Istanbul on the 16th day of December, 2011;
WHEREAS, the House of People’s Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has ratified the said Agreement at its session held on the 14th day of January, 2016;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Turkey on Mutual Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic Passports Ratification Proclamation No.927/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Turkey on Mutual Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic Passports signed in Istanbul on the 16th day of December, 2011, is hereby ratified.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA ON THE WAIVER OF VISA REQUIREMENTS FOR HOLDERS OF DIPLOMATIC, SPECIAL OR SERVICE PASSPORTS
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Agreement Between The Government Of The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and The Government Of The Republic of Tunisia on The Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Diplomatic, Special or Service Passports Ratification Proclamation No 926/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Agreement between The Government Of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and The Government Of the Republic of Tunisia on The Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Diplomatic, Special or Service Passports signed in Addis Ababa on the 10th day of June, 2011, is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Ministry Foreign Affairs in collaboration with the relevant organs is hereby empowered to implement this Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVRERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES ON ABOLITION OF VISAS FOR HOLDERS OF DIPLOMATIC OR SERVICE PASSPORTS
WHEREAS, the Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Seychelles on Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic or Service Passports has been signed in Addis Ababa on the 15th day of July, 2012;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Seychelles on Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic or Service Passports Ratification Proclamation No.925/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Republic of Seychelles on Abolition of Visas for Holders of Diplomatic or Service Passports signed Addis Ababa on the 15th day of July, 2012, is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in collaboration with the relevant organs is hereby empowered to implement this Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
A PROCLAMATION TO RATIFY THE GENERAL COOPERATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF LESOTHO
WHEREAS, the General Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho has been signed in Addis Ababa on the 17th day of July, 2012;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with of Article 55 (1) and (12) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “General Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government the Kingdom of Lesotho Ratification Proclamation No. 924/2016”.
Ratification of the Agreement
The General Cooperation Agreement signed in Addis Ababa, on the 17th day of July,2012 between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho, is hereby ratified.
Responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Collaboration with the relevant Organs is hereby empowered to implement this Agreement.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
ETHIOPIA’S OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS, the Government’s commitment to create a favorable domestic condition for promoting employment opportunities for those who are able to work is intact, it has been found necessary to protect the rights, safety and dignity of Ethiopians who are willing to take-up overseas employment in pursuance of their qualifications and ability;
WHEREAS, it is believed that bilateral agreements with receiving countries may strengthen lawful overseas employment and could prevent human trafficking;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to define the role of the private sector in overseas employment exchange services;
WHEREAS, it has become essential to enhance the role of the Government in the follow-up and monitoring of overseas employment exchange services;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to replace existing Employment Exchange Services Proclamation with new Overseas Employment Proclamation;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Ethiopia’s Overseas Employment Proclamation No.923/2016”.
Definition
In this Proclamation, unless the context requires otherwise:
“Private Employment Agency” or “Agency” means any person other than a Government body, which makes a worker available to an overseas employer by concluding a contract of employment with such a worker;
“license” means a certificate of competence issued by the Ministry to an Agency enabling the latter to engage in providing overseas employment exchange services;
“employer” means any person who employs one or more persons through an Agency or through Government to Government arrangement or through direct employment in accordance with this Proclamation;
“worker” means an individual who has a contractual relation with an employer or an Agency in accordance with this Proclamation and it may, as the case may be, include a job-seeker;
“direct employment” means an employ ment relationship between an employer and a worker without the involvement of a Government organ or an Agency;
“condition of work” and “occupational accident” shall have the meanings provided for under Labour Proclamation;
“certificate of occupational competence” means a document issued by an authorized organ evidencing that the worker is capable of performing a particular task;
“family” means a spouse, ascendants, descendants or relatives up to a second
￼egree through consanguinity or affinity;
“bilateralagreement”meansanagreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the receiving country pertaining to overseas employment;
“Ministry” means the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
“appropriate authority” means a Regional Government organ entrusted with the power to implement labour laws;
“region” means any Regional State specified under Article 47 of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes the Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa City Administrations;
“mission” means Ethiopia’s diplomatic mission, permanent mission, consular office or trade office abroad;
“business organization” means a partnership, share company or private limited company;
“person” means any natural or juridical person;
any expression to the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply to:
overseas employment relation of Ethiopians’ conducted by public employ ment organs, through Agency or on direct employment;
Ethiopians travelling to abroad to engage in overseas contracts of house maid service for non-profit making purposes.
PART TWO
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE SERVICE
SECTION ONE
EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE SERVICE
Recruitment and Placement of Worker
The Ministry may provide recruitment and placement services to Governmental organization in receiving country based on Government to Government agreement.
Types of Services
The services to be provided by the Ministry pursuant to Article 4 of this Proclamation shall include interviewing and selection; causing medical examinations; approval of employment contracts, provision of pre- employment and pre-departure orientations, facilitation of departure of employed workers and other similar services.
Prohibition of Direct Employment
No employer shall directly recruit and employ a worker except through the Ministry or an Agency.
Notwithstanding sub-article (1) of this Article, the Ministry may permit direct employment on the following grounds:
where the employer is a staff of an Ethiopian Mission;
where the employer is an International organization; or
where the job seeker acquires a job opportunity by his own accord in job positions other than house maid service.
The direct employment pursuant to paragraph (c) of sub-article (2) of this Article may be permitted by the Ministry only when evidence of the following are secured:
an assurance secured from a pertinent mission or from mission of country of destination if an Ethiopian mission is not present in the country of destination; and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia that the worker’s basic rights and dignity will be respected in the country of destination;
life and disability insurance coverage for the worker pursuant to Article 62(1) of this Proclamation has been issued;
appropriate air or land transport service together with contract of employment are submitted.
An advertisement to vacant positions permitted for direct employment pursuant to this Article shall only be conducted through the Ministry or the appropriate authority.
SECTION TWO
EDUCATION, TRAINING AND MEDICAL EXAMINATION
Educational level and Occupational Competence Assessment
Any worker who desires to take-up overseas employment shall:
at least complete eighth grade education;
possess a certificate of occupational competence issued by the appropriate competence assessment center for the work he is to be employed.
The worker shall be required to present certificate of occupational competence pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article only when the fulfillment of other requirements set by the employer are ascertained.
Awareness Raising Program
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall:
undertake regular pre-employment and pre-departure awareness raising to citizens who show interest to take-up overseas employment pertaining to the conditions of receiving countries, the required skill for a job position they are taking, their rights and duties and similar other matters;
conduct continuous national awareness raising activities to the public at large by using mass media and disseminating correct and up-to-date information regarding overseas employment.
conduct regular awareness raising programs to Agencies’ board of directors, general managers and employees on issues related to overseas employment;
carryout awareness creation orientation to foreign employers on the conditions of recruitment and employment of Ethiopian employees, existing laws, regulations, directives, requirements and standards for overseas employment.
Medical Examination
The medical examination of a worker shall only be undertaken in a medical institution selected by the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Ministry of Health.
The Agency shall refer the worker for medical examination only when it is ascertained that the worker fulfills other requirements of the Employer.
Whenever a worker is required to undergo a medical examination more than once, such expense shall be covered by the Agency.
SECTION THREE
EXPENSE COVERAGE AND SERVICE FEE
Expense Coverage
The employer shall cover the following expenses:
entry visa fee to the country of destination;
round-trip transport cost;
work permit fee;
residence permit fee;
insurance coverage;
costs associated with visa and document authentication paid to the embassy of country of destination which hosts in Ethiopia;
employment contract approval service fee.
The Agency or employer shall refund the worker’s expenses referred to in sub- article (2) of this Article, if the worker fails to be deployed for work for reasons not attributable to him after incurring the expense.
Whenever the worker, without justified cause, fails to be deployed for work after all requirements for departure are fulfilled, the employer may require the worker to refund expenses incurred regarding the employment pursuant to sub-article(1) of this Article.
Service Fee
The Ministry shall charge the employer a service fee associated with the approval of contract of employment in accordance with Regulations issued by the Council of Ministers.
BILATERAL AGREEMENT AND STRUCTURE
Requirement of Bilateral Agreement
Deployment of workers for overseas employ ment in accordance with this Proclamation shall be effected only if there is a bilateral agreement concluded between the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopian and the receiving country.
Structure
The Ministry shall establish the necessary organizational structure in order to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to it by this
Assignment of a Labour Attaché
The Ministry shall, in consultation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and after obtaining permission from Government, cause the assignment of a Labour Attaché in the mission of the receiving country to ensure protection of the rights, safety and dignity of workers employed overseas.
The duties and responsibilities of the labour attaché to be assigned pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall be determined by a rule of operation to be issued jointly by the Ministry and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
ensure the proper implementation of this Proclamation;
ensure proper provision of cooperation and support relevant to the objectives of organs engaged in counseling and reintegration activities of returnees;
cause the conduct of studies with a view to concluding bilateral agree ments with receiving countries on issues related to employment and thereby establish conducive situation;
cooperate with appropriate organs and ensure the taking legal action against those responsible for violation of rights or damage inflicted on citizens in the receiving countries;
ensure, in cooperation with concerned authorities, that persons involved in human trafficking are immediately brought before justice;
cause the provision of awareness creation training to public on illegal employment exchange activities;
facilitate the exchange of overseas employment information with concerned organs and the establish ment of well-equipped data center;
adopt its own rules of operations.
PART THREE
CONDITIONS OF WORK
SECTION ONE DETERMINATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
Working Condition
The Ministry may issue directive on working condition regarding prevailing overseas labour market and social services.
Content of Model Contract of Employment
The Ministry shall prepare model contract of employment, at least including the following:
regular working time,favorable wages for regular working hours and overtime pay, as appropriate, which shall not be lower than the prescribed minimum wage in the receiving country, the appropriate minimum wage set by the bilateral agreement, international agreements ratified by both countries, whichever is highest;
annual leave, weekly rest and other similar vacations;
free transportation to and from the worksite or offsetting benefit;
free medication, food and accommo dation or offsetting benefits;
insurance coverage for life or disability;
valid grounds for termination of contract of employment.
When model contract of employment is to be formulated as provided under sub- article (1) of this Article, basically, the following shall be taken into account:
the culture, custom, way of life and the labour and social affairs laws of the receiving country and the policies of the employing enterprise;
relevant bilateral and multilateral treaties signed with receiving country, international conventions and resolutions;
prevailing labor market conditions.
Freedom of Parties to Stipulate Contract
Parties to overseas employment contract are at liberty, without contravening Ethiopian government policies, laws and public morality, to stipulate other terms, conditions and benefits that are not provided for in the model contract if it is more beneficial to the worker than the minimum set in the model contract.
Obligation to Disclose
Any Agency shall, to the Ministry, appropriate authority or the mission, disclose within appropriate time all relevant information related to recruitment and placement of workers and other information may be requested with respect to condition of worker.
The Ministry shall issue directive to determine the appropriate time for provision of information pursuant to sub- article (1) of this Article.
SECTION TWO
INSPECTION SERVICE
Inspection
The Ministry shall, in order to ensure the legality of workers going for overseas employment, issue special identification cards for those whose contract of employment has been approved.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall assign labour inspector to monitor any agency whether it discharges its obligations and responsibilities provided for in this Proclamation in.
ascertain that an Agency has possessed fully equipped office, sufficient and appropriate space and necessary expertise for conducting recruitment process, pre employ ment orientation and counseling services before the issuance or renewal of license or change of the existing office;
Ensure that the agency has in place automated data base system.
ensure that the agency has given orientation on general conditions of work, situation of receiving countries, and pre-employment and pre-departure orientation and counseling services to workers destined for overseas employment;
undertake appropriate investigation whenever he is aware or notified that an Agency has contravened this Proclamation or regulations or directives issued hereunder;
undertake monitoring so as to prevent illegal recruitment and deployment of workers;
enter the office of any agency, at any time during working hours, and examine necessary documents, records, books of accounts and other similar documents, and make inquires.
The labour inspector while conducting inspection pursuant to sub-article (3) of this Article shall keep with or show his identity card issued to him by the Ministry or the appropriate authority.
The labour inspector shall submit, the findings of the inspection conducted pursuant to sub-article (3) of this Article to the Ministry or the appropriate authority together with his recommendations on legal measures to be taken.
The Ministry may issue directive on the procedures of conducting inspections pursuant to sub-article (3) of this Article.
The inspector shall be held accountable for abuse of power in accordance with appropriate law.
Any Agency shall have obligation to cooperate for the proper implementation of the responsibility of labour inspector.
PART FOUR
OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE SERVICE THROUGH AN AGENCY SECTION ONE
LICENSE, ELIGIBILITY AND NON- ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE
Requirement of a License
Any person who desires to operate an Agency shall obtain a license from the Ministry.
Any person who wishes to operate in more than one country by issuing license pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall obtain a separate license for each country of operation.
Eligibility to Obtain License
In order to obtain a license of Agency:
where the applicant is sole proprietor, he shall be an Ethiopian citizen and have operating capital not less than Birr one
million;
where the applicant is a business organization, the sole objective shall be overseas employment exchange service and all its members are Ethiopian citizens and have paid up operating capital not less than Birr one million in shares or contributions.
the applicant shall not be a person prohibited pursuant to this Proclamation or other relevant laws not to operate overseas employment exchange service.
Non-eligibility to Obtain License
The following shall not be eligible to obtain license:
for contravention of the Proclamation No. 632/2009, regulations or directive issued there-under;
any Agency, its members or in cases where the Agency is a share company, the Board of Directors whose license had been revoked;
any agency or its members whose license had been revoked for failure to provide remedies for complaint against it for violations of the rights, safety and dignity of workers;
any agency whose license has been suspended for more than three times or written notice for revocation of license has been served on;
an individual accused and sentenced by the court of law for his engagement in human trafficking, smuggling of migrants, organized crime, terrorism acitivity, transfer of narcotic substances or money laundering or individual charged for the crime and whose case is pending before a court of law until decision is rendered;
travel agency, ticket office of airlines or employee of the travel agency or ticket office of airlines, transistor or seaman;
any official or employee in the Ministry, the Appropriate authority, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Main Department for Immigration and Citizenship, Police Commission or any governmental organ entrusted to implement this Proclamation or Ethiopian community overseas in leadership position or the families of these individuals.
SECTION TWO
ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
Requirements to Obtain License
Any applicant who is eligible pursuant to Article 22 of this Proclamation shall fill the application form prepared for such purpose and submit it together with the following documents:
certificate of Business Registration and Trade Name enabling the applicant to operate as an Agency;
where the applicant operates the activity as a business organization, copies of its Memorandum of Association and Articles of Associations authenticated by the Document Authentication and Registration Office;
certificate of clearance from Police confirming that the individual applicant, if he is a sole proprietor, or its members if it is partnership and Board of Directors, management bodies, as well as the officials and employees, if the applicant is a private limited company or share company, if any, were not involved in crimes specified under Article 23 (2) of this Proclamation;
a chart showing the organizational structure of the Agency together with list of required manpower and educational qualifications; job position, personal history and two passport size photographs of each official and employee;
office address of the applicant and certificate of ownership if he is the owner of office or the original copy of the contract of lease authenticated by the Document Authentication and Registration Office if the office is leased one;
verification document to the effect that the security bond pursuant to Article 60 (1) of this Proclamation is complied with;
confirmation document that specifies the general manager has at least first degree and three years’ management work experience;
certificate showing the attendance of the owner and the general manager in pre- license training, if the activity is operated by sole proprietor; or if it is operated by a business organization, a certificate showing the attendance of the members and management members of the business organization in pre-license training;
In the country of destination:
that the applicant has opened a decent office or has represented a citizen of the receiving country duly licensed to engage in overseas employment exchange services and produced a verification document showing same;
that the delegate represented pursuant to paragraph (a) of this sub-article has accepted the representation and this is verified by the Ethiopian Mission or if there is no Ethiopian Mission in the country of destination through the latter’s mission here in Ethiopia and confirmed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and produced a verification document showing same;
that the applicant has a facility for providing temporary food and sheltering services to the workers and to this effect a confirmation letter by the Mission and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs produced;
confirmation letter issued by appropriate organ that the applicant is authorized to freely enter into and exit from the receiving country;
Tax clearance certificate
receipt showing payment of license fee;
other evidences to be prescribed by the directive of the Ministry, as the case may be.
Issuance of License
Whenever the Ministry ensures that the requirements for issuing license as per this Proclamation are met, it shall, within five working days, issue the license to the applicant. If the application for license is denied, such denial shall, within five working days, be communicated in writing to the applicant.
Validity of License
A license issued pursuant to Article 25 of this Proclamation shall remain valid for one year.
Display of License in Conspicuous Place
Any Agency shall display the license issued to it in accordance with this Proclamation in its office in a conspicuous place.
Non-transferability of License and Prohibition of Engagement in more than one Agency
No Agency shall, directly or indirectly, transfer to any other person the license issued to him by the Ministry.
Any person can not operate in more than one Agency directly or indirectly as owner or a member of partner ship or private limited campany, Board of directors, General manager or an employee.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub- article (1) of this Article, in case of death of a sole proprietor, the license may devolve to his legitimate heirs, upon their request, for the mere purpose of preventing disruption in protecting the rights, safety and dignity of workers and winding up of operation of the business in accordance with this Proclamation.
Where the heirs specified under sub- article (3) of this Article seek to resume the operation of the Agency, the Ministry may transfer the license to them upon being satisfied that they meet the requirements.
Notification of Change of Management or an Employee
Any Agency shall, up on making change to its board of directors or general manager or recruit or dismiss any employee, notify same to the Ministry or the Appropriate authority within 10 working days.
Making Management Personnel Public
Any Agency shall, publicize changes of its general manager or its board of directors, within seven working days through a newspaper of wider circulation, radio and television and notify the same to the Ministry or the appropriate authority.
Opening Additional Local Offices
Any Agency shall obtain permission from the Ministry or appropriate authority to open additional local office.
Change of Business Address and Notification
An Agency:
may only change its business address after the Ministry or the appropriate authority verifies and approves that the office complies with the requirements specified under Article 24 (5) of this Proclamation;
shall, within seven working days publish the change of business address effected up on approval pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article in a newspaper having wider circulation and submit evidence of same to the Ministry or the Appropriate authority.
Renewal of License
A license issued in accordance with this Proclamation shall be renewed every year.
Any Agency one month prior to the expiry of the period specified under sub- article (1) of this Article shall, in order to renew a license, fill an application form and submit it to the Ministry with the following documents:
evidence of the deposit of a security bond pursuant to Article 60 (1) of this Proclamation;
financial statement audited by external auditor and evidence showing that the Agency has settled its tax liability;
clearance from Police showing that those persons mentioned under Article 24 (3) of this Proclamation are free from any criminal activity specified under Article 23 (2) of this proclamation;
evidence of renewed license of its foreign representative;
general report that indicates the status of deployed and returned overseas workers;
other documents specified in the directives of the Ministry.
Where the Ministry is satisfied that the Agency has met the requirements for license renewal, up on causing to pay license renewal fee, shall issue the renewed license within three working days; where the application for license renewal is denied, such denial shall be communicated in writing to the applicant within the same timeline.
The license not renewed within the validity period specified under Article 26 of this Proclamation shall be suspended.
Where an Agency fails to renew its license in due time, its license may be renewed within three months following the expiry date, up on payment of 20% additional fee for the first month; 40% additional fee for the second month and 60% additional fee for the third month in the form of penalty.
Incentive Scheme
The Ministry may issue directive on incentive scheme to evaluate and reward Agencies involved in the sector and achieve good performance.
SECTION THREE
EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE SERVICE 35.
Advertisement for Overseas Employment
Any Agency shall, as the case may be, submit to the Ministry or the appropriate authority to register and get approval before advertizing any overseas job vacancy.
Job vacancy advertisement through any mass media, shall indicate the following:
the name of the Agency, address and license number issued to it by the Ministry and the authorized country for sending workers;
number of vacant job positions, required qualification, wage rate, duration of employment, country of destination and worksite and other necessary information;
a declaration that the Agency does not collect service charge from the worker for any service it provides.
Recruitment of Worker
Any Agency shall conduct worker recruitment only within the premises of its office.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub- article (1) of this Article, where the recruitment requires substantial work force, the Ministry or the appropriate authority may authorize a temporary recruitment venue the particulars of which shall be prescribed in the directives of the Ministry.
Approval of Contract of Employment
An Agency shall submit for approval a contract of employment signed by the employer, the Agency and the worker which is drawn up in accordance with the model contract of the Ministry and up on fulfilling other requirements specified in the directive issued by the Ministry.
The signature of the employer in the contract of employment specified under sub-article (1) of this Article and other documents attached to shall be verified by the appropriate Mission and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Where the Ministry is satisfied that the conditions stipulated under sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article are met, it shall approve and register the contract of employment with in a time prescribed by the directive.
Deployment of Worker and Reporting
Any Agency shall:
deploy the worker within one month after the approval of the contract of employment;
notify to the Ethiopian Mission or Consular office in the country of destination and cause registration of deployed workers within 15 days with; ensure that the worker has obtained work permit and residence permit and report the same to the Ministry.
Revocation of Contract of Employment
Where the Agency fails to deploy the worker within the time-limit prescribed under Article 38 (1) of this Proclamation, it shall notify along with reason to the Ministry within one month for the revocation of the approved contract of employment.
Joint and Several Liability
Where the contract of employment of a worker is breached, the Agency and the employer shall be held jointly and severally liable.
PART FIVE
VIOLATION AND CORRESPONDING MEASURE
SECTION ONE
VIOLATIONS BY AN AGENCY AND CORRESPONDING CORRECTIVE MEASURES
Power to Decide Administrative Matters
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall have power to hear and decide administrative matters involving or arising out of violations of this Proclamation, and Regulations and Directives issued hereunder including refund of fees illegitimately collected from workers.
Type of Contraventions
The contravention of sub-article (2) or (3) of this Article shall entail suspension or revocation measure against the license of an Agency.
The following contraventions shall entail suspension of a license:
obstruction or attempt to obstruct the activities of labour inspector assigned for the purpose of inspection by the Ministry or appropriate authority;
appointing a general manager or members of board of directors or recruit an employee without prior notice to the Ministry or the appropriate authority;
influencing or attempting to influence any employer not to employ a worker other than those registered by his own Agency;
failure, without good cause, to deploy a worker within the legally prescribed time limit;
failure to provide remedy for applications pertaining to violations of workers’ rights, safety and dignity;
disregard of orders and notices issued by the Ministry or the appropriate authority or failure to follow other legal processes;
failure to submit periodic reports required by the Ministry or the appropriate authority which are related to deployed workers, vacant job positions, foreign currency earned by the Agency in the form of commission for its services;
failure to submit report on the lists of workers who are terminated from employment due to various reasons and other similar information requested by the Ministry or the appropriate authority;
failure to display its license in a conspicuous place of its office;
failure to provide adequate service as required by this Proclamation;
withholding of the worker’s wage or his remittances;
failure to refund expenses of worker who was not deployed for reason not imputable to him;
failure to provide pre-departure orientation and counseling service to workers destined for overseas employment;
failure to comply with Article 60(4) of this Proclamation.
The following contraventions shall entail revocation of a license:
the direct or indirect engagement of the owner, general manager or employee of an Agency licensed as sole proprietor as a manager or as an employee in a travel agency or air ticket office management;
for an Agency established in the form of:
partnership or private limited company when its members, general manager or employee; or
share company when its board of directors or general manager or employee,
a manager or an employee in travel agency or in air ticket office engage directly or indirectly in activities;
failure to renew license within the period prescribed under Article 33 (5) of this Proclamation;
recruitment and deployment of a worker who is below the age of eighteen years;
obtaining or renewing license based on falsified evidence;
recruiting or deploying workers to a destination where there is no bilateral agreement between Ethiopia and the receiving country or to a destination where the Ministry has put prohibition;
recruiting or deploying workers to a service that adversely affects public health or morality or damages the country’s image
transferring or changing ownership of a license in contravention of the provisions of this Proclamation;
receiving fee, in cash or in kind, from a worker in return for overseas employment exchange service;
deployment of a worker before the approval of the contract of employ ment by the Ministry;
sending a worker to a destination other than what is stipulated in his contract of employment;
engaging in a type of service, place of work or country apart from those stipulated in the license;
assigning a worker to an employer other than that mentioned in the approved contract of employment;
engaging a person, in an Agency’s business, who is prohibited from overseas employment exchange service by this Proclamation, any other law or by the decision of court;
furnishing falsified evidence or document or advertisement in order to recruit or deploy a worker;
substituting or replacing the approved contract of employment by another without notifying to and approval of the Ministry;
withholding and prohibiting travel document and other information of the worker before or after deployment;
intentional falsifying or changing worker’s travel document;
compelling a worker to relinquish his rights and benefits through fraudulent practice or duress.
Submission of Complaint
Any victim worker or his representative may submit oral or written complaint, to the Ministry or the appropriate authority when this Proclamation or any regulation or directive issued hereunder or any other relevant law has been contravened by an Agency.
The complaint pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article, if submitted orally, the officer of the Ministry or the appropriate authority shall write on hardcopy and cause the complainant to sign.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority may conduct proceedings on its own initiative or based on reports received from other body on the violation of the provisions of this Proclamation.
Content of Complaint
The complaint to be submitted pursuant to Article 43 of this Proclamation shall, among other explanatory notes, include the following:
name and address of the complainant;
name and address of the Agency against whom a complaint was submitted;
nature of the complaint, relevant facts and reasons for the complaint;
time and place of the commission of the act complained;
the amount of claim, if any;
relief sought;
other relevant supportive evidences.
Complaint Hearing
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall open a file to a complaint submitted to it pursuant to Article 43 and 44 of this Proclamation and proceed examining and hearing of the case.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall, up on receipt of the complaint, issue summon order, together with the copy of the compliant and supporting documents, if any, directing the respondent Agency to present his statement of defense within ten working days.
Where the respondent Agency fails to submit his statement of defense to the complaint he received through summon pursuant to sub-article (2) of this Article ex-parte proceeding shall resume.
Withdrawal of complainant by the complainant for whatever reason, shall not bar the Ministry or the appropriate authority from examining and passing decision on the complaint.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall, within one month, render its decision on the complaint submitted to it.
Temporary Measure
The Ministry shall:
not approve any contract of employment submitted by the respondent Agency, until the complaint instituted on violation of this Proclamation, regulation and directives issued hereunder has been examined and determined;
suspend the respondent Agency’s license until the complaint is disposed on the following grounds:
if the Agency against which complaint is lodged fails to appear in person or fails to present relevant document after receiving order;
if it is believed that the continued operation of the Agency may lead to further violation or exploitation of workers to be recruited or adversely affect relations with any country or prejudice national interest;
there is a prima facie evidence of a case for violation of this Proclamation, regulations or directive issued hereunder.
Administrative Measure
If it is proved that an Agency has committed contraventions specified under Article 42 (2) of this Proclamation;
its license shall be suspended for three months, if the violation is for he first time;
its license shall be suspended for six months, if the violation is for the second time;
its license shall be suspended for twelve months, if the violation is for a third time.
If the Agency contravenes Article 42 (2) of this Proclamation for the fourth time or if it has committed any of the contraventions specified under Article 42 (3) of this Proclamation, its license shall be revoked..
Commission of any of the contraventions from paragraph (a) to (s) excluding paragraph (c) of Article 42 (3) of this Proclamation shall entail criminal liability according to the circumstance as per appropriate criminal law besides to Administrative measure.
Legal consequences of license suspension or revocation
An Agency whose license has been suspended or revoked shall cease to engage in any overseas employment exchange service.
An Agency whose license has been revoked shall, within five working days, return the license to the Ministry.
Whenever the Ministry suspends or revokes the license of an Agency for any reason; this fact shall be notified to appropriate organs and to the public at large through convenient means.
Whenever the appropriate authority suspends the license of an Agency for any reason; this fact shall be notified to appropriate organs and to the public at large through convenient means.
Suspension or revocation of license does not relieve an Agency from responding to lawful requests of the workers it sent overseas.
Content of Decision
The decision of the Ministry or the appropriate authority rendered in accordance with Article 45 (5) of this Proclamation shall be written in short and precise manner and contain the following:
material facts;
issue framed;
laws, regulations or directives relevant to the issue;
reasoning and conclusion;
crux of the decisions;
Execution Order
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall issue an execution order to the respondent Agency to execute its decision rendered in accordance with Article 45 (5) of this Proclamation.
The respondent Agency shall, within 15 days, execute the order of the Ministry or the appropriate authority issued pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Proclamation.
Priority of Execution
When an Agency held liable by the decision of Ministry or the appropriate authority or the organ empowered to entertain labor disputes upon contravening the recruitment process prescribed under this Proclamation, but fails to execute the decision, the following priority of execution shall be applied.
over the Agency’s blocked account allocated for the overseas workers’ security bond;
over the Agency’s movable property if the Agency is sole proprietor or over the movable property of the business if the Agency is a business organization;
over the Agency’s immovable property if the Agency is sole proprietor or over the immovable property of the business if the Agency is a business organization.
SECTION TWO
VIOLATIONS BY AN EMPLOYER, AN AGENCY’S REPRESENTATIVE AND WORKERS AND THE CORRESPONDING MEASURES
Power to Decide Administrative Matters
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall have the power to hear and decide administrative matters that emanate from the violation of this Proclamation and regulations and directives issued hereunder by the employer, representative Agency or a worker.
Violations Committed by Employer and Representative of Agency
The following violations shall suffice to impose appropriate measure, against employer or representative of an Agency:
failure to discharge its obligation as agreed in the contract of employment;
failure to discharge its obligation as per the delegation;
withholding or denying access to the worker’s legal travel documents for whatever reasons;
withholding, without good cause, the workers wage or his remittances;
negligently causing serious injury, health problem or death on the worker;
committing an act that violates worker’s human dignity and moral;
commission of sexual harassment on the worker
contravention of the provision of this Proclamation, regulations or directives issued hereunder.
Complaint Against an Employer or a Representative Agency and the Decision Making
A victim worker or any person may submit oral or written complaint to the Ministry or the appropriate authority alleging the commission of violation by employer or a representative of Agency.
The complaint pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article, if submitted orally, the officer of the Ministry or the appropriate authority shall write on hardcopy and cause the complainant to sign.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority may conduct proceedings on its own initiative or based on reports received from other body on the violation of the provisions of this Proclamation.
An employer or a representative Agency against whom a complaint has been lodged may temporarily be suspended from employing worker from Ethiopia or participating in overseas employment
exchange service until such time the complaint is disposed of.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall, within one month, render decision on the complaint submitted before it.
Content of the Complaint
Any complaint submitted pursuant to Article 54 (1) and (2) of this Proclamation shall contain the following information:
the name and address of the complainant;
the name and address of the employer or a representative of Agency against whom complaint is lodged;
the nature of the violation committed;
the time and place of the violation committed;
other supportive evidences.
Legal Consequence of the Decision
Where the Ministry or the appropriate authority ascertains that the employer or a representative of Agency has committed the contravention complained of:
the employer shall be prohibited from employing worker from Ethiopia;
the representative of the Agency shall be prohibited from participating in the Ethiopian overseas employment activity;
the employer or the representative of the Agency shall be liable to pay reasonable compensation for the contravention it committed pursuant to Article 53 of this Proclamation.
Contraventions by a worker
The following violations shall suffice to impose appropriate measure against worker:
failure to discharge his obligation he as agreed in the contract of employment;
commission of crimes punishable in Ethiopia or in the country of destination;
failure to respect the religion, custom or customary practice of the country of destination;
unwillingness to be deployed, without good cause, after the contract of employment has been approved by the Ministry;
an unauthorized use of employers’ or colleagues money or property;
terminating contract of employment without good cause.
Administrative Measures
Without prejudice to the liability of the worker in accordance with other relevant laws for the contravention of Article 57 of this Proclamation, the following administrative measures shall apply:
if the contravention is committed for the first time, the worker shall be suspended from overseas employment for six months;
if the contravention is committed for the second time, the worker shall be suspended from overseas employment for one year;
if the contravention is committed for the third time, the worker shall be disqualified from overseas employment;
Right to Lodge Pleading before Court of Law
A party aggrieved by the decision of the Ministry or the appropriate authority that emanate from the violation of this proclamation , regulations and directives issued here under may, within fifteen days, lodge his pleading to the Federal High Court or a regional court having jurisdiction,.
The decision given by court of law pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall be final.
PART SIX
WELFARE SERVICE SECTION ONE
FINANCIAL GUARANTEE AND INSURANE 60. Financial Guarantee
Any Agency shall deposit USD 100,000 or its equivalent in Birr in a blocked bank account for purposes of guaranteeing the protection of the rights and safety of deployed workers.
The amount of money deposited in blocked bank account pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article shall not be released unless permission is obtained from the Ministry.
Where the Agency fails to execute the duty imposed on it pursuant to paragraph (a) and (b) of Article 69(1) of this Proclamation, the Ministry is empowered to withdraw the required amount from the deposited guarantee money and use for the intended purpose.
Where the deposited amount has been used pursuant to Article 51 (1) of this Proclamation and sub-article (3) of this Article, the Agency shall replenish the fund within 10 working days.
Whenever the Agency ceases operation in what so ever condition, its financial guarantee shall be released by the Ministry, when there is no claim against the Agency before any competent organ and after six months from the termination of the employment contracts of all workers who were deployed overseas by the Agency.
Foreign Employers’ Guarantee Fund
A Foreign Employers’ Guarantee Fund shall be established pursuant to this Proclamation for all workers hired by a foreign Governmental Organizations through the Ministry or a foreign employer who has been allowed for direct employment, for the purpose of covering claims of workers that may arise from breach of contract of employment.
The foreign employer specified under sub-article (1) of this Article shall, for each worker it recruits, allocate USD 50 to the Foreigner Employers’ Guarantee Fund established hereunder.
The Fund established under sub-article (1) of this Article shall be administered by the Ministry.
The Fund shall only be utilized:
mainly for settling claims pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article;
for purchasing treasury bonds and for profitable and convenient investments as determined by the directive of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation.
The Guarantee Fund shall not be subject to attachment or set-off any payment of debit.
Insurance Coverage
The employer shall, from the domestic insurance market, buy life and disability insurance of the worker deployed overseas. The Ministry may issue a directive prescribing the details.
An Agency or the worker shall present to the Ministry the insurance policy document accompanied with contract of employment.
SECTION TWO
ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO WORKERS
Responsibility
The Ministry and, as appropriate, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall have the responsibility to ensure that the rights, safety and dignity of worker deployed in overseas employment are respected.
Any Agency shall have duty to cause the employer to respect obligations enshrine in the contract of employment with respect to a worker he has deployed overseas.
Provision of Support
The Ministry or the appropriate authority may entertain request for support claimed by the worker or a person who has concern for the worker in connection with issues of overseas employment.
When support is requested pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article, the Ministry or the appropriate authority shall order the Agency to act up on support sought or problem brought to its attention and to submit report on the status or condition of the worker.
Where the Agency or the employer fails to act for support requested by the worker or a person who has concern for the worker, the Ministry or the appropriate authority may take the necessary administrative measure in accordance with this Proclamation.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall, in cooperation with concerned bodies, facilitate reintegration supports for Ethiopian overseas workers deployed and return in accordance with this Proclamation; the details of which shall be specified in the directive.
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall provide legal assistance to workers victimized in connection with overseas employment.
Registration of worker on leave or vacation
Any worker coming to homeland being on leave or vacation and returning back to same employer shall be registered by the Ministry upon presentation of the following documents:
valid passport;
visa and work permit valid for the country of destination;
other evidences to be requested by the Ministry.
SECTION THREE
CONCILIATION AND REPATRIATION OF WORKERS
Conciliation
The Ministry or the appropriate authority may receive and conciliate any complaint submitted to it by a worker, an Agency or employer relating to overseas employment.
Conciliation Proceedings
The Ministry or the appropriate authority shall, upon receipt of a complaint, notify within three working days to the respondent and strive to bring concerned parties together to discuss the possibility of arriving at an amicable settlement within fifteen working days.
The issues, on which amicable settlement is reached, shall be binding and enforceable.
Where efforts for amicable settlement fail, the complainant may submit his case to adjudication office of the Ministry or appropriate authority, as appropriate.
Administrative Measures
Where the Agency against whom complaint was lodged fails, without good cause,
to appear on the date specified for conciliation, or
to abide by the terms of the approved settlement, the Ministry shall not approve any contract of employment submitted by the Agency, until it complies thereto.
Repatriation of Workers
Any Agency shall have the following obligations:
transporting back the worker and his personal belongings by covering air transport fee upon termination of contract of employment;
where the workers sustains serious bodily injury or dies, unless there is valid reason for delay, shall repatriate his body and personal effects accompanied with legal medical certificate witnessing his injury or death within 15 days and shall cover all expenses of air transport associated with the repatriation;
Cover medical expenses to a worker who has been repatriated due to serious bodily injury.
Where the worker terminates his contract of employment without good cause, the Agency may reclaim its expenses after repatriating the worker.
PART SEVEN
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Determining Number of Agencies Work with one Representative and an Agency with Representatives
The Ministry shall determine by directive the number of Ethiopian Agencies to be represented by a single licensed representative in the country of destination and the number of representatives in the country of destination with whom an Ethiopian Agency works.
Labor Dispute Resolution
Any dispute arising between the worker and the employer or an Agency in connection with rights and claims shall be resolved before a Labor Bench established pursuant to Labor Proclamation.
Burden of Proof
Whenever a worker deployed for overseas employment institutes a court case pertaining to work conditions and if the employer or the Agency objects the proceeding, the burden of proof lies on the Agency or the employer to show that the action does not have a legally valid ground.
Period of Limitation
Any administrative complaint against an employer, Agency, representative of Agency or a worker for violations of this Proclamation shall be barred by limitation unless submitted to the Ministry within three years from the date of commission of the wrong or from the time the commission of the wrong was known.
Prohibition
For any person it is prohibited to receive service charge from a worker for overseas employment exchange service.
The Ministry may prohibit the overseas movement of citizens for employment, whenever the country of destination is believed to be a war-zone, affected by natural calamities or contagious diseases which endanger the safety of citizens.
Power to issue Regulation and Directives
The Council of Ministers may issue regulations for the proper implement ation of this Proclamation.
The Ministry may issue directives for the proper implementation of this Proclamation and the regulation to be issued pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Any person shall have duty to cooperate for the proper implementation of this Proclamation.
Repeal and Inapplicable Laws
Employment Exchange Service Proclamation No. 632/2009 is hereby repealed.
No law, regulations, directives or practice shall, in so far as it is inconsistent with this Proclamation, be applicable in respect of matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub- article (1) of this Article, regulations and directives issued pursuant to Proclamation No.632/2009 shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with this Proclamation, remain in force until replaced by regulations and directives to be issued pursuant to this Proclamation.
Transitory Provisions
Any dispute pertaining to overseas employment pending before any competent organ to settle labour disputes prior to the coming into force of this Proclamation shall be settled in accordance with the law and procedure which were in force before the coming into force of this Proclamation.
Any Agency licensed for overseas employment service by virtue of the Proclamation No.632/2009, if wishes to resume the service, shall issue a new license within three months from the effective date of this Proclamation. Failure to issues new license within the time-limit shall make the former license null and void.
Notwithstanding the provision of sub- article (2) of this Article, revocation of license may not relieve an Agency from rightful claims arising from workers’ it deployed.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 77 (1) of this Proclamation, the Proclamation No.632/2009 shall apply on local employment exchange service and on new applicants for local employment exchange service until a new law pertaining to it is issued.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
PROCLAMATION No. 922/2015
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE AUTHENTICATION AND REGISTRATION OF DOCUMENTS
WHEREAS, authentication of documents provide reliable means of evidence and thus facilitate social, economic, contractual and other relations between persons both at domestic and international levels as well as registration of documents ensures availability of documents whenever required and provide guarantees for constitutional rights;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to put in place law and procedure that meets international standard to make the activities of authentication and registration of documents uniform, effective and efficient all over the country;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the existing laws of authentication and registration of documents to create transparent relations between authentication and registration institutions and supervising improperly certified documents and to enable to have efficient economic and social relations among persons as well as to make the procedures predictable and thereby to create one economic community;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55 (6) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the “Authentication and Registration of Documents’ Proclamation No. 922/ 2015”.
Definitions
In this Proclamation unless the context requires otherwise:
“document” means any contract, will, document of
power of attorney or revocation, a document translated from one language into another by a licensed translator, copy of a document, document of vital event, education and professional certificate, memorandum or/and articles of association, minutes or any written matter submitted for authentication and registration in accordance with this Proclamation;
“to authenticate a document” means to sign and affix a seal by witnessing the signing of a new document by the person who has prepared such document or the person it concern and after ascertaining that this formality is fulfilled; or to sign and affix a seal on an already signed document by ascertaining its authenticity through an affidavit or specimen signature and/or seal;
“to register a document” means to register a document in a register prepared for the purpose by giving identification number or to register and deposit a document which is required by law to be deposited with authentication and registration institution;
“institution” means a federal or regional organ duly authorized to perform duties of authentication and registration of documents;
“notary” means a person who is employed to authenticate a document in an institution duly authorized by law to authenticate and register documents;
“Ministry” means the Ministry of Justice;
“region” means any state referred to under Article 47 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia;
“person”meansanynaturalorjudicialperson;
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply to documents to be authenticated and registered by the federal and regional institutions vested with the powers and duties to authenticate and register documents as well as by the other federal government organs vested with such powers and duties in this Proclamation.
PART TWO
AUTHENTICATION AND REGISTRATION INSTITUTIONS AND OBJECTIVES
Federal Institution
This Proclamation shall apply to documents to be authenticated and registered by the federal and regional institutions vested with the powers and duties to authenticate and register documents as well as by the other federal government organs vested with such powers and duties in this Proclamation.
Regional Institution
Regions shall establish institutions for enforcement of this Proclamation.
The structure of the institutions to be established in accordance with sub-article (1) of this Article shall be determined by respective regions based on their objective realities.
Regional institutions shall, for the purpose of maintaining the uniformity of national document authentication and registration system, have a responsibility to send to the federal institution the necessary data of documents they authenticated and registered as well as to implement other collaborative activities.
Other Federal Government Organs Vested with the Powers and Duties of Authentication of Document Notwithstanding the document authentication and registration powers given to the Organs by other laws, the following organs shall have the power of document authentication.
The Ethiopian Embassies and Consular Offices shall authenticate documents to be sent to Ethiopia.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall authenticate:
documents authenticated by Ethiopian Embassies and Consular Offices and by embassies and consular offices of foreign countries in Ethiopia;
documents that are to be sent abroad and require authentication under the law of the receiving country.
Commanders of divisions of the defense force shall authenticate documents submitted by members of the defense force who are on active duty.
Heads of federal prisons shall authenticate documents submitted to them by prisoners or detainees.
￼7. Objectives of Document Authentication and Registration
Any activity or procedure of documents authentication and registration conducted at federal and regional level in accordance with this Proclamation shall follow the following objectives:
creating cooperative spirit of working relationship among regional and federal institutions conducting document authentication and registration;
ensuring the uniformity of the documents authentication and registration towards to the national vision and mission of the country;
protecting citizens’ rights of producing private property, use and transfer through legal means and thereby supporting the justice system and ensuring the rule of law;
ensuring the documents sent from other countries to Ethiopia that they are not against law and moral; and the recognition of documents, in the receiving country, sent to other countries from Ethiopia;
facilitating the efforts of building good governance and free market system;
creating accessible working system by using new technological inputs and by enhancing the quality levels of institutional service;
act in collaboration with stakeholders.
PART THREE AUTHENTICATION ACTIVITIES, PROCEDURES AND DUTIES OF THE NOTARY
Authentication Activities
The documents authentication activities include the following:
to authenticate documents;
to authenticate and register copies of documents against their originals and register same;
to administer oath and receive affidavits;
to keep custody of specimen of signatures and/or seal upon request by those concerned;
to ascertain the legality of documents submitted for authentication;
to ascertain the capacity, right and authority of persons who are about to sign or who have signed documents submitted for authentication;
to ascertain with respect to contracts made to transfer properties for which title certificates are issued under the law:
the right of the transferor to transfer the property; and
that the property is not mortgaged or pledged or that such property is not attached by a court order;
to ascertain whether documents are produced by legitimate authority;
to provide evidence upon request by authorized or appropriate organ about authenticated and registered documents;
to conduct other similar activities.
Ascertaining the Legality of Documents
A notary shall, before authenticating and registering a document, ascertain that its contents are not illegal or immoral.
Apart from ascertaining its legitimacy, a notary shall not have power to change or cause to be changed the contents of a document submitted for authentication.
Ascertaining the Conditions of Ownership and the Owners of Certain Properties Without prejudice to provisions provided by the relevant law, before authenticating documents relating to the transfer of properties for which title certificates are issued under the law, the notary shall ascertain that:
the transferor of the property has title certificate for the property in accordance with the relevant law;
the property is not mortgaged or pledged or is not attached by a court order;￼￼￼￼
PROCLAMATION No. ……/2017
A PROCLAMATION TO PROVIDE FOR THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
WHEREAS, the participation of the private sector is recognized an essential strategy to realize the country’s development objectives, including the infrastructure system;
WHEREAS, it is desirable to establish a favorable legislative framework to promote and facilitate the implementation of privately financed infrastructure projects by enhancing transparency, fairness and long-term sustainability;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to further develop the general principles of transparency, economy and fairness in the award of contracts by public entities through the establishment of specific procedures for the award of infrastructure projects;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
CHAPTER ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Private Partnership Proclamation No. ___/2017".
Definitions In this Proclamation unless the context requires otherwise:
"Board" means the public private partnership board established pursuant to this Proclamation.
"Contracting Authority" means a Public Body or a Public Enterprise which intends to enter into a Public Private Partnership Agreement with a Private Party.
"Infrastructure Facility" means any physical facility and systems that directly or indirectly provide Public Service Activity.
"Ministry" or "Minister" means the Ministry or Minister of Finance and Economic Cooperation, respectively.
“Person” means any natural or juridical person.
"Private Party" means a party that enters into a Public Private Partnership Agreement with a Contracting Authority.
"Project Agreement" means the Public Private Partnership Agreement and other agreements entered into between the Contracting Authority or another Public Entity and the Private Party for the purpose of the project.
"Project Company" means the legal entity incorporated under the laws of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia by the successful bidder whose sole purpose shall be to execute and implement the Public Private Partnership Agreement and other Project Agreements, if any.
"Public Body" means any organ of the Federal Government, which is wholly financed by the Federal Government budget.
"Public Enterprise" means an enterprise fully owned by the federal government and defined under the relevant laws of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
"Public Entity" means a Public Body or a Public Enterprise.
"Public Private Partnership" or "PPP" means a long-term agreement between a Contracting Authority and a Private Party under which a Private Party:
undertakes to perform a Public Service Activity that would otherwise be carried out by the Contracting Authority;
receives a benefit by way of
compensation by or on behalf of the Contracting Authority;
tariffs or fees collected by the Private Party from users or consumers of a service; and
a combination of such compensation and such charges or fees.
"Public Private Partnership Agreement" means a contract concluded between the Contracting Authority and a Private Party setting forth the terms and conditions of the Public Private Partnership.
"Public Service Activity" means any activity the government has decided to perform for the reason that it has deemed it to be necessary in the general interest of the public and considered that private initiative was inadequate for carrying it out.
"PPP Directorate General" or "Public Private Partnership Directorate General” means the unit established within the Ministry pursuant to this Proclamation.
“Regional States” means any region referred to in Article 47(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes the Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa city administrations;
"Unsolicited Proposal" means any proposal undertaking a Public Private Partnership project that is not submitted in response to a request or solicitation issued by the Contracting Authority within the context of a competitive selection procedure.
"Value for Money" means that the undertaking of a Public Service Activity of the Contracting Authority by a Private Party under a Public Private Partnership results in a net benefit accruing to that Contracting Authority or consumer defined in terms of cost, price, quality, quantity, timeliness of implementation and other factors which influence the determination of the best economic value compared to other options of delivering this Public Service Activity or use of government property.
any expression in the masculine gender includes the feminine.
Objective This Public Private Partnership Scheme shall have the following objectives:
to create a favorable framework for promoting and facilitating the implementation of privately financed projects to support Ethiopian economic growth;
to enhance transparency, fairness, Value for Money, efficiency and long-term sustainability;
to improve quality of Public Service Activity; and
to maintain macroeconomic stability by reducing growth in public debt.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply to
Public Private Partnership projects of Public Bodies and
Public Enterprises;
The following activities are expressly excluded from this Proclamation:
oil, mines, minerals, rights of air space; and
Privatization or divestiture of public infrastructure or public enterprises.
Forms of Public Private Partnerships
Public private partnerships may involve any of the following activities or any combination thereof:
The design, construction, financing, maintenance or operation of new Infrastructure Facilities;
The rehabilitation, modernization, financing, expansion, maintenance or operation of existing Infrastructure Facilities and/or
The administration, management, operation or maintenance pertaining to new or existing Infrastructure Facilities.
The Contracting Authority shall select the form of contract which reflects the desired allocation of risks and responsibilities for each agreement.
Contracting Authority
The Contracting Authority for a Public Private Partnership shall be the Public Entity legally mandated to be responsible for the infrastructure service to be delivered by way of the Public Private Partnership.
In the event that a Public Private Partnership project involves infrastructures and/or services which are the responsibility of more than one Public Entity, the Board shall among Public entities select the appropriate Contracting Authority for this specific project.
Authorization to grant rights for Public Private Partnerships
Rights to use or operate publicly owned Infrastructure Facilities and/or provide Public Service Activities may be granted by the Contracting Authority which by its establishing legislation is responsible for such activities, to a Private Party in accordance with this law.
CHAPTER TWO. ADMINISTRATION OF PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS
Public Private Partnership Board
It is hereby established the Public Private Partnership Board which shall consist of:
The Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation;
The National Bank of Ethiopia;
The Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity;
The Ministry of Transport;
The Ministry of Public Enterprises;
The National Planning Commission;
The Ministry of Federal and Pastoralist Affairs;
The Public Private Partnership Directorate General;
Two members from the private sector appointed by the Minister.
The Minister of Finance and Economic Cooperation shall chair the Board.
The PPP Directorate General shall act as secretariat to the Board.
Responsibilities of the Board
The Board shall have the following responsibilities:
approve the PPP project structure (including any feasibility study related thereto) prior to the commencement of the tendering process;
approve significant changes to the risk allocation or expected cash flow from that envisioned under the initial structure pursuant to changes during the tendering process or prior to signing;
approve any significant amendment to a Project Agreement;
identify the appropriate Contracting Authority when required for specific projects;
recommend specific tax or other incentives for a particular project to the relevant authority;
approve the tender or negotiation results carried out to select the private sector which can participate in the Public Private Partnership;
recommend government support requested in accordance with Article
The Board shall have the power to prohibit a Contracting Authority from issuing any solicitation document and/or formalizing any agreement for any Public Private Partnership project which does not demonstrate Value for Money or meet minimum standards set forth by the PPP Directorate General.
The Board shall have the power to instruct a Public Body or a Public Enterprise to carry out a project as a Public Private Partnership project. Such Public Body or a Public Enterprise shall comply with the instruction of the Board.
The Board may consider delegating its responsibilities to the Ministry or the PPP Unit as it may consider appropriate.
The Board shall meet quarterly, or more frequently as necessary, to carry out its responsibilities.
The Board shall issue a guideline prescribing its working procedures.
PPP Directorate General
A PPP Directorate General is hereby established within the Ministry.
The Ministry shall be responsible to adequately staff the PPP Directorate General and for ensuring that there is an incentive mechanism to employees of the Directorate General.
Objectives of the Directorate General The Directorate General shall have the objectives of achieving the country’s development objectives by ensuring that public private partnerships are carried out as per the provisions of this Proclamation.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Directorate General
The PPP Directorate General shall have the following responsibilities:
promote the participation of the private sector in the financing, construction, maintenance and operation of Public Service Activities;
provide technical assistance and support to the Board, the Ministry and the contracting authorities on all matters relating to Public Private Partnerships;
make recommendations regarding the Public Private Partnership legal, regulatory, institutional and policy framework;
develop and implement guidance, mandatory or otherwise, related to project preparation, procurement procedures, preparation of bid documents and Project Agreements or other topics as may be necessary to support the implementation of Public Private Partnerships in accordance with this Proclamation;
conceptualize, identify and categorize projects for purposes of this Proclamation;
review and issue opinions regarding the viability of proposed projects and make recommendations to the Board, the Ministry and contracting authorities;
disseminate information regarding projects contemplated as potential Public Private Partnerships;
select private sector candidates that may participate in public private partnerships in accordance with the procedures provided in this Proclamation and submit its recommendations to the Board;
monitor and evaluate the progress of implementation of Public Private Partnerships;
at certain intervals, determined by the Board provide information to the public on the implementation of public private partnership projects.
Carry cut activities delegated to it by the Board;
CHAPTER THREE
Contracting Authority
Subject to other provisions of this Proclamation, the Contracting Authority shall have overall responsibility for the initiation, development, procurement, signing of agreements and implementation of Public Private Partnership projects it administers.
In addition to those specified in the directive, the Contracting Authority shall have the following detailed responsibilities:
Execute preparatory activities for a potential project, including all relevant feasibility and options studies, financial models, Value for Money analysis and other studies necessary to structure a technically and financially viable project;
Submit proposed projects to the Ministry and the Board as provided in this Proclamation;
Establish a technically qualified project management team to oversee the transaction process;
Sign public private partnership agreements referred to it by the Directorate General;
Provide information, as reasonably requested, by the Ministry, the Board and the PPP Directorate General;
Unless otherwise stipulated in the Project Agreements, supervise the Private Party and ensure its strict compliance with the terms of the Project Agreements.
Project Management Team within the Contracting Authority
A Contracting Authority that intends to enter into a Public Private Partnership shall establish a project management team dedicated to a particular project which shall consist of such financial, technical and legal personnel as that Contracting Authority shall consider necessary for the performance of its functions. The project management team shall include a member of the PPP Directorate General.
The project management team shall, on behalf of the Contracting Authority:
prepare and appraise the Public Private Partnership project to ensure its, legal, regulatory, social, financial, economic and commercial viability;
prepare the project in accordance with guidelines and standard documents issued by the PPP Directorate General;
ensure that the Private Party comply with the provisions of this Proclamation;
monitor the implementation of the Public Private Partnership Agreement entered into with the Contracting Authority;
liaise with all key stakeholders during the project cycle;
oversee the management of a project in accordance with the Project Agreements entered into by the Contracting Authority;
submit to the PPP Directorate General, annual or such other period reports requested by the PPP Directorate General on the Project Agreements entered into by the Contracting Authority;
maintain a record of all documentation and agreements entered into by the Contracting Authority relating to the Public Private Partnership project;
ensure that the transfer of assets at the expiry or early termination of a Public Private Partnership Agreement is consistent with the terms and conditions of such agreement, where this agreement involves a transfer of assets; and
carry out such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Contracting Authority.
In performing its functions under sub-article (2) of this Article, a project management team shall:
Implement the recommendations and guidelines issued by the PPP Directorate General;
Submit such information as shall be required by the PPP Directorate General or other Directorates of the Ministry.
CHAPTER FOUR
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL PROCESS
Project identification
The identification of potential Public Private Partnership projects shall be carried out by the Contracting Authority, a Public Entity or the PPP Directorate General.
A Contracting Authority which intends to implement a project through a Public Private Partnership shall be responsible for conceptualizing and administering the contract of the project.
In conceptualizing, identifying and prioritizing potential projects, a Contracting Authority shall consider the strategic and operational benefits of entering into a Public Private Partnership compared to the development of the facility or the provision of the service by the Contracting Authority itself.
Approval of the Ministry
Where a Contracting Authority considers it appropriate to potentially implement a project through a Public Private Partnership, it shall submit an application to the Ministry for approval before undertaking an in-depth analysis of the project under a Public Private Partnership scheme.
Feasibility Study
Upon approval by the Ministry, the Contracting Authority shall undertake a feasibility study of the project for the purpose of:
ensuring that a Public Private Partnership approach is the most economically advantageous to the Contracting Authority.
In undertaking a feasibility study under Sub-Article ( 1/) of this Article, a Contracting Authority shall consider:
the technical requirement of the project;
the legal requirement to be met by the parties to the project;
the social, economic and environmental impact of the project;
the Value for Money of the project compared to other procurement method;
the affordability of the project by the Contracting Authority and/or endusers;
the sustainability of the project for both parties;
the institutional capacity of the Contracting Authority to prepare, tender, implement and monitor the project.
Taking into account the analysis carried out pursuant to sub-article(2 / of this Article, the feasibility study shall describe the proposed structure for the project including:
project capital and operating costs under various scenarios;
proposed responsibilities and risks assumed by each the Contracting Authority and the Private Party;
proposed government participation and support, if any.
Approval of the Board
The Contracting Authority shall submit the feasibility study prepared under Article 17 to the Board and the Ministry.
The Board shall review the feasibility study with the support of the PPP Directorate General. The Board shall in its review take into account the assessment of the departments of the Ministry responsible for debt management and guarantees and take a decision that complies with this assessment.
The Board may require additional studies be carried out either by the PPP Directorate General or the Contracting Authority prior to issuing a determination as to whether the project is authorized to proceed to tender.
If specific incentives or government support is required, the Board shall with its suggestion submit the matter to the appropriate authority.
If the Board is satisfied that the project meets the desired expectations of viability and Value for Money, the Board may authorize to proceed to tender the project.
CHAPTER FIVE
SELECTION OF PRIVATE PARTY
Procurement Through Open Bidding Process
Except as otherwise provided for under this Proclamation, all projects shall be procured through an open bidding process with prequalification.
In procuring and awarding a Public Private Partnership Agreement to a Private Party, the Directorate General shall be guided by the principles of transparency, free and fair competition and equal opportunity.
Prequalification
Upon approval of the Board pursuant to Article 18, the Directorate General shall engage in prequalification proceedings with a view to identifying bidders that are suitably qualified to successfully implement the project.
The Directorate General shall issue a notice of request for qualifications:
in a widely circulated publication inviting potential bidders to participate in a prequalification proceeding ;
in addition to publication in a newspaper the content of which is to be determined in a directive, may send the request for qualifications to potential bidders identified by the Directorate General.
Prequalification criteria
In order to qualify for the pre-selection proceedings, interested bidders must meet objectively justifiable criteria that the Directorate General considers appropriate in the particular proceedings of the project, as stated in the request for qualifications.
The details of the minimum prequalification criteria which shall include, amongst others, technical and financial capabilities shall be prescribed by the relevant directive.
Participation of consortia
The Directorate General, when first inviting the participation of bidders in the prequalification proceedings, shall allow them to form bidding consortia. The information required in the request for qualifications from members of bidding consortia shall relate to the consortium as a whole as well as to its individual participants.
Unless stated in the request for qualifications, each member of a consortium may participate, either directly or indirectly, in only one consortium at the same time. A violation of this rule shall cause the disqualification of the consortium and of the individual members.
When considering the qualifications of bidding consortia, the Directorate General shall consider the capabilities of each of the consortium members and assess whether the combined qualifications of the consortium members are adequate to meet the needs of all phases of the project.
Decision on prequalification
The PPP Directorate General shall:
make a decision with respect to the qualifications of each bidder that has submitted an application for prequalification.
shall apply only the criteria set forth in the request for qualifications.
Invite all prequalified bidders to submit their bids.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Directorate General may, provided that it has made an appropriate statement in the request for qualifications to that effect, reserve the right to request proposals upon completion of the prequalification proceedings only from a limited number of bidders that best meet the prequalification criteria.
For the purpose of Sub-Article 2 of this Article, the Directorate General shall rate the bidders that meet the prequalification criteria on the basis of the criteria applied to assess their qualifications and draw up the list of bidders that will be invited to submit proposals upon completion of the prequalification proceedings. In drawing up the list, the Directorate General shall apply only the manner of rating that is set forth in the request for qualifications.
Request for Proposals
The Directorate General shall prepare a request for proposals for the purpose of inviting bidders to submit proposals.
The details of the request for proposals shall include at least the following information:
General information related to the project necessary for the preparation and submission of a proposal;
specifications of the project including the technical and financial conditions that should be met by a bidder;
specifications of the final product, level of services, performance indicators and such other requirements as the Directorate General and relevant regulatory bodies shall consider necessary including the safety, security and environment preservation requirements to be met by a bidder;
the contractual terms of the Project Agreements proposed by the
the criteria and method to be used in evaluating a proposal;
the value of the bid security required to be submitted by a bidder; and
the manner and the deadline for submitting proposals.
The directive may prescribe additional requirements of the request for proposals.
Bid securities
The request for proposals shall set forth the requirements with respect to the issuer and the nature, form, amount and other principal terms and conditions of the required bid security.
The amount and the details of the ways a bid security is to be submitted or forfeited as the case may be and other related matters shall be prescribed by directive.
Meetings, clarifications and modifications The PPP Directorate General:
may hold one-on-one or group meetings with prequalified bidders to provide information on the project, respond to their enquiries and receive comments from the bidders.
Shall communicate in writing to all bidders any information provided to a bidder .
may invite prequalified bidders to provide comments on the request for proposals including on the terms of the Project Agreements.
shall respond to request for clarification from prequalified bidders.
may, whether on its own initiative or as a result of a comment or request for clarification of a bidder, review and, as appropriate, revise any element of the request for proposals, including the Project Agreements.
shall communicate in writing any such modification to the bidders at a reasonable time prior to the deadline for submission of proposals.
Submission of proposals
A bidder who intends to bid for a project shall complete and submit a technical proposal and a financial proposal and enclose each proposal in a separate sealed envelope as may be specified in the request for proposals.
Evaluation of proposals
Unless provided otherwise in the request for proposals, the Directorate General shall not open the financial proposal unless it has opened and deemed the technical proposal to be responsive.
The Directorate General shall compare and evaluate each proposal in accordance with the evaluation criteria, the relative weight accorded to each criterion if applicable and the evaluation process set forth in the request for proposals.
For the purpose of Sub-Article 2 of this Article, the Directorate General may establish thresholds with respect to quality, technical, financial and commercial aspects. Proposals that fail to achieve the thresholds shall be regarded as nonresponsive and be rejected from the selection procedure.
The Directorate General may provide a preference margin to be granted to proposals reflecting local participation in the manner as described by directive.
Evaluation report
The Directorate General shall, upon evaluating the proposals and before declaring the first ranked bidder, prepare an evaluation report specifying the evaluation criteria, the manner in which the first ranked bidder satisfied the requirements specified in the request for proposals in comparison with the other bidders, and such other information as the Directorate General shall consider necessary.
If negotiations take place with the successful bidder in accordance with Article 31, the evaluation report shall be updated following negotiations and indicate any changes to the Project Agreements as a result of the negotiations.
Further demonstration of fulfillment of qualification criteria
The Directorate General may require any bidder that has been prequalified to demonstrate again its qualifications in accordance with the same criteria used for prequalification.
The Directorate General shall disqualify any bidder that fails to demonstrate again its qualifications in accordance with sub article 1 of this Article if requested to do so.
Negotiations
The process provided in Article 26 of meetings and receiving comments from the bidders on the request for proposals shall enable the Directorate General to reduce and if possible avoid the need for negotiations of the Project Agreements.
However, in exceptional circumstances and only where deemed appropriate by the Directorate General, the Directorate General may:
enter into negotiations with the successful bidder; and
request the second ranked bidder to extend the validity of its bid pending the completion of negotiations with the successful bidder.
Where the negotiations carried out with the successful bidder are unsuccessful, the Directorate General shall enter into negotiations with second ranked bidder and so forth.
The provisions of sub article 1 and 2 of this Article shall also apply to negotiations to be carried out with the second ranked bidder.
Approval of the Board
The Directorate General shall require the approval of the Board if there is any material change to the project structure previously approved by the Board prior to the tender and which has changed during the tender process .This approval of the Board on changes to the project structure may be sought during the tender process and/or at the end prior to the award of the project in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article.
Prior to the award of the project in accordance the Directorate General shall apply to the Board for approval. For this purpose, the Directorate General shall submit to the Board the evaluation report of the proposals, the Project Agreements and other documents deemed relevant.
Process to be Confidential
After opening of the proposals, information relating to examination, clarification, and evaluation of the proposals and recommendations for award must not be disclosed to bidders or other Persons not officially concerned with this process until the award of the Public Private Partnership is announced.
The Directorate General shall treat proposals in such a manner as to avoid the disclosure of their content to competing bidders.
Notification of Award and Signing of Contract
Prior to the expiry of the period of the bid validity and upon receipt of the Board approval in accordance with Article 32, the Directorate General shall notify the successful bidder that its proposal has been accepted. The notification of the award shall specify the time within which the Project Agreements must be signed. The unsuccessful bidders shall also be informed as to who the successful bidder is and why they have lost the bid.
The Directorate General shall within two days from the date of the award send the Project Agreement to the Contracting Authority together with the necessary documents for it to be signed by the Contracting Authority.
The Project Agreements shall not be signed by the Contracting Authority prior to the receipt of the notice by all unsuccessful bidders or before the period specified in the relevant directive has lapsed.
Upon execution of a Project Agreement by the parties, the Directorate General shall publish the results of the tender in the manner to be prescribed by directive.
Re-verification of qualifications may be conducted prior to award to confirm that a bidder continues to possess the necessary financial and technical qualification stated in the request for qualifications and/or the request for proposals.
CHAPTER SIX
TWO-STAGE BIDDING
Conditions of use of Two-Stage Bidding
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in Chapter Five of this Proclamation, if it is not feasible to formulate a request for proposals with adequate project specifications, performance indicators or contractual terms in a manner sufficiently detailed to enable the submission of final proposals, the Directorate General may engage in a two-stage bidding.
The Directorate General shall run a prequalification procedure in accordance with Articles 20 to 23 to invite only prequalified bidders to participate in the two-stage bidding procedure.
Procedure for Two-Stage Bidding
The initial request for proposals shall call upon the bidders to submit, in the first stage of the procedure, initial proposals relating to project specifications, performance indicators, financing requirements or other characteristics of the project as well as to the main contractual terms of the Project Agreements.
The Directorate General may convene meetings and hold discussions with any of the bidders to clarify questions concerning the initial request for proposals or the initial proposals and accompanying documents of the bidders.
Following examination of the proposals received, the Directorate General shall draw up a request for proposal which is more appropriate to its requirements. For this purpose it may revise the initial request for proposals by deleting, adding or modifying any aspect of the initial project specifications, performance indicators, financing requirements or other characteristics of the project, including the main contractual terms of the Project Agreements, and any criterion for evaluating and comparing proposals and for ascertaining the successful bidder, as well as by adding characteristics or criteria.
In the second stage of the proceedings, the Directorate General shall invite bidders to submit final proposals with respect to a single set of project specifications, performance indicators or contractual terms in accordance with Articles 24 to 34.
The Directorate General shall prepare an evaluation report and obtain the approval of the Board prior to award and execution of the Project Agreements in accordance with Articles 29, 32 and 34.
CHAPTER SEVEN
COMPETITIVE DIALOGUE
Conditions of use of Competitive Dialogue
The Directorate General may engage in competitive dialogue, upon approval by the Board, for particularly complex projects where the Directorate General considers that the use of single stage or two-stage bidding procedure is not appropriate for the award of the Public Private Partnership Agreement.
The Directorate General shall run a prequalification procedure in accordance with Articles 20 to 23 to invite only prequalified bidders to participate in the competitive dialogue procedure.
Procedure for Competitive Dialogue
The Directorate General shall establish a contract notice setting out its needs and requirements, which it shall define in that notice and/or in a descriptive document.
The Directorate General shall invite prequalified bidders to participate in a dialogue the aim of which shall be to identify and define the means best suited to satisfying its needs. The Directorate General may discuss all aspects of the Project Agreements with the prequalified bidders during this dialogue.
During the dialogue, the Directorate General shall ensure equality of treatment among all bidders. In particular, it shall not provide information in a discriminatory manner which may give some bidders an advantage over others.
The Directorate General shall not reveal to other bidders solutions proposed or other confidential information communicated by a bidder participating in the dialogue without his agreement.
The Directorate General may provide for the procedure to take place in successive stages in order to reduce the number of solutions to be discussed during the dialogue stage by applying the award criteria in the contract notice or descriptive document. The contract notice or descriptive document shall indicate that recourse may be had to this option.
The Directorate General shall continue such dialogue until it can identify the solution or solutions, if necessary after comparing them, which are capable of meeting its needs.
Having declared that the dialogue is concluded and having so informed the bidders, the Directorate General shall ask them to submit their final proposals on the basis of the solution or solutions presented and specified during the dialogue. These proposals shall contain all the elements required and necessary for the performance of the project.
The proposals may be clarified, specified and fine-tuned at the request of the Directorate General. However, such clarification, specification, fine-tuning or additional information may not involve changes to the basic features of the proposal or the call for proposals, variations in which are likely to distort competition or have a discriminatory effect.
The Directorate General shall assess the proposals received on the basis of the award criteria laid down in the contract notice or descriptive document and shall choose the most economically advantageous proposal.
At the request of the Directorate General, the bidder identified as having submitted the most economically advantageous proposal may be asked to clarify aspects of the proposal or confirm commitments contained in the proposal provided this does not have the effect of modifying substantial aspects of the proposal or the call for proposals and does not risk distorting competition or cause discrimination.
The Directorate General may specify prices or payments to bidders in the dialogue.
The Directorate General shall prepare an evaluation report and obtain the approval of the Board prior to award and execution of the Project Agreements in accordance with Articles 29, 32 and 344.
CHAPTER EIGHT
DIRECT NEGOTIATION
Conditions for use of Direct Negotiations
The Directorate General may engage in direct negotiation in respect of a Public Private Partnership, upon approval by the Board, only where the following conditions are satisfied:
Where there is an urgent need in the provision of the service and engaging in the procedures set forth in Articles 20 to 38 would be impractical, provided that the circumstances giving rise to the urgency where neither foreseeable by the Directorate General nor the result of dilatory conduct on its part;
Where the project is of short duration and the anticipated initial investment value does not exceed the amount to be specified by directive;
Where the project involves infrastructure projects related to national defense or national security;
Where there is only one source capable of providing the required service, such as when the provision of the service requires the use of intellectual property, trade secrets or other exclusive rights or assets owned or possessed by a certain Person or Persons;
When an invitation to the prequalification proceeding or a request for proposals has been issued but no applications for qualification or proposals were submitted or all proposals failed to meet the evaluation criteria set forth in the request for proposals and if, in the judgment of the Directorate General, issuing a new invitation to the prequalification proceedings and a new request for proposals would be unlikely to result in a project award within the required time frame;
Where a Public Private Partnership project, of limited value, length or otherwise as specified by directive, is ancillary andthe necessary complement to a mining, industrial or other type of investment and must be carried out by the private sponsor of such mining, industrial or other type of investment.
Except for Project Agreements negotiated pursuant to sub article 1 of this Article, the Directorate General must publish a notice of its intention to commence negotiations in respect of Project Agreements.
Procedures for Direct Negotiation
The Directorate General may engage in negotiations with as many Persons as the Directorate General Judges capable of carrying out the project as circumstances permit. The Directorate General may run a prequalification procedure if it deems it appropriate.
The Directorate General shall prepare a description of its needs and requirements, a draft of the Project Agreements and establish evaluation criteria against which proposals shall be evaluated and ranked. This document shall be communicated to the bidder(s).
The Directorate General shall be free to negotiate to all aspects of the project including prices and payments terms.
During the negotiations, the Directorate General shall ensure the equal treatment of all bidders. In particular, they shall not provide information in a discriminatory manner which may give some bidders an advantage over others.
The Directorate General may provide for the negotiated procedure to take place in successive stages in order to reduce the number of bidders to be negotiated by applying the evaluation criteria. The specifications communicated to the bidder(s) shall indicate whether recourse has been had to this option.
The Directorate General shall prepare an evaluation report and obtain the approval of the Board prior to award and execution of the Project Agreements in accordance with Articles 29, 32 and 34.
CHAPTER NINE
UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS
Admissibility of Unsolicited Proposals
The Directorate General in consultation with the Contracting Authority may review and accept Unsolicited Proposals for a project of a special nature.
Unsolicited Proposal
Following receipt and preliminary examination of an Unsolicited Proposal, the Directorate General shall make use reasonable efforts to inform the proponent whether or not the project is considered to be potentially in the public interest.
If the project is considered to be potentially in the public interest, the Directorate General shall invite the proponent to submit as much information on the proposed project as is feasible to allow the Directorate General to make a proper evaluation of the proponent's qualifications and the technical and economic feasibility of the project and to determine whether the project is likely to be successfully implemented in the manner proposed in terms acceptable to the Directorate General.
In considering an Unsolicited Proposal, the Directorate General shall respect the intellectual property, trade secrets or other exclusive rights contained in, arising from or referred to in the proposal.
Procedure for Unsolicited Proposal
Following receipt of the documents provided in Sub-Article 2of Article 42, the Directorate General shall formally decide whether to accept or reject the potential project derived from the Unsolicited Proposal.
If the Unsolicited Proposal is accepted by the Directorate General, the Contracting Authority shall proceed to prepare a feasibility study and submit it to the Board prior to moving to tender.
An Unsolicited Proposal shall be awarded through a competitive selection procedure in accordance with Chapters 5 to 7 and may be awarded through direct negotiations only if it meets the requirements set forth in Article 39.
The proponent shall be invited to participate in any competitive selection procedure initiated in response to its unsolicited proposal. The Directorate General may decide to award the proponent a bonus on its technical and/or financial score during the competitive selection procedure or award the proponent a financial compensation for studies undertaken by the proponent should the proponent not be awarded the project. The bonus point scheme principle or the amount of the financial compensation shall be agreed upon acceptance of the proposal in accordance with Sub-Article 1 / of this Article. The identity of the proponent, the detailed allocation of bonus points or the amount of the potential compensation to the proponent shall be indicated in the competitive selection procedure documents.
CHAPTER TEN
CONTENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT
Establishment of a Project Company
The Directorate General shall require that the successful bidder establish a Project Company incorporated under the laws of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia whose sole purpose shall be to execute and implement the Public Private Partnership Agreement and other Project Agreements, if any.
The Public Private Partnership Agreement may:
establish requirements around the share capital of the Project Company;
require approval of changes to by-laws and shareholders' agreement and other related agreements of the Project Company; and
impose restrictions around the transfer of ownership interests, such as shares, in the Project Company, including in accordance with sub article (3 / of this Article.
A Project Company may include a Public Entity as a minority shareholder in the Project Company or its holding.
Except as otherwise provided in the Project Agreements, any ownership interests in the Project Company, such as shares, the transfer of which would result in a change of control of the Project Company shall not be permitted without the consent of the Contracting Authority. The Project Agreements shall set forth the conditions under which consent of the Contracting Authority shall be given
Duration of Public Private Partnership
The duration of the Public Private Partnership shall be set forth in the Project Agreements.
Price
The Private Party shall receive financial compensation by way of:
compensation by or on behalf of the Directorate General subject to paragraph (b) of sub-article (1) of this Article;
tariffs or fees collected by the Private Party from users or consumers of a service provided to them; and/or
a combination of such compensation and such charges or fees.
The Private Party shall have the right to charge, receive or collect tariffs or fees for the use of the facility or its services in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the Project Agreements, which shall additionally provide the methods and formulae for the establishment and adjustment of those tariffs or fees.
The cost of delivering a facility or service shall be affordable and provide Value for Money to the Contracting Authority and end users while enabling the Private Party to maintain its financial integrity, attract capital, operate efficiently and compensate a Private Party for any assumed risk.
Government Support
When duly justified and required on the basis of Value for Money and with the prior approval of the Board, or the appropriate authority if required, the Directorate General and/or the Ministry may provide economic support and guarantees to ensure sustainability, implementation and/or financial viability of the project.
This economic support must be initially identified in the request for proposals documentation and must have been recommended by the Board in accordance with Article 9 and 18 of this Proclamation.
The economic support may take any reasonable form, including (but not limited to):
Direct payments to the Private Party as a substitute for, or in addition to, tariffs or fees for the use of the facility or its services. These may include availability payments, cash subsidies, capital grants, minimum trafficking or revenue guarantees and minimum off-take or capacity payments and purchase guarantees;
Contributions in-kind, including asset transfers and land usage rights;
Payment guarantees, securities, undertaking or binding letters of comfort;
Guarantees for the performance of obligations of the Contracting Authority under the Project Agreements.
The economic support to be granted in accordance with sub-article 3 of this Article shall be provided in the Project Agreement.
Ownership of Assets Without prejudice to relevant laws, the Project Agreements shall specify, as appropriate, which assets are or shall be public property and which assets are or shall be the private property of the Private Party.
Acquisition of Rights related to the Project Site
The Contracting Authority or other Public Entity under the terms of the law and the Public Private Partnership Agreement shall make available to the Private Party or, as appropriate, shall assist the Private Party in obtaining such rights related to the project site, including title thereto, as may be necessary for the implementation of the project.
Any compulsory acquisition of land that may be required for the implementation of the project shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant law relating to expropriation.
The Private Party may possess land and use it for the purpose of the implementation of the project. The restrictions in terms and tenure of land and bidding system shall not apply on land that is covered under the project.
The Private Party shall have the right to mortgage the immovable property developed under the project in order to obtain loans from financial institutions.
Operation of Infrastructure
The Project Agreements shall set forth, as appropriate, the extent of the Private Party's obligations to ensure:
The modification of the service so as to meet the demand for the service;
The continuity of the service;
The provision of the service under essentially the same conditions for all users; and
The non-discriminatory access of other service providers to any public infrastructure network operated by the Private Party.
The Private Party shall have the right to issue and enforce rules governing the use of the facility, subject to the approval of the Contracting Authority or any other authorized Public Entity.
Performance Guarantee
The Project Agreements may specify security to be provided by the Private Party to guarantee the performance of any of its obligations under the Project Agreements.
If such security is required, the Project Agreements shall also set forth:
the requirements with respect to the issuer and the nature, form, amount and other principal terms and conditions of the required security; and,
The amount and the details of the ways the security is to be submitted or forfeited as the case may be.
Security Interests
Subject to any restriction that may be contained in the Project Agreements, the Private Party has the right to create security interests over any of its assets, rights or interests, including those relating to the infrastructure project, as required to secure any financing needed for the project, including, in particular, the following:
Security over movable or immovable property owned by the Private Party or its interests in project assets;
A pledge of the proceeds of, and receivables owed to the Private Party for, the use of the facility or the service it provides.
The shareholders of the Private Party shall have the right to pledge or create any other security interest in their shares in the Private Party.
No security under Sub-Article 1 / of this Article may be created over public property or other property, assets or rights needed for the provision of a Public Service Activity where the creation of such security is prohibited by the law.
Financial reporting and audit
A Project Company shall keep proper books of accounts and records in relation to the Project and shall be open for scrutiny by the Contracting Authority.
A Project Company shall submit the duly audited financial accounts and any other information as may reasonably be required by the Contracting Authority within six months after the end of each financial year.
Assignment of the Project Agreements
Except as otherwise provided in Article 52 of this Proclamation, the rights and obligations of the Private Party under the project agreements may not be assigned to third parties without written consent of the Contracting Authority.
The Project Agreements shall set forth the conditions under which the Contracting Authority shall give its consent to an assignment of the rights and obligations of the Private Party under the Project Agreements, including the acceptance by the new Private Party of all obligations there under and evidence of the new Private Party's technical and financial capability as necessary for providing the service.
Compensation for Specific Changes in Legislation
The Project Agreements may set forth the extent to which the Private Party or the Contracting Authority is entitled to compensation in the event that the costs of the Private Party's performance of its obligations under the Project Agreements has substantially increased or decreased, or that the value that the Private Party receives for such performance has substantially diminished or increased, as compared with the costs and the value of performance originally foreseen, as a result of changes in legislation or regulations specifically applicable to the Infrastructure Facility or the services it provides.
Takeover of an Infrastructure Project by the Contracting Authority
Under the circumstances set forth in the Public Private Partnership Agreement, the Contracting Authority has the right to temporarily take over the operation of the facility for the purpose of ensuring the effective and uninterrupted delivery of the service in the event of serious failure by the Private Party to perform its obligations and to rectify the breach within a reasonable period of time after having been given notice by the Contracting Authority to do so.
In the event that a Contracting Authority elects to take over a project under Sub-Article 1 / of this Article, the Contracting Authority:
shall collect and pay any revenues that are subject to lien to satisfy any obligation;
may develop and operate the project, impose user levies and comply with any service contract existing; and
may solicit proposals, as appropriate, for the construction, maintenance or operation of the project.
Substitution of the Private Party
The Contracting Authority may agree with the entities extending financing for an infrastructure project and the Private Party to provide for the substitution of the Private Party by a new entity or Person appointed to perform under the existing Project Agreements upon serious breach by the Private Party or other events that could otherwise justify the termination of the Project Agreements or similar circumstances.
Termination of the Project Agreements
The directive may prescribe events that may cause the termination of the Project Agreements.
Compensation upon Termination of the Project Agreements
The Project Agreements shall stipulate how compensation due to either party is calculated in the event of termination of the Project Agreements, and where appropriate, for compensation for the fair value of works performed under the Project Agreements, costs incurred or losses sustained by either party, including, as appropriate, lost profits.
Governing Law
The Project Agreements are governed by the laws of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. Disputes between the Contracting Authority and the Private Party
Any disputes between the Contracting Authority and the Private Party shall be settled through the dispute settlement mechanism agreed by the parties in the Project Agreements.
Notwithstanding any contrary provision in any existing law, the Project Agreements may provide for settlement of disputes through arbitration or any other forms of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
Disputes involving Customers or Users of the Infrastructure
Where the Private Party provide services to the public or operates Infrastructure Facilities accessible to the public, the Contracting Authority may require the Private Party to establish simplified and efficient mechanisms for handling claims submitted by its customers or users of the Infrastructure Facility.
Other Disputes
The Private Party and its shareholders shall be free to choose the appropriate mechanism for settling disputes among themselves.
The Private Party shall be free to agree on the appropriate mechanisms for settling disputes between itself and its lenders, contractors, suppliers and other business partners.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Complaints
The complaints and review mechanism provided under the Ethiopian Federal Government Procurement and Property Administration Proclamation, as they may be amended or replaced, shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to this Proclamation. Directives issued in accordance with this Proclamation may provide for an adaptation of these articles as to apply to Public Private Partnership projects.
Power to issue Regulation and Directives
The Council of Ministers may issue regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Ministry shall issue directives enabling the realization of the objectives of this Proclamation and for the proper implementation of the directives issued in accordance with sub article 1 of this Article.
Repealed and Non-Applicable Laws
Except for specific provisions referred to in this Proclamation, the provisions of the Ethiopian Federal Government Procurement and Property Administration Proclamation, as may be amended, are inapplicable to Public Private Partnership projects.
No law, regulation, directive or practices inconsistent with this Proclamation shall have effect with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Transitory Provisions
This Proclamation shall not apply to existing public private partnership projects where contracts have already been concluded or are under negotiation.
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of its publication in the Federal Negarit Gazeta.
Done at Addis Ababa, this …, 2017.
MULATU TESHOME (Dr)
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
CONTENT
Regulation No. 4/2006
Regulation for issuance of Professional License for Auditors and Accountants that Works in Private or in Association
Regulation No. 4/2006
Regulation for issuance of Professional License for Auditors and Accountants that Works in Private or in Association
Whereas, it is necessary to give the audit and accounting service exercised in our region should be conducted by professionals who are equipped with skill, knowledge and ethics required by such a profession;
Whereas, it is necessary to enhance the quality of the service by ensuring professional competence of auditors and accountants;
Whereas, it is necessary to expand the auditing and accounting coverage as the service demand of auditing and accounting in both governmental and private sectors is increasing along with the economic development of our country;
Whereas, it is necessary to confirm professional competence of those who seek to engage in this profession either privately or in groups and licensing them;
Whereas, it is necessary to follow up and control in order that there shall be precise accounting in governmental and private institutes as well as in associations in the region;
In Accordance with a Proclamation to Amend Proclamation No 90/2005 to Re Establish The Office of Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Proclamation No.154/2005 Article 26 Sub Articles 1 the following regulation is issued by the Council of Oromia Regional.
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This regulation may be cited as the ‘Regulation for the Issuance of Certificate of Professional Competence to Private Auditors and Accountants No.4/2014.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise in this regulation:
“Professional license” means a lcense issued to be certified auditors and accountants.
“Institutes” means legal institutes engaged in service delivery of trade and development activities.
“Audit Team” means a team which authorized to render auditing service and consists of 2 or more audit members on duty.
“Proclamation” means a Proclamtion to Amend Proclamation No 90/2005 to Re Establish the Office of Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Proclamation No. 154/2005.
“Office” means the Oromia Rgional State Auditor General Office.
“Individuals” means auditors or accountants who were organized either individually or in associations and are issued with professional license.
“Accountant” means an individual or organization holding accounting professional competency certificate to provide and engage in accounting activities.
“Authorized accountant” means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render accounting service pursuant to this regulation.
“Level one authorized accountant” means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes or offices found in all level pursuant to this regulation.
“Level two authorized accountant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 500,000,000 /five hundred million/.
“Level three authorized accoutant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations, unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 100,000,000 /one hundred million /.
“Level four authorized accoutant” means accountant who is authorized by the Office to render accounting service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 10,000,000 /ten million/.
“Auditor” means an organization or individual holding professional competence certificate that verifies accounting reports and recommends on the precision and completeness of such the report.
“Authorized Auditor” means an organization or individual authorized to render auditing service by the Office in accordance with this regulation.
“Level one authorized auditor”means an organization or individual authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes or offices found in all level pursuant to this regulation.
“Level two authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations, unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 500,000,000 /five hundred million/.
“Level three authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 100,000,000 /one hundred million/.
“Level four authorized auditor” means an auditor who is authorized by the Office to render auditing service to institutes associations,unions or enterprises whose annual budget or income is less than 10,000,000 /ten million/
“Association” means cooperative associations, cooperative unions,cooperative federation, development association, finance association, various professional associations,as well as any social association.
“Professional association” means accounting or auditing professional association that is recognized in regional, nationwide or internationally and accepted by the Oromia main auditor head office.
“Auditors’ professional assocition” means associations that met the criteria identified under this regulation, organized in accordance with Oromia region associations organization law, recognized by organizing entities and rendering auditing service in the region.
“Accountants’ professional association” means associations that met the criteria identified under this regulation, organized in accordance with Oromia region associations organization law, recognized by organizing entities and rendering accounting service in the region.
“Certificate” means evidence isued either by concerned body or the Office of the Oromia auditor General to verify the professional competency of auditors or accountants.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this regulation set out in the masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This regulation shall apply on matters regarding issuance, renewal suspension and cancellation of auditors and accountant professional license in Oromia National Regional State in accordance with article 7 sub article 13-16 of proclamation No. 154/2002.
Part Two
Requirment for Issuance of Professional Licencse Duty and Level
Responsibilities of an Authorized Auditor An authorized auditor shall have the following responsibilities:
Audits financial statements and issues recommendation,
Gives profession auditory advice,
Carries out all activities related to auditing duties under the level of authorization.
Criteria for the issuance of auditing professional license
He who is able to submit evidence,which certifies he has passed auditing professional competency examination from concerned body.
He who complements education direct work experience as well as field of study which are provided under articles 7-10 of this regulation.
He who fulfills the relevant preises, tools, capital and man power.
He, whose auditing or professional right is not cancelled or suspended.
He who has got professional license and who hadn’t received any evidence– backed complaints by customers or offices he had served in.
He who finalized his period of suspension if he had ever been suspended from doing auditing activities.
He who is able to confirm the professional competency of auditing professionals he has employed and could submit thereof.
The application of this article shall be defined by the upcoming procedure.
Level one authorized auditor
Competency certificate and accounting recognition from any recognized international association or organization of accountants, or certificate in public accounting with 2 years (two years) of experience in external auditing.
Level two authorized auditor
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 7 (seven) years of experience for external audit as well as9 (nine) years of experience for internal auditing.
M.A. degree and 5 (five) years of experience for external audit as well as 7 (seven) years of experience for internal auditing.
PhD and 3 (three) years of expeence for external audit as well as 5 (five) years of experience for internal auditing.
Level three authorized auditor
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent edutional level and 6 (six) years of experience for external audit or 8 (eight)years of experience in internal auditing,associations’ auditing, or as inspector in tax regulation and collection.
M.A. degree and 4 (four) years of experience for external audit as well as 6 (six) years of experience or internal auditing.
Level four authorized auditor
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 0 (zero) years of experience and who is organized in associations by concerned body,
He who has participated in short term trainings given by Office and completed with good standing.
The application of this article shall be defined by the upcoming procedure
Part Three
Requirements for Issuance of Professional License Duty and Level Tasks to be done by Authorized Accountant
An authorized accountant shall have the following duties
Tax accounting tasks,
Extension of accounting and intnal controlling system,
Preparing budget plan,
Financial analysis,
Closing account,
Giving professional advice on accounting,
Preparing financial statement and
Carries out all activities related tonauditing tasks under level of authorization.
Criteria for the issuance of accounting professional license
He who is able to submit evidence,which certifies he has passed accounting professional competency examination from concerned body,
He who complements education,direct work experience as well as field of study which are provided under articles 13-16 of this regulation,
He who fulfills the relevant preises,tools, capital and man power,
He whose accounting professional right is not cancelled or suspended,
He who has got professional license and who hadn’t received any evidence backed complaints by customers or offices he had served in,
He who finalized his period of sus pension if he had ever been suspended from doing accounting activities,
He who is able to confirm the pro fessional competency of auditing professionals he has employed and could submit thereof and
The application of this article shall be provided by the upcoming directive.
Level one Authorized Accountant
Competency certificate and accounting recognition from any recognized international association or organization of accountants, or certificate in public accounting with 1 year (one year) of experience.
Level Two Authorized Accountant
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
First degree or equivalent eduction and 6 (six) years of experience in accounting or external and internal auditing or 5 (five) years of experience in internal auditing in an organization that practices joint accounting system or in any governmental office in higher position in finance or accounting or in both internal and external auditing or
M.A. degree and 4 (four) years of experience in external and internal auditing or as well as 3 (three) years of experience working in higher position in governmental office in finance or accounting or external and internal auditing or
PhD holder and who has taught accounting for 5(five) years in any recognized university and college that graduates students in accounting course (three) years of experience for external audit as well as 5 (five) years of experience for internal auditing or
PhD and 2 (Two) years of experience in accounting or external and internal auditing or 1 (one) year of experience in internal auditing in an organization that practices joint accounting system or in any governmental office in higher position in accounting or in both internal and external auditing.
Level Three Authorized Accountant
In accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information system or management or business management or business or economics or cooperative accounting and audit or in any other related fields:
Part Four
Institutes or offices in which an Organized or Individual Authorized Auditor or Accountant may work in
An auditor or an accountant who is authorized either individually or in group
May work in institutes listed below:
Governmental offices or
State developmental organizations or
Non-governmental organizations or
Cooperative federation or
Cooperative union or
Colleges in different level or
In basic cooperative associations or
Small and micro enterprises or
Private organization.
While the provision provided under sub article 1(a–i) is kept, agreement and power of attorney from the main auditor Office is needed in order to carry out auditing activities in governmental offices either individually or in organized.
General Duties
An authorized auditor or accountant shall only work on a level for which was issued professional license.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall work retaining the code of ethics needed for the profession.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall submit a comprehensive report and supportive documents when he is requested by Office regarding his activity in non-governmental and private organizations.
An authorized auditor or accountant shall, who was issued competency certificate from concerned body, shall be registered according to the trade law and obtain trade license from the concerned body to use the professional license he was issued by Office.
In order to check whether authorized auditors or accountants who are working in the region follow the code of ethics and receive legal fare for the service they render:
They shall submit audit and ac counting report of the institute or the private entity they have audited,
Number education and experience of their employees deployed for the job,
Audit report of their company,
Legal receipts,
They shall submit other relevant evidence up on request ,
It is strictly forbidden to carry out accounting or auditing activities privately in the region unless, in accordance with this regulation unless the application lodged by such a person to work as authorized accountant or auditor is reviewed, and professional license is issued by the Office,
An authorized auditor or ac countant shall only be issued professional license if and only if he knows the working language of the region,
The Auditor or the accountant shall carry out his task respecting both the country’s and the region’s constitutions and laws.
Authorized Auditors or Accountants who come from other Places
The Office registers authorized auditors and accountants who come from the federal or other regions with certificates, checks whether they meet relevant requirements as well as criteria and then may allow them to work in the region if such an Office believes they can work in the region.
The application of this article shall be provided by the upcoming directive.
Promotion of Authorized Auditor and Accountant
Authorized auditors and accountants may promote to the next step
The Office shall issue procedures on requirements that shall be met regarding promotion.
Change of Profession
If the authorized auditor or accountant desires to change his profession to auditing or accounting professions, he may submit his request to the Office.
Requirements those shall be met regarding change of profession shall be decided on the procedure to be set.
Part Five
Examination and Training
Examination
Any person who lodges request to obtain auditing or accounting profession license shall pass the professional competency examination.
The Office is entitled to reach an agreement with the concerned body regarding the professional competency examination issued by such an Office. Its execution shall be decided on the procedure to be set.
Training
The Office shall give a short term training on auditing for those who are interested and graduated with first degree from different higher learning institute in accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information systems or management or business management or business education or economics or cooperative accounting and auditing.
The main office shall give a short term training on accounting for those who are interested and graduated with first degree from different higher learning institute in accounting or accounting and finance or accounting information systems or management or business management or business education or economics or cooperative accounting and auditing.
If anyone who takes professional competency examination wants to take training, the Office may facilitate it.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the procedure to be set.
Part Six
Procedures of Issuance of Professional License for Auditors or Accountants who are working in Governmental offices and Desire to Work in Groups
Auditors or Accountants who want to be organized and Work
Auditors and accountants who meet the requirements provided in this regulation may be organized and render auditing and accounting service according to their level.
For auditors or accountants who want to be organized and render accounting and auditing service,they shall pass the professional competency examination if each of their members meets the requirements identified in this regulation.
If auditors or accountants who meet the criteria required to be organized in associations obtain,in accordance with Oromia Region organizational laws of associations, recognition from the organizing entity, they may receive professional license, and carry out their activities by notifying the Office.
Regarding Applicants who are in Working in Governmental Offices
Applicants who are in working in governmental offices can obtain professional license to work as an authorized accountant or auditor if they meet the requirements provided in this regulation.
Keeping the provision identified under sub article 1 of this article applicants who are in working in governmental offices shall provide with a clearance from the governmental office if they meet the criteria to work in this profession and want to get professional license.
Licensing Procedure
Any accountant or auditor who wants to engage in this profession can be issued with professional license if he meets the requirement provided in this regulation.
The auditing and accounting professional license supposed to be issued shall only be issued if it is approved by the auditor general.
Part Seven
Follow up, Renewal, Suspension, Cancellation and Renewal of Suspended Professional License
Follow up
The Office shall distinguish address and number of customers of those who are issued professional license and follow them up.
Their shall be multi functional follow up on the professional issued with accounting or auditing license to check whether such a professional is working in line with the code of ethics of accounting or auditing.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Renewal of Professional License
Any authorized individual or organized auditor or accountant,who received professional license from the Office, shall annually renew such a license.
The term of renewal is calculated within the first 3 months of each budge year from July 8 – October 10.
Circumstances in which Renewal of Professional License is Suspended
If auditing or accounting task is confirmed done beyond professional ethics;
If it is confirmed he doesn’t meet requirements or criteria of level of profession;
In case of an auditor who estab lished auditing company, his capital is confirmed insufficient for the task or he is confirmed he didn’t deploy competent professionals;
If such a license is not renewed within the prescribed time;
If he was found guilty of corruption or dishonesty by the authorized court;
If is confirmed mentally ill by physicians;
If he fails to notify his new address within 2 months;
If the Office confirms the accuracy of completes lodged by 3rd parties or customers backed by sufficient evidence;
If he doesn’t submit timely report on accounting and auditing activities for the concerned body;
If other reasons that shall effect on suspension of professional license are found;
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Conditions in which Professional License Becomes Invalid
If the holder dies or the association dissolves;
If the authorized auditor or ac countant is requested by letter to notify his address and he fails to do so for 1 year or so;
In accordance with article 9, if the reasons to suspend professional license are found serious and the renewal is believed insurmountable;
If he is found using the license for other professions he is not illegible to and this is confirmed by empirical evidence. In this case not only cancelling the license but it might cause legal charge.
Other cases that can cause to canceling the professional license
Conditions for the Renewal of Suspended Professional License
If the authorized auditor or accountant, whose professional license suspended, states in black and white that he has regretted and is ready to improve professional ethics, he may pay unpaid renewal and penalty fees and gets the license renewed.
In spite of the existence of the provision provided under article 28(2) of this regulation, he may renew his professional license by paying the required penalty if the Office finds the reason sufficient and acceptable.
Any accountant or auditor he who was allowed to execute the provisions stated under sub article 1 and 2 of this article should have been submitting evidence for his positive achievement of his accounting and auditing tasks from institutes or offices he rendered his service as well as providing timely report to Oromia Revenue Authority.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Appeal and Compliant Procedures
An inquiry and ethics committee that investigate compliant and submit the result along with recommendation to the auditor general shall be established.
The decision which is passed by the auditor general based on the provided recommendation shall be final decision.
If the accountant or the auditor or ganized individually or in association remains unsatisfied with the decision, his right of appeal is reserved according to the country’s or the region’s law.
The execution of this article shall be decided by the directive to be issued.
Guilt and Penalty
An authorized auditor
Shall retains penal and civil responsibilities;
In accordance with Civil Procedural Code, he shall pay restitution for the loss caused by his mistakes.
Part Eight
Miscellaneous Provisions
Service Fee
The authorized auditor or accountant shall pay service fee for the issuance of professional license. The term of payment shall be decided on the directive to be issued.
Deprivation
Any one is strictly forbidden to carry out auditing and accounting tasks either individually or organizationally in Oromia Region without meeting the necessary requirements described in this regulation and obtaining professional license from the head office.
Address of the Organization
The authorized auditor or accountant shall have permanent address and should notify the head office his address.
The auditor or the accountant shall notify the Office all information about the organization.
Up on opening branch offices, the authorized auditor or accountant shall notify the Office.
Power to issue directives
The Office may issue directives for implementation of this regulation.
Inapplicable laws
Any regulation and customary practice that are inconsistent with this regulation shall not be applicable.
Effective Date
This regulation shall come in to force as of its publication on Megelete Oromia.
Abdi Taha
Oromia National Regional State
Council Deputy Speaker
March, 2014
Finfine
Proclamation No 195/2015.A proclamation to Revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation NO 195/2015.
Whereas, it is found necessary to make the cities of the regional state to be centers of development, industry, technology, information and trade as well as comfortable centers for life in a modern way observing their level of development.
Whereas, it has become necessary to provide a condition by which the cities shall be structured and their power and duties be determined based on the constitutional principles of the rights of the people to self administration at different levels;
Whereas, it is found necessary to create a favorable condition which can speed up the development of the cities in the region by making their work procedures and structural organization to depend on the principle of good governance so as to enable them that by possessing higher development capacities, promote the growth of the regional state and improve the living standards of their residents;
By creating a conducive environment for the speedy and effective service rendering, and thereby increasing the participation and being beneficiary of the people, to enable them work to realize a viable peace and order and ensure rule of law in the cities as well as to ensure a fast development from which the people can benefit step by step through strengthening a solid integration within the different cities and between the cities and rural areas;
Now, Therefore, in accordance with article 49(3) (a)of the Revised Oromia Regional State Constitution, it is here by proclaimed as follows.
Part One
General Provisions
Short title
This proclamation may be cited as “A proclamation to revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation No. 195/2015.”
Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:-
“Region” means the Oromia regional state
“City” means a city which has got legal personality as being a city
“City Administration” means a city which has got legal personality, and has its own council, administration council and the Judiciary established at Regio polis city ,principal city, higher city, intermediate city and growing city levels.
“Caffee” means Oromia regional state government “Caffee”.
. “Regi onalAdmi n i s t r at i on council” means the highest executive body of the Regional State Government Administration.
“Council” A body established as a representative at the city administration and kebele level by the election of the people.
“Court” means an ordinary court established at the city administration level that has jurisdiction over the matters to be tried at the ordinary courts and on the cases arising in the city.
“Administration council” means an executive body to be established at the city Administration, at the city district and at the city kebele levels.
“Constitution” means Oromia Regional State Constitution
“Mayor” means a chief executive officer of a city administration.
“City Manager” means an official who executes the municipal services of the city administration.
“Municipality Services” shall include Services such as water and sewage services, construction and maintenances of roads, fire dangers and accidents prevention, city land development, sanitation and beautification of a city , regular services provided to the residents and other activities to be decided and performed by the city.
“Bureau” means the Industry and Urban Development Bureau of Oromia.
“Regio polis city” means those cities that help to develop their surrounding cities by being centers of developments in various dimensions.
“City district” means the body in the organizational structure of a city next to the city administration which has an administration council and established as having the power of executive body of its level and is given the level of district.
“ kebele” means the initial city administration structure replacing the former kebele administration of a city which has a council, executive organ and social court of its own in the cities of the regional state in accordance with this proclamation.
“The city enactment” means a mandatory law issued by a city which is enforced in the city concerned.
“Government activity” means Activities performed by the government sectors in the city administration.
“Regulation protecting body” means without prejudice to the law protecting power vested in other bodies, it is a body established for protecting and enforcing the laws in the jurisdictions of the cities.
“City Associations” means asso ciations established by the cities which have legal personality for their mutual development benefits.
Gender description
In this proclamation, any expression in the masculine gender shall also applies to the feminine.
Scope of application
This proclamation shall be applicable on any city of the regional state having legal personality.
Part two
The Establishment, level, Power and Functions of the cities.
The level and Accountability of the cities.
The cities of the regional state shall be grouped in to the following grades depending on the development they achieved and the criteria to be set.
The Regio polis city Administration
The principal city Administration
The Higher city Administration
TheIntermediate city Administration
The Growing city Administration
The Municipality city Admin istration
The Growing municipal city Administration
The Grade of the cities of the regional state shall be evaluated depending on the criteria Provided as follows:-
The income which the city collects
Number of population
The surface area of the city
Its being center of Administration seat.
The implementation of sub article 2(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The accountability of the Regio polis city, principal city, and higher city shall be to the city’s council and to the Regional State president office.
The accountability of intermediate city and growing city shall be to the city’s council and the Zonal Administration office.
The accountability of municipal city and growing municipal city shall be to the district council and district administration office.
The means of providing supports to the cities of the regional state with thegrades specified under sub articles (a-g) of this article shall be decided by the Regional Administrative Council through identifying their grades and the support to be made.
Regarding the rural kebeles having the characteristics of cities but fail to fulfill the criteria of a city, the cities serving as the seats of districts and not included in the grades of the cities of the regional state provided in this proclamation, the bureau may consider them as a growing municipality and give them legal personality and decide their powers and functions.
Notwithstanding to the provisions of sub articles 2(a-d) of this article, the Regional Administration Council may extraordinarily decide the grade of a city and issue additional evaluation criteria of the grades of the cities. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The ways as to how any city may may be promoted to the next grade or downgraded from its grade, the tenure of the grade and other matters shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city administrations which are on the grades of Regio polis and the principal city administrations may establish the city district structural organization where they fulfill the criteria provided for city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Promotion of grade of any city shall be given only where its proposal is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional Administration Council. Its details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Acquiring legal personality
Residents of a particular area may submit their request of acquiring city’s legal personality to the bureau through their representatives.
The request to be submitted as per sub article (1) of this article shall be in writing and shall fulfill the following criteria.
Evidence revealing the boarders of the living place of the applicants given from the concerned government body.
The surface area of the place and population number
A description about the socioeconomic activities and the services found at that place.
Evidence describing that 25% from the people residing in that area qualified for voting have supported the application.
The plan prepared for the city which is approved by the concerned body.
Other criteria provided by the directive to be issued by the bureau.
The bureau shall review and decide on the application submitted for acquiring legal personality of being a city within three (3) months and provide evidence describing the legal personality of the grade of the city.
Where the request for acquiring legal personality is not accepted, a written response shall be given to the applying body or their representatives by clearly specifying the reason for its non acceptance.
The bureau shall provide an evidence of legal personality for the city where it decides to provide such legal personality to a city.
Their grades shall be described thereof when the evidence of legal personality of the cities is provided
The effect of acquiring legal personality. Any city that has acquired legal  personality in accordance with this proclamation shall have the right to be called in its name, implement the powers and functions specified in this proclamation, the right to enter in to contracts, the right to own properties and may sue or be sued.
Cancellation of legal personality.
The legal personality of a city may only be cancelled or revoked where the city concerned is unable to observe and exercise the criteria of a city by defending the legal personality granted to it.
The bureau shall provide the necessary support to a city before canceling or revoking the legal personality of a city.
Where the legal personality of of a city is cancelled or revoked, the rights and duties of the city shall be transferred to the body for which the city has been previously accountable. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Merging of the cities.
The adjacent cities may be merge d where it is believed appropriate for service delivery and administrative activities depending on the interest and agreement of the residents when it is approved by the city council and based on the research conducted by of the bureau.
In accordance with this article sub article 1, the merging of the cities shall be submitted to the Regional Administration Council by the bureau and shall be approved. Anybody shall implement such decision.
Change of name of a city Administration.
Any city shall called by the name name acquired legal personality the change of name of a city shall be made depending on the interest and agreement of the  residents of the city submitted to the concerned city administration council and decided when deemed necessary.
The request decided by the city council as per sub article 1 of this article shall be approved by the Regional Administration Council.
The powers and functions of the cities
Any city shall have the powers and functions to:-
Decide on the social, econom ic and political activities in a way that participates the population of the city and make them the beneficiaries from the development achieved.
Work to ensure good governance, and lay a transparent and accountable system.
Prepare the social, economic and budget plan of the city and implement same.
Administer the budget of the city according to the law. Determine the tax and service incomes as per the law; collects or make to be collected, and spend them on the growth and development activities or purposes of the city
Borrow money based on the decisions of the regional state or the city’s council.
Legally administer the houses under the city administration.
Administer the human resource of the city in accordance with the regional states’ civil servant law.
Create legal relationships and contractual agreements with government bodies, private investors, community associations, and with other fellow cities.
Without prejudice to the provision under article 40 sub article8 of the constitution, it make one’s private property for public use by paying equivalent compensation in advance where the public interest requires so.
Create mutually beneficiary brotherly agreements with other cities in the country or outside the country depending on the provisions of this proclamation or other laws.
Ensure that the construction activities underway in the city to be in such a way that protects the cleanliness, beauty and plan of the city.
Administer and make productive the land under its master plan or which is found within its territory
Depending on the regulation and directives to be issued, register and provide legal personalities for persons who want to organize in association for building homes; it also conducts researches regarding residential homes constructed with savings; and implement where it is authorized.
Register contractual agreements of purchases and sales, house rents, houses attached in securities.
Provide a speedy, effective and just service for the residents; particularly it constructs and maintains or causes the construction and maintenances of basic infrastructural services such as roads, potable water, electricity, telephone and mass transportations.
Perform environmental protectiion activities such as wastes disposal, protection of environmental destruction, installation of pipe lines and other similar activities.
Provide social services like education, health services by emphasizing on preventive ways, HIV/AIDS prevention, Ambulance services, various evidences registration services, slaughter houses, Grave yards, markets and other similar services.
Provide sporting services, theaters, refreshments, entertainments, Library, museum and other similar services.
Provide protection of peace and order of the society, justice services, protection of fire dangers, supervising medicines and foods.
Facilitate ways of providing nurturing services of elders, people suffering from physical incapacities and orphans.
Perform activities which help to improve the developments of the city and the lives of the society through implementing activities generating incomes and poverty reduction programs.
Prepare or cause the preparation of the plan of the city, amend, approve and implement it.
Lay a modern working system so as to enable the various services be delivered in high quality and speed and to ensure that the residents seats be arranged in a way that make them to be easily accessed.
Organize tourist attraction areas in the cities, follow up and prove the proper managements of archeological fossils and cultural materials
Work to improve the participation of the residents on the development activities by organizing them level by level, it also works to develop the participation of the society and make them beneficiaries particularly of the women and youth.
Considering the conduciveness of the services delivered by the cities to their residents, it may be made to be provided wholly or partially with other government bodies or with private investor, or with the participation of the society or by other alternatives.
Part Three
Organization and management(managerial) Procedures of a city
Level of Administration power
Depending on the grade of a city, the level of power of the city administrations shall be provided as follows:-
City Administration: –The city administration having full power.
City district:-the organizational structure established following the city administration which has only the power of an executive body.
kebele: - the initial administrati on level which is established following a city district.
The structure of city district shall be established following the city administration only in the cities having the grades of Regio polis and principal cities.
In the cities other than the Regio polis and principal city grades, the administration structure to be organized following the city administration is the kebele administration.
Organization of government bodies at the city level.The organization of government bodies of the cities shall be as follows-
The council:-the Law making body
Administration council:- the Law enforcing body
The Judiciary: - the law interpreting body.
Organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city.
The organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city shall be made in accordance with the level of the city and based on the levels provided in accordance with this proclamation, and shall be established by a city district and the kebele
The management body of a city district level shall be organized by only executive body and it shall be an executive body next to the city administration which implements the power delegated to it from the city administration.
At the city district level, the struct ure of a court may be organized as deemed necessary by the decision of the government.
Organization of the city zone level government bodies.
Organization of the city kebele level government bodies shall be as follows:-
The council:- the city kebele level law making body
The administration council:- the city kebele level high executive body
The social court:- the city kebele level law interpreting body.
System of management of a city.
The system of management of a city shall be “the mayor’s council” systemwhich shall be implemented only in the cities having their own councils. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city council
The regular election of the city council shall be made every five years
Members of the city council being odd number and shall be elected at the city and kebele levels by the residents of the city in accordance with their votes casted freely and secretly.
The number of members of the city council shall be implemented according to the law issued to determin the number of members of the district, city and kebele councils.
Where it is found that the number ber of Oromo nations residing in the city administrations having their own councils is less, the Oromia regional state “Caffee” may make that 51% of the seats in the city council to be reserved for them through comparing the number of the Oromo people with the number of other people in the city. This provision shall also apply on the kebele level city councils.
In the city administrations having their own councils 20% of the seats in the city councils shall be reserved for the rural kebeles bordering the city. The representatives of these adjacent rural Kebeles bordering the city shall be represented by the Kebele council or kebele councils from the elects.
Any person shall fulfill the criteria specified by the national election law to compete for the election of city councils and shall also know the working language of the regional state AfaanOromoo.
The municipal city and growing municipal cities without the need to establish their own independent council, shall have participation inthe district council as kebele or kebeles.
The powers and functions of the city council.
The city council shall have the powers and functions to:-
Implement or cause the implentati on of the powers and functions of the city councils provided under article 11 of this proclamation
Without prejudice to the provision of this article sub article 1, the city administration shall have the powers and functions to:-
Issue city enactments or city ordinance on city matters being consistent with the policy, strategy and Laws of the regional state.
Review and approve the socioeconomic and budget plan of the city submitted to it by the mayor; follow up its implementation.
Decide the tax and service paym ents in accordance with the Law; Ensure its being collected.
Follow up and supervise the land in the city whether it is administered in accordance with the law.
Approve the organizational structure of the city administration;decide the structure and work procedures of the executive bodies of the city; follows up its implementation.
Establish permanent and temporary committees.
Elect the speaker of the council among the members, decide on his activities.
Elect the mayor of the city from the members of the council; approvehis appointment.
Elect the deputy mayor of the city from the members or nonmembers of the council.
Establish the city administration council depending on the grade of the city; decide the number of members of the council depending on the recommendation of the mayor; approve the appointment of members of the council submitted by the mayor and decide about their work.
Approve the city’s plan; follows up its implementation.
Prepare work performance standards and the goals of the plan year and review the activities accordingly and pass decisions.
Issue code of conducts for its members and follows up its implementation.
Deliver work performance reports to the residents periodically
Term of office and Accountability of the city council
The term of office of the city counccil shall be five years
The city council shall be accountable to the people and the Regional State“ Caffee”
The meeting procedure of the city council.
The city council shall have its regular meeting once in three months;extraordinary meeting may becalled where the speaker or the mayor or 1/3 of members of the council requested so.
The presence of more than half of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the council.
The decision of the council shall be passed by the majority vote ofthe members participated on the meeting.
The meeting of the council shall be open to the public unless it is deemed necessary for the security of the city or moral of the public or to protect the rights of other members,
The council shall have a registry to register its activities and decisions.
The appointments of the speaker.
The speaker of the council shall be elected from the members of the council and is accountable to the council.
The term of office of the speaker shall be the term of office of the council.
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub article (2) of this article, the speaker may be removed from position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons.
Voluntary resignation of his position
Removed from his position by the council.
Interruption of his being membership of the council
Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The provision under sub article3 (a-d) shall only be implemented where it is the city delivered to council and approved.
Particulars for the implementation of this article sub article 3(a-d)shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
Powers and Function of the speaker of the city council.
The speaker of the council shall have the following power and functions:-
Calls the council’s meeting; prepare agendas of the discussion, chairs the council’s meeting, organize the committees of the council.
Manages the administrative matters of the council, cause the enforcement of disciplinary measures taken on the members by the council and represents the city.
Extends the ways by which thecouncil shall be organized by the permanent and temporary committee’s plans and follows up its implementation.
Prepares training plans designed for promoting or enhancing the members’ performance abilities; cause its implementation with the concerned executive bodies.
Ensure the transfer of decisions of the council to the concerned bodies; follows up its implementation,
Represents the council in all its relations with the third party.
Performs other activities assigned to it from the council.
The Appointments and Accountability of the mayor and deputy mayor
The mayor of a city shall be assigned from the members of the council and nominated by the council.
The deputy mayor of a city council shall be elected from the members or from the non-members of the council, and appointed by the city’s council.
The mayor of Rejio polis, principal city and higher city shall be accountable to the city’s council and to the president of the region.
Mayor of intermediate and growing cities shall be accountable to the city’s council and Chief Administrator of the zone.
Manager of municipal city and the growing municipal city shall be accountable to the district Administrator’s office.
The deputy mayor shall be accountable the mayor of a city.
The term of office of the mayor shall be the term of office of the council.
Subject to the provision of sub article 7 of this article, the mayor of a city may be removed from his position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons:-
Voluntary resignation of his job
Suspension from his responsibility by the council
Interruption of his being membership of the council or
His Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The particulars of the enforcement of sub article 8(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
The powers and Functions of the mayor
The mayor shall have the powers and Functions to:-
Serve as the head and chief executive of a city.
Ensure the respect of the constitution and constitutional system as well as the law in the city.
Implement the policy, strategy and and the laws of the regional state and those enacted at national level and the decisions passed by the city council and the regional state administration council’ and cause their implementation, submit performance reports to the council and an organ to whom it is accountable.
Select members of the administration council and submit his proposal to the city council for approval of their appointment; manage their activities in accordance with the law.
Select the manager of a city depen ding on the abilities and leadership quality and submit to the city council for approval of his appointment.
Ensure the rendering of speedy, effective and just services by the manager of the city.
Represent the city on holiday events celebrated at a regional, national and public level.
Prepare the plan and budget of the city by discussing with the administration council and submit to the city council; implement or cause their implementation up on approval.
Organize forums in collaboration on with the concerned bodies so as to enable the people forward their opinions on the plan, budget, work performances and other issues of the city.
Perform other activities assigned to him from the city council, Office of the president and from the administration offices of different levels depending on the grades of the cities.
The power and duties of deputy mayor
The deputy mayor shall have the powers and functions to:-
Represent and perform activities of the mayor where he is not at office.
Perform other activities assigned to him by the city council and the mayor.
The city Administration council
The city Administration council may be established from the members or from the non –members of the city council.
The number of members of thecities’ administration council shall be decided by the city council depending on the recommendation of the mayor. The particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Members of the city Administration council shall be individually and jointly liable for the decision they pass.
Term of office of the Administration council shall be the term of office of the council.
The city Administration council shall be accountable to the mayor and the city council.
The Power and Functions of City Administration Council
The city administration council shall have the power and functions to;
Follow up and ensure the implementation of laws, decisions and grades made by the regional state and the decisions and grades made by the city council; cause the protection of the constitution, constitutional system and laws.
Manage and organize the government activities performed in the city.
Prepare the budget of the city; implement up on its approval.
Prepare the social and economic development strategies as well as operational programs of the city; implement same up on approval.
Perform other activities assigned to it by the council and the mayor of the city.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager and Deputy Manager
The manager of Rigio polis, principal, higher, medium level and growing city shall be appointed by the city council upon the nomination by the mayor of the city, being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The manager of the municipal city city and growing municipal city shall be appointed by district council upon the nomination by the chief administrator of the district being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The deputy manager shall be accountable to the manager of the city.
The manager of a city shall be a member of the city administration council.
The Rigio polis and principal cities may have more than one deputy manager
The deputy manager of city shall be assigned by mayor of the city and nominated by the city council.
The accountability of the deputyty manager shall be to the general manager of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager
The manager of a city shall have the power and functions:-
Serve as an executive of the city municipal services.
Manage and organize the city municipal services.
Develop and submit to the mayor,service delivery indicators and levels,ensure their implementations upon approval.
Ensure the implementation of policies, laws and levels approved by the regional state and the decisions of city council in the service delivery branches of the city.
Constitute and direct a management committee consisting of heads of service delivering bodies of the city.
Assign heads of service delivering bodies of the city
Recruit, administer and dismiss employees serving in the service delivering bodies of the municipal city according to the law.
Make recommendations, to the Mayor, for the establishment of municipal city service delivering bodies and alternative means of delivering different services; implement same when decided.
Organize and submit to the Mayor, standards and directives of service delivery; implement same upon approved.
Prepare and submit to the Mayor, the budget and work plan of the budget year of municipality service delivering bodies; implement same upon approval.
Receive and entertain the complaints of residents concerning the municipality services transparently; give speedy responses for the complaints.
Submit to the Mayor, periodic work performance and financial reports about services of municipality.
Power and Functions of Deputy Manager
Deputy Manager shall have the following power and functions:-
Serve as deputy manager and de partment organizer.
Act on behave of city manager, where he is absent or unable to perform his activities.
Perform his branch’s functions and other activities, which are specifically identified and assigned to him by the city manager.
Establishment and Accountability of sectorial offices of the cities
The sectorial offices and different services delivering institutions shall be established in accordance with the grade of the city and they may be accountable to the mayor or their superior. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the regional state administration council.
Establishment of City District
The city district shall be the structture following city administration that may be organized with the number of population from 10,000 to 20,000. Its particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
The city district may estabilish by4 (four) or more than kebeles.
The city district shall be accountable to the people and to the city administration.
The city district shall have its own government structure in order to provide speedy and effective services.
A permanently operating executive body shall be established in the city district and its functions shall be the functions of the city administration council provided under article 26 of this proclamation. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Rigio polis and principal city shall be proposed by the executive committee of city district and appointed by the mayor of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Regio polis and principal city, being accountable to the manager of the city and executive organ of the district and shall have the following power and functions:
Participate, without a vote, in the meetings of the city council.
Implement and cause the implementation of the service delivery activities of the city.
Being together with the manager of the city, make recommendation about alternative implementation of different activities for the services delivery in the city district and city kebeles; implement same when allowed.
Administer employees of the municipality of the city district in accordance with the law.
Submit work performance reports to the manager of the city.
prepare work plan of the city district depending on the plan of the city; implement same upon approval.
Pass decision on issues relating to city services in the city district.
Perform other additional functions assigned to him by the manager of the city.
Establishment of City Kebele
The City Kebele shall be established by this proclamation as the lower administrative structure in the cities having or not having council.
The City Kebele shall be organized by the government power structures of the council, the administration council and the social court.
A City Kebele may be established having the number of population from 2,000 to 10,000. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The City Kebele shall have rules and regulations enforcement body.
Power and Function of Kebele
Without prejudice to the powers and functions give to kebele by Regional constitution , the city Kebele shall have the powers and function of its levels by sharing it from the city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment of Kebele Manager
The manager of a city Kebele, being evaluated by his professional ability and leadership efficiency, shall be nominated by the chairperson of the kebele, and appointed by the Kebele council.
Part Four
Establishment of Regular and Social Courts of a City
Establishments of Regular Courts
Cities of different hierarchy shall have the court having judicial power, which shall be established in cities having their own councils as deemed necessary.
The city court to be established as per this proclamation shall be realized with the request of Oromia Supreme Court depending on the research.
The structure of these courts shall be in accordance with the structure and practices of the regional state courts.
As per this article, city matters entertained by the courts at the city administration level shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Establishment of Social Courts
A social court, which shall have jurisdiction over petty offences committed in the city, shall be established at City Kebele level.
The city kebele social court shall be accountable to the city Kebele council.
The powers and functions of the kebele social courts provided by proclamation shall be applicable on the city kebele social courts.
Establishment of Regulation enforcement body
Every city district and city Kebele shall establish rules and regulation enforcement body; whose number may vary according to the differences of the district or the kebele. Its particulars shall be decided by the internal regulation to be issued by the city council.
Part Five
Relationships of the Cities with the Residents and Other Bodies
Relations with the Residents
The relationship of the cities with the residents shall depend on the fundamental constitutional principle that says, “All power emanates from the people”.
It is only the people of the city who can elect or remove from their power members of the city councils. The people in the city alone may recall the representatives they have elected for the city administration council.
Ensuring the Peoples’ Participation
Residents, civic associations, and private sectors shall made to discuss and express their views on the work programs, budget proposals,project ideas, work performances, finance and audit reports of the fiscal year.
Whether the city have council or not, the city administration shall facilitate forums at least once in every three months to enable the residents of the city whether , civic associations, and private sectors to discuss and present their views on various issues concerning the city.
Without prejudices to this article sub article 2, A public meeting may be called by the city where the circumstance so requires.
The city administration shall device different strategies and facilitates conditions to encourage residents of the city to participate in the different boards or committees established for the purpose city matters.
Any city has a duty to give a prompt response to questions and complaints raised by the residents.
Relationship Between the City and City Kebele
The power, function and internal organization of city kebele shall be based principle of decentralization, which its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city kebele council may make proposal to the city administration or district administration on matters relating to the development activities of the kebele.
Federal or Regional government function matters that used to be performed by the city kebele and excluded from the powers and functions of a city as per this proclamation may be performed in accordance with the agreement made between the regional government and the city administration.
Part Six
Relationships between the Cities and Regional Government
General Principles
Based on the recognition that cities are autonomous; accountable and responsible to the regional government; the relationship between the cities and regional government shall be guided by the spirit of cooperation, partnership, collaboration and rule of law.
The relationship between the regional government and the cities shall facilitate favorable condition for coordinated planning and flow of information.
Regional government and Cities Partnership
To perform its powers and functions the city may work together in coordination or by agreement with the administrative bodies or institutions of the regional government to play its role.
The regional Government may organize regional organs when deemed necessary or perform regional government powers and functions in the city.
Enactment and Enforcement of Laws and Standards
The regional government may provide necessary technical support to enable cities to perform their powers and functions by issuing necessary laws and standards.
The cities shall be responsible to ensure the enforcement of laws and observance standards.
The decisions rendered and working system established by the cities shall be consistent with the policies, strategies, programs and laws issued at regional state and at country level.
How the Regional Government Assists the Cities
Without prejudice to the grant regional government may give for the implementation of specific projects, the regional government shall provides development assistance to the cities basis of competitiveness and equity.
The regional government shall create favorable conditions within which cities can develop and grow.
Establishing Joint Committee
In order to strengthen urban-rural economic interaction, the cities may establish joint committee with the adjoining district to work cooperatively on issues of mutualinterest.
Boundary dispute arising between the cities and the ad-joining rural kebele shall be settled amicably between the city and concerned rural kebele. Failing such amicable settlement, the decision of regional administration council shall be final.
How Cities Submit their Re-ports
The cities shall submit quarterly and annual work performance and financial reports to the body for which they are accountable; submitaudit reports to the body for which they are accountable as found necessary.
The body to which the report is submitted may periodically review the reports and give feedbacks to ensure the accuracy of the reports.
Dissolution of City Council
"Caffee" may cause city council to be dissolved “” when it believes that operation of the city council poses a threat to the federal and regional state's constitution, or where serious security problems or human right violations which cannot be controlled as well as where it believes that serious injury to the public interest has been occurred.
Where the city administration council dissolves in accordance of sub article 1 of this article, the temporary administration shall be nominated by the regional council;caffee of the region shall make arrangement with the concerned body to make fresh elections within the time fixed. The details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Part Seven
City Finance and Budget Administration
Fiscal year
The fiscal year of cities shall be the fiscal year of the regional government.
Revenue Sources of Cities
Income of cities shall be from the following sources:
Revenue and taxes authorized by law and service delivery fees collected from services they render.
Budget support granted by the regional government.
Loans and Assistances
Other income sources
Every regular income or revenue collected at the city level shall be income of the cities. The condition by which cities support each other shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Without prejudice to Sub-article(2) of this Article, it shall be effective from the next budget year.
The cities shall receive payment for the function they perform to the regional government.
Prior to the implementation of the loan of the cities in accordance with sub-article (1)c of this article, its importance shall be decided by regional state administration council.
The cities may borrow money from the federal or regional governments as well as from the legally recognized financial institutions. The loan obtained in such a way shall be allocated only for the expenses the of capital projects.
Details of the condition of loan and their payments shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Administration System and Books of Accounts
Every city shall have power and responsibility to systemically organize and administer its property.
The financial system of every city shall be implemented in accordance with the regional state financial system.
Every city shall have complete and accurate books of account and financial documents.
The Bureau shall make necessary supports for the cities to improve their efficiencies of budget preparation and performances. details of the condition shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Reporting Systems
The mayor shall present the financial reports of the city administration to the city council twice a year; also discloses it to the public.
The manager of a city district, municipality, and growing municipality shall present the financial reports of the city periodically to the body to whom it is accountable; also discloses it to the public.
Auditing System
Every city shall have internal Audit.
The internal auditor, who shall be accountable to accountable to the head of the institution, shall ensure on day-by-day basis that the resources of the city are being implemented in accordance with the relevant financial regulations.
Part Eight
Human Resource Management of cities
General Principles
Recruitment and administration of human resource of the cities shall be in accordance with administration of civil servant law of the regional state.
Every city shall have power to recruit,administer, specify the power and duties, decide the salary and benefits and dismiss its employees in accordance with the regional state civil servant law.
Except for political appointees, the placement of city officers and employees shall be carried out depending on their efficiency and importance to the position based on sufficient examination.
Applicability of the regional state civil servants law
The Regional state government civil servant law shall also be applicable on the employees of the municipality service.
Part Nine
City Plan
Power to Prepare and Implement City Plan
Every city shall have the power to prepare, cause to be prepared, approve, amend and implement a city plan.
The cities shall observe the fundamental principles, guidelines and standards of plan preparation of the regional state and the federal government in the process of plan preparation. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Notwithstanding to the provision under sub article (1) of this article, the power to approve the planof the municipal and growing municipality cities shall be the district council.
The bureau, with the concerned body, may review the city plan to ascertain its conformity with the condition provided under sub-article 2 of this article; add necessary improvements on the plan if necessary; submit it to the city or district councils.
Enabling City Residents Participate
The residents of the city shall have rights to participate and forward their views in all phases of plan preparation and implementation.
The city shall device the system and favorable condition by which residents of the city can efficiently express their opinions and forward their views in the preparation and implementation of the city plan.
Part Ten
Association of Cities
Establishment
Cities in the region may establish associations of their own and actively participate in the operation thereof.
The association shall be registered by the appropriate government body and acquire legal personality.
The structural and manner of operation of the association shall be determined by its memorandum of association and internal regulation.
Power and Functions of Associations of the Cities
The association of cities, without prejudice to the power and functions provided under its memorandum of association and internal regulation; shall have the following power and functions;
Works to realize the existence of inter-city cooperation; sharing of experiences and ideas.
Represent cities and exchange their views on matters of common interest.
Work to strength the performance abilities of the cities by providing trainings and material support for its members.
Create strong relationships with local and foreign city associations in consultation with the Bureau; and
Carry out other activities that would enhance the developments of cities in the region.
Part Eleven
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power and Functions of the Bureau
Notwithstanding powers and duties entrusted to it by other laws, the bureau shall have the powers and responsibilities to follow up and ensure the implementation of all matters provided in this proclamation, and policies, strategies, and laws relating to the cities of the regional state,
Advice the regional state government on matters relating to cities; undertake or cause to be undertaken different researches concerning cities; submit it toconcerned bodies; implement same when authorized,
Submit work performance reports of the cities to the regional state government,
Prepare directives and working practices to enable the urban land to be used economically and for highly beneficial purposes in accordance with the plan of the city; cause to be implemented; supervise and control,
Conduct researches periodically concerning the technical and material supports necessary for the cities, as well as issues that strengthen their performance abilities; and submit to the concerned bodies; implement or cause it to be implemented when authorized,
Entertain and decide on the request of residents to obtain legal personality of being a city,
Reviews the request of the cities for promotion to the next grade and submit its proposal to the regional administration council; implements same upon approval,
Support cities of the regional state to create and strengthen relationship with other cities in the country and outside the country,
Work for the existence of favorable working relationships between the regional government and cities of the regional state government,
Transitory Provisions
The regional state government administration council may decide on how this proclamation can be implemented at different levels in various cities.
As per the provision of sub article(1) of this article, the current city administration may be made to continue functioning until the election of members of the city council by the next national election period stepwise.
The administration structure that had been functioning before the approval of this proclamation shall continue until the grades of the cities in the region are decided in accordance with this proclamation.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of article 23 of this proclamation, the designation and appointment of Mayor of Cities administration will continue until the election of council of city administration held.
Transfer of Rights and Obligations
The rights and obligations of the cities before the approval of this proclamation shall proceed in accordance with this proclamation.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The regional state government administrative council may issue a regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Bureau may issue directives for the implementation of this proclamation and the regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and customary practices contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this proclamation.
Urban Local Government Proclamation of Oromia National Regional State No. 65/2003 and its amendment proclamation No. 116/2006 are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
A Proclamation to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No. 163/ 2011 Article 61 Sub-articles (1-5 ) and proclamation No. 170/2012 article 2 sub article 3 (1-3) are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Any organ shall have a duty to cooperate for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on MegeletaOromia
Finfinne
This 2nd of October 2015
Muktar kedir
President of Oromia National
Regional state
Proclamation No. 179/2013
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to implement programs stated in the urban land development and management policy in an organized manner;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to make free this limited resources from misuse and rent-seeking through the realization of urban land development and management system within the urban areas of the region in a way that has transparency and accountability and to realize social and economic transformation;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to strengthen implementation capacity of urban by creating information and data system of urban land by creating modern procedure and technology as well as building skilled and competent manpower;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish an organ that work on urban land development and management issues which has been executed at different place in a scattered manner;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “A Proclamation to Establish Urban Land Development and Management Agency No. 179/2013.”
Definitions
Unless the context required otherwise in this Proclamation:-
“Bureau” means Oromia Industry and Urban Development Bureau.
“Urban” means urban whose population is 2000 and more and where the livelihood of 50% of this popultion does not depend up on agriculture.
“Urban Land” means land found in the boundary of urban administration.
“Urban Land Management” means administering and leading urban land and land related property in a modern way.
“Urban Administration” means urban administration that acquired legal and concerned government organ recognition.
“Land Related Property” means urban land and immovable property found on it.
“Cadastre” means a system by which land and real propertiy found on it is registred and known.
“Urban Plan” means structural plan, local development plan or basic plan of an urban center including annexed descriptive documents which are legally endorsed by the authorized body and have legally binding effect.
“Person” means physical or judicial person or organization.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine gender.
Objectives of the Agency
To enhance transparency and accountability in urban land use that is guided by urban plan to bring basic change in socio-economic of urban society as well as, fast growth and development of towns by creating organized urban land development and management system.
PART TWO
Establishement, Organization and Power and Duties of the Agency
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia National Regional State Land Development and Mamanagement Agency hereafter called “Agency” shall be established by this Proclamation.
The Agency shall be accountable to the Bureau.
The Head Office of the Agency
The head office of the Agency shall be in Finfine Town and it may have structure and office at Zonal, Urban, and Kebele level as it may necessary.
Organization of the Agency
The Agency shall have the following organization.
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Other necessary workers.
Powers and Duties of the Agency
The Agency shall have the following powers and duties:-
Implement urban land development and management policy and strategy,cause to be implemented, follow up,and control.
Provide modern urban land development and administration system; cause to be provided; support; control and follow up.
Implement, follow up and control lease laws and other laws related to urban land development and management.
Provide and cause to be provided urban land administration and service delivery system which ensures transparency, efficiency, quality and accountably.
Collect, organize, administer and disseminate information and data regarding land and property related with urban land.
Cause modern data and information system related with urban land and property related to it to be provided; follow up and control its implimentation.
Study and prepare urban land, with the necessary infrastructure, free from dispute and complaint for investment and development service, transfer to the concerned body, control its implementation, take and cause the necessary legal measure to be taken;
Study and identify old urban areas, facilitate conditions with the concerned body for its redevelopment, follow up its implementation.
Follow up, control the implimentation of urban land previously given for investment is utalized in accordance with the existing law, where necessary cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Recieve, organize and submit request of investment land for manufacturing and industry to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and cause to be decided and implemented; follow up its implementation, if not performed as per the the agreement take and cause the necessary measure to be taken.
Make investors sign an agreement with urban administration; register,hold the agreement and transfer it to the concerned body.
Execute request of change of ownership and type of investment land project with the concerned body; follow up its implementation.
Cause compensation to be estimated in accordance with the law for persons whose land is expropriated; cause compensation to be paid before their displacement.
Undertake research to make compensation payment correspond with the market value of the time; submit it to the concerned body and cause to be approved, implement and cause to be implemented with the concerned body.
Work in coordination with the concerned body to rehabilitate persons whose land is expropriated; support; follow up and control.
Provide a system in which urban identify, register rural land and utilize it for development and avoid illegal activities.
Provide a system which makes urban land delivery fruitful and urban economic development aim to be achieved.
Provide land preparation system and organize land data bank.
Shall give construction and land utilization license; follow up its implementation; where a problem is found take and cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Give and cause to be given a training that strengthen worker's implementation capacity.
Shall provide urban land utilization plan that ensures the realization of urban development goal, that could be implemented and as well as correspond with each other.
Issue Directives and guideline to ensure urban land use for maximum economical benefit in accordance with urban plan, cause its implement ation; follow up and control its implementation.
Issue Directive and guideline with the concerned body to control the expansion of illegal construction inside urban areas and on the borders; follow up, control its implimentation; take and cause legal measure to be taken.
Coordinate the collection and organization of data regarding land and property related to land in urban areas as per cadastral map system; control; cause its implementation.
Follow up, control cities whether they follow the master plan in a modern way; give the necessary support in the preparation of the town's master plan as per the standard.
Study and submit structure and salary of the employees of the agency to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and implement the same upon approval.
Study and submit urbans that did not enter in to the lease system to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval and impliment the same upon approval; follow up its implementation.
Study and Submit initial lease price of urban land to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval; cause to be implemented; support.
Coordinate, control those organs accountabile to it.
Own property, enter in to contract; sue and to be sued.
Appointment
The General Manager and the Deputy General Manager of the Agency shall be nominated by the President of the National Regional State of Oromia and appointed by National Regional State's Administrative Council.
Powers and duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties.
Coordinate and administer duties of the Agency.
Implement the powers and duties of the Agency; cause to be implement.
May delegate some of his powers and duties to heads and other worker under him for better implementation.
Employ, administer and fire workers in accvordance with civil servant law.
Represent the Agency in all communications with the third party.
Prepare and submit work plan and budget to the concerned body and implement the same upon approval.
Administer, open bank account and run the budget of the Agency, as per financial law.
Prepare and submit work performance and budget execution report to the concerned body.
Powers and duties of the Deputy Manager
Represent the General Manager in his absence.
Perform duties given to him by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Income of the Agency
Income of the Agency shall be from the budget allocated by the government and various donations.
Book of Account
The Agency shall have full and clear book of account and financial documents.
Account Audit
Books of account and financial document of the Agency shall be audited by Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Office or by other auditor assigned by it.
Transitional Provisions
All works and datas related with urban land started by various bodies shall be transferred to the Agency by this Proclamation.
Accountability of Different Bodies
The Oromia Urban Planning Institute and Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office shall be accountable to the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may establish different bodies by Regulation to ensure the proper implementation of the powers and duties of the Agency.
Powers to Issue Regulation & Directives
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may issue Regulation to implement this Proclamation.
The Agency may issue Directives to implement this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
Article 13 Sub-Article (2)(f) of Proclamation No. 163/2011 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Articles 4 (6), (7),(9), (10) and (28) of Proclamation No. 170/2012 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office Regulation No. 142/2012 Article 4 Sub- Article 2, Article 7 Sub-Article 1, Article 8 Sub-Article 11 and Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 Sub-Articles 5 and 7 and Article 16 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistant with this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come in to effect as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of Oromia National Regional
State
Finfine, 13th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 180/2013
A Proclamation to Establish Irrigation Development Authority of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure anddevelopment found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares.
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
“Large Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of more than 3000 hectares.
“Irrigation Development’’ means to develop an irrigation farming using different technologies with ground or surface water or both.
“Irrigation Farming’’ means farming conducted using irrigation water.
“Drainage’’ means to drain excess water from farm land which is more than the need of the crop.
“Technology’’ means all the infrastructures and inputs required for the development of irrigation.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this Proclamation set out in a masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia Irrigation Development Authority,here after referred as “The Authority’’ is hereby established by this Proclamation.
The Authority shall be accountable to the President of the National Regional State of Oromia.
Objective
Support by irrigation development, to hasten socio economic growth of the farmers and pastoralist community of the region,to alleviate shortage of food crops and for the people of the region to attain food selfsufficiency in sustainable manner.
Office of The Authority
The head office of the Authority shall be in Finfinne and may have offices at Zone,District and Keble level as necessary.
PART TWO
Organization, Powers and Duties of the Authority
Organization of The Authority
The Authority shall have:
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Required staffs;
Powers and Duties of the Authority
The Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Prepares and submit policies, strategies and programs related to irrigation to the government and implement the same upon approval.
Undertake and cause the undertaking of the study, design, construction and scheme management of traditional, micro, small, medium and large scale irrigation.
Fully administer, follow up, execute technical work of those medium and large scale irrigations whose construction is completed up until the users are self sufficient to administer;conduct maintenance work and cause to conducted where it is found to be beyond the capacity of the users, and turn the administration over to them when they are self sufficient.
Undertake awareness creation advice and follow up on fee collection and saving to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of irrigation scheme.
Conserve the water resource in the region for sustainable irrigation developmentin collaboration with the concerned bodies.
Undertake drainage work where it is necessary in the region.
Undertake water harvesting for irrigation development.
Undertake a study with the concerned body on problems related with areas of irrigarion development, drainage, also on irrigation technology; coordinate; dessiminate research findings and improved technology; prepare demonstration plots.
Taking the responsibility of following up, supporting, strengthening micro and moisture irrigation to be undertaken by community.
Collaborate with stakeholders who contribute to the sustainability and growth of irrigation development.
Follow up, administer, irrigation development funds obtained from different funding agencies as grant or loan is utilized for the intended purpose and report its implimentation to concerned the bodies.
Shall handover completed small scale irrigation projects to the users, provide technical support, follow up, conduct maintenance, cause to be conducted where it is found beyond the capacity of the users.
Collect irrigation construction investment cost from the users; where it is allowed by the government invest it back on irrigation projects; collect different service and maintainance fees and utialize it back.
Select technologies that enables to speed up farming, work with the concerned bodies on the quality of the selected technologies.
Expand irrigation extension and irrigation development farming advisory service.
Identify, record and scale up best practice of irrigation development from all levels and disseminate.
Strengthen community participation on irrigation development.
Organize water user associations, train, assist and follow up in the the preparation of thier by laws also work with the concerned bodies for them to get legal personality.
Work and facilitate conditions for women and youth to be participants and users of irrigation development;
Gives necessary technical support and supervise those organs working on irrigation development.
Look for fund through different methods for irrigation and drainage coverage increment.
Work with the concerned bodies to minimize the negative impact that irrigation development may cause on the environment and human being.
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
Power and Duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all its dealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Power and Duties of the Deputy General Manager
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
Books of Account
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
Audit
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Powers to Iissue Regulation
The Administrative Council of the National Regional State of Oromia may issue a Regulation to execute this Proclamation.
Provision of Transition
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Repealed Laws
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional
State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 13th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development;
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently,it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No.181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution,construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council” means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from the net profit.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in masculine gender shall also apply to feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on any existing public enterprise and on those established after the issuance of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER TWO
Establishment and Legal Personality of Public Enterprise
Requirements to be Met Before Establishment of an Enterprise
Before the establishment of an enterprise the Authority shall ascertain that:
The payment which is made in kind is valued properly by an expert.
Cash paid as part of the initial capital is deposited in a bank and in the account of the enterprise.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article if the payment made in kind has audited accounts the book value of each payment in kind may be taken into account.
The experts stated under Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article shall prepare a report containing a detailed description of the property, the value given to each item and the method of valuation.
Where any expenses incurred by the Authority for the establishment of an enterprise is confirmed by the auditors, it shall form part of the capital.
The sums deposited under Sub-Article 1(b) of this Article shall not be withdrawn from the bank until the establishment of the enterprise.
Establishment of the Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall be established by this Proclamation and the establishment law shall contain:
The name of the enterprise,
The objectives of the enterprise,
A statement that the enterprise shall be governed by this proclamation,
The authorized capital,
The amount of the initial capital paid up both in kind and in cash,
The address of the head office of the enterprise,
That it may have branches,
The duration for which the enterprise is established.
Working Procedure, Legal Personality and Liability of Public Enterprise
A public enterprise shall have legal personality.
A public enterprise may not be held liable beyond its total assets;
An enterprise shall follow the laws and systems of free market.
Without prejudice to the provision of Sub-Article 3 of this Article where found necessary the government may order the enterprises directly to intervene for the benefit of the public.
Address
The address of an enterprise shall be the place where its head office is situated and may have branch offices as may be necessary.
CHAPTER THREE
Organization and Management of an Enterprise
Organization
Any public development enterprise shall have the following organisation:
Board,
A General Manager and a Deputy General Manager as may be necessary;
The necessary staff.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Authority given by other laws, the Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Cause public enterprises to submit a plan and performance report; analyze;follow up; evaluate its performance and give feedback.
Propose the chairperson and members of the Board of public enterprises for appointment and assignment to the President of the Regional Government.
Fix allowance to be paid to the members of the Board, follow up its implementation.
Decide the standard of public enterprise based upon their capital and manner of establishment.
Cause the allocation of initial capital of the enterprises by the government.
Cause the allocation of reserve fund or funds by the Government so that the authorized capital of a newly established public enterprise to be fully paid up within five years.
Follow up, cause the implementation of the amount to be paid to government from net profit of the public enterprises.
Upon the request of the board, submit a request with its recommendation to the Administrative Council of the Government the amount of state dividend to be given to an enterprise, execute upon approval.
Undertake study on a means of building the capacity of public enterprises for effective achievements of their objectives, submit it to the Administrative Council of the Government, upon approval follow up its implementation.
Submit purchase plan of fixed assets that is necessary for the activities of an enterprise; submit to the Administrative Council for approval; cause its implementation upon approval.The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Issue Directives with regards to writing off the accounts of public enterprises and follow up its implementation.
Formulate policy with regards to public enterprises, execute upon approval; provide strategic directions for public enterprises.
Without prejudice to the powers and duties given to the Board, perform other functions necessary for the protections of the ownership rights of the state.
Members of the Board
Based on the standard of the enterprise,the number of members of the Board may be from five to eleven.
Not more than one third of the members of the Board shall be elected by the general assembly of the permenant workers. The rest of the members of the Board shall be appointed by the Authority.
The members of the Board shall be appointed or elected on the basis of their profession, experience and competence.
Any member of a Board may also be appointed as a Board member of any other non competing enterprise.
The term of office of the members of the Board shall be three years; where necessary a member of a Board may be reelected or reassigned at the expiry of his term of office for the next one term only.
Where any member of the Board resigns from membership, the chairperson of the Board shall bring the matter to the attention of the Authority so that another person is assigned in the same manner.
Where a member of the Board could not fulfill his responsibilities effectively;was consecutively absent from a meeting more than three times or was absent for or more than five times in one fiscal year, the Authority submits a proposal for his dismissal to the organ that assigned him.
Meeting Procedures of the Board
The Board shall have a regular meet ing at least once a month.
The chairperson shall call a meeting where there is an urgent matter or where at least more than fifty percent of the members of the Board so request.
The agenda of the meeting shall be communicated to the Board members in advance.
The meeting commences where a majority of the members are present.
The Board shall take a decision by a majority vote, in case of a tie the chairperson shall have a casting vote.
The Board shall have a minute signed by the members.
The Board shall select and assign a secretary from among the employees of the enterprise.
The General Manager of the enterprise shall attend meetings of the Board without having the right to vote.
The Board shall draw its own working procedure.
Powers and Duties of the Board
The accountability of the board shall be to the Authority, and shall have the following powers and duties:
Appoint and dismiss the General Manager of the enterprise and decide his salary and allowance.
Propose to the Authority for the increase or decrease of the enterprise's capital.
Submit books of account to external and internal auditors, also periodic reports on the state of activities and financial reports of an enterprise to the Authority.
Study and propose the purchase of equipment and fixed asset that are necessary for the enterprise; and based on the decision cause to be implemented. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Approve the sale of fixed asset that is not necessary for the enterprise.
Ensure that books of accounts and properities of the enterprise are kept properly.
Without prejudice to Article 27 of this Proclamation, the Board may request the Authority for additional contingency fund and upon permission cause to be assigned, and decide on its use.
Approves the enterprises’ work plan, budget and internal regulations,follow up and report its implementation to the Authority.
Approves the employment, assignment,salary and allowance of those officers of the enterprise accountable to the General Manager.
Prepare strategic plan compatible with the mission of the enterprises based on the direction given from the Authority, and submit it for approval; upon approval cause its implementation.
Accountability of the Board Members
The members of the Board, shall carry out their powers and duties with due care.
The members of Board shall be accountable individually and jointly for the damage caused on the enterprise by their failure to perform properly.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 2 of this Article, a Board member who dissented from the decision should have to write and sign specifying his point of dissent so as not to be held accountable.
Powers and Duties of the General Manager of a Public Enterprise
The accountability of the General Manager shall be to the Board and have the following powers and duties:
Plan organize, direct, administer and control the activities of the enterprise.
Represent the enterprise in dealing with third parties.
Subject to the approval of the Board,employ, assign and define the functions of officers accountable to him.
Employ, assign, dismiss and determine the salary and allowance of other employees of the enterprises in accordance with its internal regulation and labor law.
Keeps proper books of accounts of the enterprise, and opens and operate bank accounts of the enterprise.
Shall sell fixed assets not needed by the enterprise based upon the approval of the Board and Directives of the Authority to be issued.
Prepare and submit to the Board the internal regulation as well as the work plan and budget of the enterprise and implement the same upon approval.
Implement and cause the implementation of the decisions of the Board.
Establish and preside over the meetings of the management committee;participate and brief, and submit a report on performance evaluation meetings conducted by the Authority.
Prepare a strategic plan inline with the directions set by the Board, submit to the Board for approval, implement and cause to implemented upon approval.
Perform other duties assigned to it by the Board.
Responsiblity and Liability of the General Manager
The General Manager shall be liable for the damage he causes on the enterprise through negligence or intentionally in the process of dispensing his responsibility.
CHAPTER FOUR
Capital of Public Enterprise
Capital Needed to Establish a Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall have a capital.
The Authority shall cause the initial capital needed to be allocated by the Administrative Council.
The capital of an enterprise may be in cash or in kind.
Where it is paid in kind the Authority shall ensure that the property is correctly valued in accordance with Article 5 and Sub-Article 1 (a) of this Proclamation or conforms with the book value thereof.
Paid Up and Authorized Capital
The amount of the paid up capital of an enterprise at the time of its establishment shall not be less than 25% of its authorized capital.
The authorized capital of an enterprise shall be fully paid up within five years from the date of its establishment.
Where the authorized capital is not fully paid up as provided under sub- Article 2 of this Article, the Authority shall, without prejudice to the right of the third parties adjust the capital to the level of the paid up capital.
Increase of Authorized Capital
The Authority may cause the funds needed to increase the capital of an enterprise to be allocated by the Government or to be paid out of the income of the enterprise.
Decreasing of Capital
The capital of an enterprise may without prejudice to the right of third parties to decrease, where:
The auditor proposes for the capital to be decreased;
It was decided for the capital to decrease following a proposal submitted by the Board;
The authorized capital of the enterprise has not been fully paid as provided for under Sub-Article 2 of Article 18 of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER FIVE
Name and Trademark of a Public Enterprise
Name of a Public Enterprise
The name of a public enterprise is the name under which the enterprise carries on its activities and shall clearly designate such activities.
The enterprise shall not go against government policy and offend the moral of the society, and also it shall not prejudice the right of third parties.
An enterprise shall display its name outside its premises.
Restrictions in the Use of the Name
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of the name of a public enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation and prohibit such enterprise from using the name giving rise to this dispute.
Trademark
A trademark is a name, designation,emblem or any other distinctive sign used by an public enterprise to distinguish its goods and services.
Restrictions in the Use of Trademarks
A public enterprise may choose any kind of trademark.
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of a trademark of an enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Before the trademark is used, it shall be registered by the appropriate governmentoffice and published in a news paper with wider circulation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Sub-Article 2 of this Article and/or prohibit such enterprise from using the trademark giving rise to the dispute.
CHAPTER SIX
Accounts and Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
SECTION ONE
Public Enterprise Accounts
Accounting Principles
Any public enterprise shall keep books of accounts following a generally accepted accounting principles. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Financial Year, Closing of Accounts and Financial Reports
The financial year of an enterprise shall be from July 1st to June 30th E.C.
Any public enterprise shall close its accounts at least once a year.
The annual closing of accounts shall be completed within three months following the end of the financial year and shall be open to an external auditor.
The enterprise shall prepare work performance report on plans of major activities and program to the Authority.
Failure to close, in due time, the account of an enterprise in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article may entail liability.
Reserve Funds and Its Utilization
Any public enterprise shall have a legal reserve fund.
Any public enterprise shall annually transfer 5 % of its net profit to legal reserve fund until such fund equals 20 % of the capital of the enterprise.
The legal reserve fund may be utilized for covering:
Losses, and
Unforeseeable expenses and liabilities;
The Board of any public enterprise with the approval of the Authority, may cause the enterprises to secure other reserve funds and may decide on its usalization. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Payment of Taxes and Duties
The relevant laws concerning taxes and duties shall be applicable on the enterprises.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the right of an enterprise to be exempted from taxes and duties under any other law, shall be effective.
Payment of State Dividend
Public enterprises shall pay state dividend within six months from the end of the budget year and deposit to the bank account of the Government development fund.
SECTION TWO
Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
Assignment of an Auditor
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Auditor General of Oromia given by the law, the account of each enterprise shall be audited by an external auditor approved by the Authority.
The Authority shall ascertain that the external auditors assigned satisfies the criteria set by the Office of Auditor General of Oromia and that they are free from any form of influence.
The Authority shall determine the term of an external auditor.
Obligation to Cooperate for Audit
Any person who has received, paid or expended or is in charge of the accounts of the money or property of the enterprise being audited shall, when requested have the obligation to produce to the enternal and external auditors the accounts to be audited and to provide the necessary information.
Accountability, Power, Duties of an Auditor
Accountability, power and duties of auditors related to this Proclamation is applicable in consistence with the commercial and civil codes.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Amalgamation and Division of Public Enterprises
Basic Principle
Two or more enterprise may be amalgamated by the decision of the Administrative Council and form a new enterprise or take over one enterprise.
An enterprise may be divided by the decision of the Administrative Council in to two or more enterprises.
The decision to amalgamate or divide shall be effected based on research proposal presented by the Authority.
Before amalgamation or division of the enterprises, the Authority shall inform the interest and accountability of the third party.
In the event that an enterprise which is being considered for amalgamation or division has obligation towards creditors, no decision shall be takento amalgamate or divide, if the enterprise resulting from the amalgamation or division is unable to meet the obligation towards the creditors.
The accounts of an enterprise to be amalgamated or divided shall be closed and audited from the beginning of the financial year up to the date of the amalgamation or division.
Transfer of Right and Obligation
The rights and obligation of an amalgameted enterprise shall be transferred to the newly created enterprise.
The Authority shall prepare a proposal with regards to the distribution of the rights and obligations among the enterprises divided and the newly established enterprises resulting from the division.
The proposal prepared by the Authority shall be submitted to the Administrative Council for decision; up on approval a copy shall be sent to the newly established enterprises.
As provided here under Sub-Article 3 of this Article, the Authority shall put the major points of decisions passed in a notice either on Afan Oromo, Amharic or English newspaper with wider circulation.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where there is an obligation entered with a third party previously, the new enterprises resulting from the division shall be individually and jointly liable towards the creditors.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Dissolution and Winding–up of Accounts
Grounds for Dissolution of an Enterprise
An enterprise may be dissolved for any one of the following reasons;
On the expiry of the life of the enterprise fixed in its establishment law;
Completion of the venture for which the enterprise is established;
Failure to achieve the purpose of the enterprises and where its implementation is found to be impossibile;
Loss of fifty percent of the paid up capital or due to bankruptcy;
Where the Administrative Council passes a decision to dissolve the enterprise;
Decision of the court declaring the enterprise bankrupt.
Appointment, Duties and Powers of Liquidators
Where cases referred under Article 34 of this Proclamation occur, the Authority shall assign one or more liquidators outside the employees of the enterprise in line with the criteria set by the Auditor General.
The Authority may dismiss the liquidators and appoint other liquidators for good cause.
The liquidators shall take over the books and accounts of the enterprise under liquidation.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the liquidators shall take over the property of the enterprise and manage it.
Liquidators have the powers and duties of the Board and the General Manager given by this Proclamation.
The liquidators may not undertake new business other than the execution of contracts still running with third party or where the interests of the winding up so require.
The Board shall prepare a report for the liquidators on the affairs of the enterprise covering the period from the end of the last financial year to the date the winding-up started.
The liquidators and the Board shall jointly prepare and sign a statement of affairs summarizing the rights and obligations of the enterprise.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the Board and the General Manager shall assist the liquidators in carrying out their duties.
Calling on Creditors
The liquidators shall inform creditors of the proposed dissolution of the enterprise and require them to file their claims with supporting documents.
Liquidators shall notify to the creditors by notice published in three successive weekly issued newspaper with wider circulation.
A notification shall be sent to those creditors whose address is known.
Creditors may submit their claims within 90 days from the date the letter is delivered or from the last issue of the notice in the news paper.
The liquidators shall prepare and submit financial statement of the enterprise and sequential term payment of a debt if any, and report to the Authority.
The Authority, after taking into consideration the financial statement and recommendation prepared by the liquidators shall decide the payment of the debt.
Authorize the payment of creditors who have filed their claims.
Where the balance of the enterprise is not sufficient to cover the debt due to creditors, authorize the liquidators to sell assets of the enterprise based on the Directive to be issued without affecting the right of the third party.
Where the total assets of the enterprise are not sufficient to pay off its debts and the authorized capital is not fully paid up, the liquidators shall submit to the Authority for the payment of the debt.
Provision of Creditors
Where known creditors have failed to file their claims within the time limit specified under Article 37 Sub-Article 4 of this Proclamation, the amounts due to them shall be deposited in a bank to the names of the creditors.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 37 Sub-Article 4, after the enterprise ceased to exist, creditors not cited in the books of the enterprise may claim from the surplus assets collected by the Government, provided their failure to claim within the time-limit was due to force majeure. Where the creditors have not been paid due to the liquidator's negligence, the liquidators shall be accountable.
Sums shall be set aside to meet claims in respect of undertakings of the enterprise which are not completed or disputed claims where the creditors have not been guaranteed until the dispute is settled.
Final Balance Sheet and Publication of Notice of Dissolution
After the money to the creditors have been set aside to meet potential claims pursuant to Article 38 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation, the liquidators shall prepare a final balance sheet showing surplus assets, if any, and submit the same to Authority.
The liquidators shall submit a copy of the balance sheet to Auditor General's Office and Oromia Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
The Auditor General shall promptly forward its comments, if any, to Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
As per the permission of Finance and Economic Development Bureau, the Authority approve the final balance sheet, and shall submit the dissolution proposal to the Administrative Council and cause its approval.
The Administrative Council shall then repeal the establishment Proclamation and bylaws of the enterprise.
The enterprise's right and obligation shall cease to exist as of the date of repeal of its establishment Proclamation.
The books of the dissolved enterprise shall be deposited with the Authority where they shall be kept for ten years. Any interested organ may inspect such books after payment of the prescribed fee.
Assets Due to the Government
Any surplus assets of an enterprise dissolved and liquidated shall devolve to the Government account.
CHAPTER NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power to Issue Regulation
The Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Applicable Laws
Ethiopian Commercial and civil code shall be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
The Regional State Enterprises Proclamation No. 16/1997 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
Laws and practices inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall have no effect with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall enter into force as of the 14th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional
State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 14th of July 2013
Proclamation No. 182/2013
Proclamation Licensing and Administration of Advocates and Paralegals of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to provide a system through which legal profession and law firms are guided by to ensure the rule of law and to meet the objective of the justice system;
WHEREAS, it is necessary for the public to get quality advocacy service from professionals engaged in advocacy service;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to upgrade the criteria required to be licensedand professional ethics could be fulfilled with a view of harmonizing competency of advocates working in Oromia Region;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to make legal the work of paralegal to determine conditions of granting license, administration and other related matters;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia Proclamation No. 46/2001, it is herby proclaimed as follows:
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Proclamation Licensing and Administration of Advocates and Paralegals Proclamation No. 182/2013.”
Definitions
Unless the contexts require otherwise in this proclamation:
“Public Prosecutor” means a person who employed by Oromia Justice Bureau or other governmental offices working with prosecutor profession in this institutions.
“Advocate” means a person who is granted an advocacy license to render advocacy service.
“Paralegal” means a person who is registered and granted license in accordance with this proclamation and rendering services to client by preparing application or various contracts with consideration.
“Bureau” means Oromia Justice Bureau.
“Law Firm” means a firm established by partnership agreements of two or more advocates who are granted with principal license to render advocacy service.
“Law Clerk” means a person who is registered in accordance with this proclamation and submits suits or applications prepared by advocate before the court, open files and serve summon, order of court and copy of court decision for concerned bodies.
“License” means a certificate issued for advocates or law firms to render advocacy service or paralegals to render writing service related to law.
“Client” means a person who enters in to contracts with advocate or paralegal or law firm to obtain services for himself or for third party or who has told facts of the case.
“Court” means the Oromia National Regional State Courts or the quasijudicial organ authorized by law.
“Member” means a person who is a share holder of law Firm.
“Person” means any physical or judicial person.
“Advocacy Service” means pleading courts, rendering legal consultancy service or preparation of contracts or any documents to be adduced before the court, or memorandum of association, document of establishment or amendment or dissolution of an organization with or without or direct or indirect future consideration.
“Legal Profession Service” means graduate with law from legally recognized college or University and giving legal service.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this Proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on an advocate, a law firm and paralegal licensed from the Region.
Part Two
Licensing and Registration of Advocates
Rendering of Advocacy Service
Any person who wants to render advocacy service in the Region shall be an Ethiopian and must have license granted to him from the Region.
Without prejudice to sub article(1) of this Article, the following may render advocacy service without advocacy license:
A person who plead his own case;
A person who without payment plead the case of his spouse, parents, children, grandparents, sisters, brothers or person to whom his tutor or guardian;
A prosecutor pleading in his official capacity;
A head, a partner, or an agent represented by the head of an organization or company who pleads the case of the organization or company holding a power of attorney to represent such organization or company in court;
An attorney , an official of public body or public enterprise who pleads the actions of such public body or public enterprise;
Chairperson of employee’s or employer's trade union or a person represented from among the members of the union.
Documents Submitted With License Application
An application for advocacy license shall be duly completed in a form prepared by the Bureau and attached with the necessary documents.
The following documents shall be attached with the application submitted in compliance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article:
Credential in law bestowed on him from legally recognized educational institution;
Job experience showing that the applicant has been working in law profession;
Evidence from the concerned body showing that the applicant is free from criminal records forthe last four years;
Evidence showing that he had taken the examination as necessary to get a license and passed;
Evidence from his former employer in the last 4 years regarding his conduct and performance;
Permanent residence and place of business;
Clearance and evidence of release from his job; and
Other documents provided in regulation or directives that will be issued.
Document lodged in accordance with Sub-Article 2 (d) of this Article shall be accepted only where it is lodged within three months starting from day when his passing the examination is known.
Granting of License
Where the application is submitted with the attached documents in accordance with Article 6 of this Proclamation, the Bureau shall issue license for the applicant within 10 days starting from the time when the Examination is given.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where the examination is not given in accordance with this Proclamation Article 15 Sub-Article 2 the Bureau shall issue a license from the day when the applicant submits his application with full attached document within 5 days.
Where the application has been rejected, the Bureau shall notify the reason for the applicant.
The advocacy license shall contain the following:
The name, age and nationality of the advocate;
Address of the advocate’s residence and place of business;
Type of license and its validity date;
Name and signature of the issuing officer.
Types of License
The type of advocacy license shall be principal and special.
Principal Advocacy License
Principal advocacy license granted by the Bureau shall have 1st and 2nd level.
Criteria to be Fulfilled In order to Get Any Level of Advocacy License
1st or 2 nd level of advocacy license shall fulfill the following criteria:
Who can work with the working language of the Region;
Who observes the constitution and laws of the country and the region, cause its observance;
Who passes the advocacy profession examination;
Having proper conduct for justice system;
Who is not legally or judicially interdicted from rendering advocacy service;
Not being accused and penalized with disciplinary breach in the last four years;
Not being penalized with severe disciplinary breach in the last two years; and
Where he is six months or more after he left his job.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the following criteria shall be additionally fulfilled in order to get 2nd level advocacy license:
Graduating with a degree in law from a legally recognized institution and four years experience in law profession; or,
Graduating with a diploma in law from a legally recognized law institution and an experience of six years or more in law profession.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the following criteria shall be additionally fulfilled in order to get 1st level advocacy license:
Graduating with a degree in law from a legally recognized institution and six years experience in law profession; or,
Graduating with a diploma in law from a legally recognized law institution and an experience of eight years or more in law profession. The implementationof this Article shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Limitation of Power in Advocacy Service
An advocate who has 2nd level license may render advocacy service for cases that fall under the jurisdiction of Wereda court.
An advocate who has 1st level license may render advocacy service for cases that fall under the jurisdiction of all Regional courts.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, any advocate with a 2nd level license who started a case on Wereda court may follow up it at any level of appellate courts.
Special Advocacy License
A person who has fulfilled requirements under Article 10 of this Proclamation, who plead for the rights and interest of public and private person to be respected without any kind of payment shall be granted a special license.
Provisions provided under Article 9 and 11 of this Proclamation shall be applicable on special advocacy license.
Revising Level of Advocacy License
Advocate who has a 2nd level license where his job experience or his academic level permits him 1st level advocacy license may request the Bureau to revise his license.
Advocacy License Examination
The Bureau shall:
Prepare and give an examination or cause to be given to applicants for an issuance of a license.
Mark examination paper, determine the pass mark and publicize the result.
Sitting for an Examination
Any person who fulfills the requirements listed under Article 6 of this Proclamation up on paying the registration fee shall take the advocacy license examination.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, it is not necessary to give an examination for persons who has an experience of six years or more rendering service as a judge, or prosecutor or a teacher of law in legally recognized colleges or university.
An Oath
Any advocate who is granted with a license, before starting his work shall take the following oath by the Bureau head or by his representative: I _____________ when taking this advocacy license from the Bureau, promise that I will give due respect and cause to be respected the constitution and laws of the country and the Region, is committed to achieve the mission of the justice system, by working with a proper ethical conduct, honest and free from corruption, honesty and cause the interest and benefit of my clients in accordance with the law, work with understanding and respect with my opponents and persons who has law profession like me, and to under way my obligation in ensuring rule of law.
Part Three
Law Firm
Establishment of a Law Firm
Two or more advocates who have the principal advocacy license with similar status may establish professional law firm by partnership agreement.
A professional law firm which is established in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be a limited liability ordinary partnership and shall bear the phrase “limited liability ordinary partnership” next to its name
The professional law firm established in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be established to render only advocacy service.
Application for License
Application for law firm license shall be filled in a form prepared by the Bureau and shall be submitted with the relevant documents.
The application submitted in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article shall be presented with the following authenticated document:
Memorandum of Association of law firm;
Bylaw of a law firm;
Copies of advocacy license given to the head and members of the firm.
Issuance of License
Where application is submitted with full compliance in accordance with Article 18 of this Proclamation bythe law firm,the Bureau shall issue a license within 5 days starting from the date of application .
Where the application for law firm license has been rejected, the Bureau shall notify the applicant the ground thereon.
The license issued for the law firm shall include the followings:
Name of the law firm,
The regular working address,
License certificate number,
Issuance date and year of the law firm; and
Name and signature of the person who issued the license.
Unless the law firm is granted a license from the Bureau, it can not render advocacy service.
A law firm shall have a legal Personality as of the day of its license issuance.
Members to Law Firm
Membership to a law firm is allowed only for advocates with principal advocacy license according to this Proclamation.
Member’s Obligation
Any person who is a member of one law firm shall not render advocacy service in his private capacity and be a member of another law firm.
Notwithstanding to Sub-Article 1 of this Article, an advocate may finish cases he has started before being a member of a law firm or pleads cases in accordance with Article 5 Sub-Article 2 (a) and (b) of this Proclamation.
Any advocate, who is a member of a law firm and release a law firm shall keep the secrets he knew because of his membership.
Shall not render professional advocacy service for any person who has pleading with law firm he has been a member.
Revision of Memorandum of Association
Where a Memorandum of Association of law firm is revised, shall be lodged to the Bureau and ratified.
Obligation to Serve Professionally
An advocate who is a member of a law firm shall render advocacy service without interruption unless otherwise he is sick, on leave or in force majore.
Merging and Division of Law Firm
Two or more law firms may merge in accordance with the law and its memorandum of association; rights and obligations of the merged firms shall be transferred to the newly formed one's.
A firm may be divided in accordance with the law and it’s memorandum of association; rights and obligations of the divided firm shall be transferred equally to the newly formed firms.
The merged and divided firm shall be registered in accordance with this Proclamation.
Applicable of Provisions of Commercial Code
The provisions of Commercial Code which are applicable on ordinary partnership shall also be applicable on law firm as may be necessary.
Accountability
The head of a law firm shall ensure whether advocates and other workers working in the firm respect professional ethics.
Any law firm which render advocacy service shall be liable to correct any injury sustained by its client in accordance with civil law.
Being a member of a law firm and rendering advocacy service shall not disregard the lawful relationship between an advocate and a client, and the accountability for professional ethics.
Revocation of License
A law Firm License shall be revoked due to the following reasons:
Where the firm phases out;
Where the firm is found practicing contrary to the license issued and its objective;
Where the dissolution of the firm is decided in accordance with the law;
Where it is found that the members of the firm are below two, or
Where it is found performing unlawful act or does not pay tax.
The Bureau before making a decision in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article, allows the firm’s agent to forward his opinion, where the agent is not found at his registrered address it shall give necessary decision depending on the available evidence.
A law firm whose license has been revoked shall pay some amount of money stated in the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation up on the receipt of the document of the revoked license.
The decision of revoked of license passed by the Bureau in accordance with this Proclamation shall come in to effect up on the notice issuance on the Newspaper.
PART FOUR
Common Provisions
Service Fee
Advocates or law firm shall pay service fee for service given to it.
The type of service and its execution shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Advocates or law firm may request a reasonable service fee for service he renders to his client, shall give a receipt upon receiving the service fee; the amount of the service fee shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Organizing Files
The Bureau, in accordance with this Proclamation shall organize a register in which particulars of the advocates and the law firm are registered and sshall be open to the public.
Employment and Registration
An advocate or law firm may employ assistance advocates and other employees needed for the work.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, an advocate or a law firm may not employ the following person as asistance of advocates:
A person whose advocacy license is revoked or suspended;
A person dismissed from office due to disciplinary infringement;
A person charged for and convicted in an office and not reinstated;
A permanent public servant.
Any advocate or law firm shall notice and caused to be registered law clerk and other employees employed with their name and job description to the Bureau within 15 days starting from the day when employment has taken place.
Notwithstanding to Sub-Article 2 (a) and (b) of this Article an advocate or law firm may employ as law clerk a person whose advocacy license is revoked or suspended or a person dismissed from office due to disciplinary infringement where time limit for his reinstatment is over or passed by this Proclamation or civil service law.
Notification of Change
Advocate or law firm who obtained advocacy license in accordance with this Proclamation shall notify in writing any change or improvement to the Bureau within fifteen days from the day the change is made.
Replacing a License
A lost or damaged license of an advocate or a law firm shall be replaced up on submitting of a written application to the Bureau and payment thereof.
Renewal of License
An advocacy or law firm license shall be renewed annually and it is executed from Hamle 1 up to 30 of Ethiopian calendar.
Advocate or law firm who may not renew his advocacy license with in time limit stated under Sub-Article 1 of this Article, may with additional fee renew up to Meskerem 30 of Ethiopian Calendar.
An advocate or law firm who failed to renew advocacy license within the time limit provided under Sub-Article 2 of this Article by force majeure may apply to the Bureau for the renewal.
Any request for renewal of advocate's or law firm's license shall include the following particulars:
A document showing the taxpayment of that year;
A document showing that he renders free advocacy service to persons who are unable to hire an advocate for 50 or more hours annually;
Document showing that he has taken training given by the Bureau in that year.
System by which free advocacy service is followed up and reported shall be provided by the Bureau and Oromia Supreme Court.
An a pplicant shall pay renewal fee that will be stated in the Regulation issued in accordance with this Proclamation.
Returning a License
Any advocate or law firm shall return his license to the Bureau temporarily or permanently, as the case may be where mainly engaged, in any activity outside the profession or is not in a position to render professional services up on any other ground.
Any advocate or law firm who has returned his license in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article may re-take same up on removal of the cause that compeled him to return his license ceases to exist or removed within one year with payment there on, if he has not committed any fault which would make him liable legally.
Giving of Training
Bureau may give or cause to be given training which assists to improve rendering of advocacy service.
Unless in force majeure, any advocates have a duty to take a training given by the Bureau.
PART FIVE
Disciplinary Breaches and Penalties
Severe Disciplinary Offences
The following shall be regarded as severe disciplinary offences:
Failing to achieve his obligation in pleading;
Failing to keep any personal or organizational secret or information of a customer obtained because of his profession;
Rendering advocacy service where there is conflict of interest;
Failing to keep client's property and document properly;
Rendering advocacy service without renewing a license;
Giving fraudulent or false explanation about himself or his organization or service he renders;
Giving false information for a 3rd party about his client's case regarding facts or legal issue;
Committing acts contrary to the constitution and constitutional order;
Being punished twice or more with simple disciplinary breach;
Rendering advocacy service using a suspended license;
Getting an advocacy license with a fraudulent document or statement or through mischief;
Convicted of stealing, committing forgery or fraudulent act or being an offender of a crime intentionally committed entailing to more than three years imprisonment;
Found rendering advocacy service in his private statues while he is a member of a law firm or being a member in two or more law firms in violation of the provision of Article 21 Sub- Article 1 of this Proclamation;
Rendering advocacy service on cases he has been an arbitrator, a judge, prosecutor or cases he had pleaded when he was an agent of his previous office;
Rendering advocacy service on specific case for conflicting parties;
Asking or making a client pay more than the permissible payment;
Rendering advocacy service beyond the power limitation of his license;
Preparing statement of claim without facts told to him by a client and proceed pleading;
Being absent from trial without ample cause;
Making his client pay for advocacy service he render in statues of special advocacy license;
Giving or attempting to give money or property of his client or other customer to a judge, prosecutor or to other workers of the justice sector;
Begging another for his client or other person cases;
Drinking and intoxicated, using addictive leaves or found in a place which undermines the respect of advocacy profession; or
Performing activities which undermine advocacy profession on his client or on another person.
Simple Disciplinary Breach
The following shall be regarded as simple disciplinary breaches.
Failing to renew advocacy license without sufficient ground;
Employing a law clerk contrary to Article 30 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation;
Failing to notify and cause to be registered law clerk or other workers employed or any change or improvement by violating Article 30 Sub-Article 3 and Article 31 of this Proclamation;
Disturbing or commiting acts that undermine human dignity where disciplinary cases lodged against him is proceeding or where he is getting service;
Failing to give correct information regarding the condition to his client on time.
Objective, Types and Categories of Disciplinary Measures
The objective of advocate disciplinary measure is to protect clients, society, the justice system and legal professions from advocates who does not fulfill or fail to perform their duties and responsibilities properly.
The following disciplinary measures may be imposed by considering severity of disciplinary breaches on advocate or law firm:
Written warning;
A fine from 1,000-10,000 Birr;
A fine of more than 10,000 up to 20,000 Birr;
Suspension license for not more than one year; or
Cancelation of advocacy license.
Measure stated under Sub-Article 2(a) of this Article is categorized as simple disciplinary measure.
Measure described under Sub-Article 2 (b) - (e) of this Article are categorized as severe disciplinary measures.
Decision of Disciplinary Measure
The Commission, by considering the damages occurred or would have occurred may decide one or more disciplinary measures described under Article 38 of this Proclamation.
Releasing Suspended or Revoked Advocacy License
The suspended advocacy license shall be released for an advocate or a law firm as soon as the suspension period is lapsed.
An advocate or a law firm whose advocacy license has been revoked may apply for the reinstatement of the license by stating the correction of faults or shortcoming that is a ground for revocation of license by respecting professional ethics.
The Bureau may decide the advocacy license to be given by examining the application submitted in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article.
When passing a decision as per Sub- Article 3 of this Article, the Bureau, shall take in to consideration measures taken by the advocate or the law firm to implement obligations provided under Article 42 of this Proclamation.
Temporary Suspension
The Commission may suspend an advocate or a law firm where a crime of which he/it is accused or a severe disciplinary breach committed is found to have a negative impact on justice administration system.
Obligation of an Advocate or Law
Firm of Which His/Its Advocacy License is Suspended or Revoked An advocate or law firm of which his/ its advocacy license is suspended or revoked shall notifying the reason in writting transfer the case and evidence that is in his hand to the client or advocate or law firm that the client choses within 10 days starting from date of suspension or revocation.
Accusation and Charge
A person who wants to give information or put forward an accusation on an advocate or a law firm may explain the type of the disciplinary breache, the place where the evidence or the information is found, date and place where the breach occurred and other matters to the Bureau or Justice Offices found at different levels in person or through telephone, postal service, or any other suitable means.
The Bureau shall present the information given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article to the Commission.
Where the Commission, after examining the information and accusation ensures the existence of sufficient evidence shall send a summon to be served for an advocate or law firm by his/its registered address to present his/its statement in person within 10 days starting from the date the summon is served.
Where the accused is not found at the place where he has been registered,the notice shall be posted on notice board of the court or justice office found around the place where he is working.
Defendant Failing to Appear
Where the defendent did not appear after being served a summon or by a posted summon in accordance with Sub-Article 3 and 4 of Article 43 of this Proclamation, the Commission may look into the case in his absence.
Where the defendant submits a formal complaint supported by evidence showing that he had been absent with sufficient grounds within 90 days from the time when the decision is given, the Commission may order the case to be heared in the the presence of the advocate.
Waiving Accusation or Charge
Withdrawal of the accuser or the charge of the case shall not prohibit the Commission from entertaining the case and passng a decision.
Obtaining the Copy of an Evidence
Any party who wants to obtain evidence regarding the charge of the defendant may take a copy of the document with his own expense.
Adjourning the Date of the Hearing
Where necessary, the commission may decide to hear the case in an alternate day on its own initiation or by the request of the defendant.
When adjourning the date in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article the Commission shall notify the concerned person.
Amendment of Charge of Statement of Defense
Where the Commission believes that the charge against the defendant shall be amended, it may do so.
Where it is found that the amended charge might harm the defendant, the Commission shall adjourn the date to let the defendant submit a complete statement of defense.
The Commission on its own initiation or up on the request of the accused, may order the amendment of the charge or statement of defense.
Examining and Giving Decision of Disciplinary Accusation
The Commission up on examination of the lodged charge and evidence may revoke the charge or take disciplinary measures in accordance with Article 39 of this Proclamation.
The decision given by the Commission shall be final unless it has error of law.
An advocate penalized with disciplinary measure may not be free from criminal liability.
An advocate penalized with criminal liability measure may not be free from disciplinary measure.
Revision of Decision
Where the disciplinary measure taken on an advocate or law firm proved to be on false documents,testimony or illegally, the Commission may re-examine the case and pass appropriate decision.
Where the concerned party realizes the case and claims there on and submit an appeal for the case to be re-examined within one month, the Commission may do so in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article.
Appeal
Any party who has a complaint that the decision of the Commission have error of law, may appeal to Oromia Supreme Court within 30 days after the decision.
The court shall give its decision based only on error of law without looking into the main issue and send it back to the Bureau.
The Commission shall reconsider the case on the bases of the decision of the court.
Period of Limitation
Accusation regarding sever disciplinary breach against an advocate shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within two years starting from the day it has been committed.
Accusation regarding simple disciplinary breach against an advocate shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within one year starting from the day it has been committed.
Retaining Time of Penalty Record
Penalty of sever disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against an advocate after a lapse of two years starting from the day when penalty decision has been passed.
Penalty of simple disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against an advocate after a lapse of one year starting from the day when the penalty decision has been passed.
PART SIX
Commission of Disciplinary Matters of Advocates
Establishment
Commission of Disciplinary Matter of Advocates of Oromia Region here after called “Commission” shall be established by this Proclamation
The Commission of Disciplinary Matters of Advocate may be established at Zonal level; the condition of establishment, powers and duties of this Commission shall be decided by the Regulation to be issued.
Members of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following members:
Head of the Bureau ... chairperson,
Vice head of the Bureau ... Deputy chairperson,
Two prosecutors assigned by the head of the Bureau ... member,
One judge from the Supreme Court ... member,
Two advocates assigned by Advocate's Association ... member;
Term of office of a member shall be two years.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 2 of this Article, any member may be elected again.
Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
Examine and give decision on an accusation lodged against an advocate or law firm for violating this Proclamation or Regulation issued in accordance with this Proclamation.
Cause any decision given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article to be registered in private file of an advocate.
Where it is ensured that the evidence is sufficient to entertain the charge against an advocate or law firm the charge is sent with a notice for him/ it to submit a statement of defense within 15 days.
After examining charges and evidence against an advocate or law firm as well as the statement of defense and the evidence to support it:
Where the charge is not correct or is not supported by sufficient evidence, it cancels the charge and let an advocate or law firm free.
Where the charge is correct and supported by sufficient evidence it evaluates the gravity of the breach committed and decide one of the penalties described under Article 38 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Examine and give decision on an advocate or law firm where he did not return his license in accordance with Article 34 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation.
Based on Article 41 of this Proclamation suspend license of an advocate or law firm for temporarily.
Give order on the condition of the execution of the decision; cause it to be executed.
Assign the secretary of the Commission.
Prepare directives regarding its work procedure.
Meeting Procedure of the Commission
The Commission shall have regular meeting once in a month and it may call urgent meeting as may be necessary.
It shall be a quorum where morethan fifty percent of the members of the Commission are present.
Decision shall be passed by majority vote, in case of a tie the decision supported by the chairperson shall be the decision of the Commission.
PART SEVEN
Paralegals
Rendering service of paralegal
Any paralegal shall prepare legal application or different contract in accordance with the law and the request of his client.
Put his signature and the name stamp describing his name and job on the application he wrote.
Any paralegal shall not give any service other than described under Sub-Article 1 of this Article.
Any paralegal shall have permanent address at a place where he gives service.
The service shall be given only by the paralegal who acquired a license.
Any paralegal may render a service by organizing in partnership based on a Regulation or Directive to be issued.
Registration and Grant of License
A paralegal shall register and acquired license from the Justice Office found in the Zone he wants to render service in.
Any paralegal shall not render service described under Article 58 of this Proclamation unless he is registered and granted a license.
Requirements to be Licensed
To acquire a license the following requirements shall be fulfilled:
Who can work with the region language;
Observe, cause the observance of the constitutions and laws of the country and the region;
Who submits documents showing that he has taken training related to law for not less than three months or have an experience related to law for one year or have been working as a paralegal for the last three consecutive years or that he has law education;
Present documents showing his educational status to be grade 10 or above;
Documents showing that he has good conduct;
Who pays the fee set to acquire a license;
Who have documents showing that he is not a government employee.
Service Payment
Any paralegal may make the client to pay money equivalent to the service he renders.
He shall give a receipt for the payment of service given; the service fee shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Where the body to whom the application has been written requests for it to be written again, a paralegal shall write the application correctly without additional payment.
The paralegal shall pay tax for income earned.
Application Submitted to Acquire License
A person who wants to acquire a license to render service of paralegal shall fill and submit the form prepared for such purpose.
Renewal of License
Renewal of license shall be one at a year and it is excited from Hamle 1 up to Hamle 30 in Ethiopian calendar.
A paralegal who fails to renew his license with in the time limit stated under Sub-Article 1 of this Article may renew by paying a penality feeuntill Tikmit 30.
A paralegal who fails to renew his license with in the time limit stated under Sub-Article 2 of this Article due to force majeure may submit an application to the Zonal Justice Office for the renewal of his license.
Shall submit a document showing that he had paid tax for the renewal of his license; he shall also pay renewal fee.
Paralegals Existing on Work
Where a person have been working as a paralegals before the coming in to force of this Proclamation and fulfills the requirements stated under Article 60 of this Proclamation shall register and take a license within six months starting from the coming in to force of this Proclamation.
Severe and Simple Breachs
The following shall be severe disciplenary breachs:
Writing an application or a contract without the request and opinion of the client;
Writing legal application with consideration where free service formats are available;
Working with acquaintanceship;
Rendering service with a suspended license;
Working without a renewed license;
Disappearing from his permanent address or hiding evidence and documents of a client;
Disclosing client's secret;
Masquerading and presenting oneself as an advocate;
Giving false or fraudulent explanation regarding himself or the service he renders;
Accused and convicted of simple deciplinary breaches two times or more;
Acquiring paralegal license using false document or fraudulent explanation;
Writing an application for two contending parties;
The Following shall be simple disciplinary breachs:
Failing to renew a license;
Using words that undermine human dignity in a legal application;
Causing a client pay more than that what is compatable with the service he rendered.
Retaining The Suspension of License
Where a paralegal found violating the provisions of Article 65 of this Proclamation, the Zonal Justice Office may suspend his license for two months until the case is examined.
Conditions in Which Client Lodged Accusation
A person who is harmed by paralegal may lodge his complaint in writting or orally to the Zonal or Woreda Justice Office.
The application lodged shall include the evidence or state the place where the evidence is found.
The Wereda Justice Office shall transfer the application to the Zonal Justice Office.
The Disciplinary Commission of Paralegal shall examine the complaint lodged and take necessary measures including revocation of a license.
Penalty
One of the following measures may be taken against a paralegal who has committed disciplinary breach:
Oral warning;
Written warning;
a fine of 200 up to 1000 Birr;
a fine of more than 1000 up to 3000 Birr;
Suspension of license from three months up to one year; or
Revocation of license.
The penalty described under Sub-Article 1 (a) - (c) of this Article shall be categorized as simple disciplinary measures.
The penalty described under Sub- Article 1(d) - (f) of this Article shall be categorized as severe disciplinary measures.
A paralegal who has been punished with disciplinary breach shall not be free from criminal liability.
A system in which disciplinary measure is taken shall be decided by Regulation to be issued.
Period of Limitation
Compliant regarding severe disciplinary breach against a paralegal shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within two years starting from the day it has been committed.
Compliant regarding simple disciplinary breach against a paralegal shall be barred by period of limitation unless it is lodged within one year starting from the day it has been committed.
Retaining Time of Penalty Record
Penalty of severe disciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against paralegal after a lapse of two years starting from the day the decision has been passed.
Penalty of simple deciplinary breach shall not be taken as a record against paralegal after a lapse of one year starting from the day the penalty decision has been passed.
Powers and Duties of the Bureau
Give or cause to be given training that builds the capacity of paralegals.
Follow up and control activities of paralegals.
Provide the necessary work procedure.
Examine and decide an appeal lodged by a paralegal or by a client harmed by paralegal. The decision given shall be final. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
PART EIGHT
Disciplinary Commission of Paralegals
Establishment
Disciplinary Commission of Paralegals here after called “Commission” shall be established at the level of Zonal Justice Office by this Proclamation.
Member of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following members:
The head of Zonal Justice Office... Chairperson;
One prosecutor from Authentication and Licensing Work Process... Secretary and member;
One prosecutor assigned by the head of Zonal Justice Office ...Member;
One Judge from High court ...Member;
One paralegal elected from among those registered at Zonal Justice Office ... Member;
The term of office of a member shall be two years.
Without prejudice to Sub-Article 2 of this Article, any member may be elected again.
Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
Examine and decide on an accusation lodged against a paralegal for violating this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued based on this Proclamation;
Shall put every decision given in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article in the private file of the paralegal;
A paralegal who have been punished with disciplinary breach shall not be free from criminal liability.
Meeting Procedure
The Commission shall meet and decide on cases lodged to it as it found necessary.
It shall be a quorum where more than half of the members of the Commission are present.
Decision shall be passed by a majority vote; in case of a tie the decision supported by the chairperson shall be the decision of the Commission.
PART NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Penality
Any person:
Who renders or attempt to render professional advocacy service without having or renewing his advocacy license shall be punished by a fine of not less than 5,000 Birr and not more than 20,000 Birr or simple imprisonment not less than 6 month and not move than 2 years.
Who renders service or attempts to render service without obtaining or renewing a paralegal license shall be punished with fine not less than 2, 000 Birr and not more than 10,000 Birr or an imprisonment of not less than three months or not more than one year.
Advocacy License Issued Before this Proclamation
An advocate who acquired 1st and 2nd level license in accordance with proclamation No. 86/2004, and that who have acquired a license before the coming into effect of Proclamation No. 86/2004 and his license had been approved in accordance with the same Proclamation shall be made to take competency examination prepared by the Bureau within one year starting from the coming into effect of this Proclamation, and an advocacy license shall be given for those who passed the examination in accordance with this Proclamation.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1 of this Article, it shall not include those who has no obligation to take an examination in accordance with this Proclamation and those granted advocates' license by taking an examination before.
Where an advocate fails to take the examination or has taken but failed in accordance with Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the Bureau shall cancel his license.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 3 of this Article, where an advocate fails to take an examination due to force majeure requests, the Bureau may decide for him to take the examination with in six months starting from the date his problem has been resolved.
An advocate who failed the examination may take it again in accordance with the program of the Bureau.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The Oromia Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
The Bureau may issue Directives for the implementation of this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Proclamation to determine License and Discipline of Advocate of Oromia Regional State No. 86/2004 is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any laws and customary practice contrary to this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come in to force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of Oromia National Regional State
Finfine, the 14th of July 2013
A Proclamation to Amend Proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011(As Amended), Proclamation No.194/2015.
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to amend the proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011 (asamended), NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with the Revised Constitution of the Regional State, Proclamation No.46/2001 article 49(3) (a), the following is hereby proclaimed:
This proclamation may be cited as the “A Proclamation to Amend Proclamation for the Reorganization and Redefinition of the Powers and Duties of the Executive Organs of the Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No.163/2011(As Amended), Proclamation No.194/2015"
Proclamation No 163/2011 is here by amended as follows:
Following Article 2(17), a new 18 sub article is added;
Livestock means horn animal, sheep, Goat, Camel, Chicken, Horse, donkey, Mule, Fish, pig, bees, livestock production output and development and includes other Livestock which shall be designated by law as “Livestock” in the future.
Following article 12(17), new sub articles 18,19 and 20 shall be added, and the subsequent sub articles shall be read as being re- arranged by moving away from each other.
Livestock and Fish Resources Development Bureau; Labor and Social Affairs Bureau; Construction Bureau.
The term “Transport Agency” provided under article 12(27) is cancelled and replaced by article 12(30) ,and shall be read as ‘Transport Authority” and the subsequent sub articles shall be read as being rearranged by moving away from each other.
Following article 12(30), a new sub article 12(31) is added.
Article 13(1) (a) is deleted and replaced by the following
Bureaus specified under article 12(1-20).
Following article 13(1) (c), a new article 13(1) (d) and (e) is added;
Transport Authority 13(1)(e) Coffee and Tea Development Authority.
Following article 31, new articles 32, 33 and 34 are added, and the other subsequent articles shall be read as being rearranged by moving away from each other.
Livestock and Fish Resources Development Bureau The bureau shall have the following powers and duties to:
Provide Livestock development extension service to the farmers and pastoralists; facilitate the ways of supplying production enhancing inputs and loans.
Improve, protect and supervise the livestock species of the region,
Develop, support and protect the fish resources using the natural and man-made water Resources;
Undertake a livestock forage development, work for the improvement and protection of the enclosed grazing lands.
Cause a research to be conducted to find water in areas where there is scarcity of water resources for the Livestock; develop with the Concerned body.
Promote or extend Live-stock development technologies developed in the country or imported from abroad,adopted and proved to be productive; supervise their implementation; and work with the concerned bodies to study and identify the needs and problems related with the Livestock development prevailing in the society.
Extend, support, follow up and monitor the activities related to development and health of livestock in the region;
Carry out investigation or inspection activities with the concerned bodies regarding communicable diseases of livestock which may be transmitted from country to country and from region to region; prevent or controls the livestock’s mobility; dispose the contaminated livestock where deemed necessary.
Undertake examination on meat production so as to enable the delivery of quality meat to the society from the slaughter houses; control the illegal slaughtering in collaboration with the concerned body.
Set criteria of slaughter houses of the region; provide competency license; renew and cancel same when necessary.
Control the livestock mobility so as to overcome the transmission of communicable diseases and destruction of the livestock's species; work the direction of livestock mobility to be legally recognized; establish, organize, follow up and supervise quarantine and examination centers;
Ensure and supervise the protection of animal welfare.
Control illegal trade of different kinds of fertilizers, medicines and external antiparasites of livestock; take legal measures in collaboration with concerned body; cause the expired ones to be disposed;
Work for production of livestock and livestock’s products for the internal and external markets in quality and quantity required by market; implement the quality and efficiency standard set out; give, renew, cancel and control the quality and efficiency assurance certificate;
Provide professional support to producers, suppliers and consumers of livestock and livestock's product; follow up and control quality and efficiency of the product;
Work, supports, follow up and supervise the implementation of the bees resource development and bees resource product of honey and wax in a productive way;
Support and follow up private investors engaged in the development and health protection of livestock in the region; control the efficiency and quality of their activity;
Establish, organize,administer, and supervise the basic infrastructure and livestock health protection such as: technologies producing and multiplying livestock centers, laboratory center and livestock health protection clinics.
The bureau shall have the following powers and duties:-
Works to resolve the disputes between the employee and employer peacefully and to create industrial peace;
Encourages and support the employee and employer to exercise the right to organize in association and enables them use collective agreements;
Prepares and gives training to the concerned body to raise awareness on labor law; gives necessary support and advice.
Registers employee and employer association, follows up, gives professional support; gives authentication certificate; renews and cancels;
Registers the collective agreements; follow up their implementation; gives professional support.
Registers the employment contract made between the employee and employer
Establishes labor relations administration board where there are many organizations; assigns the necessary man-power; administers, follows up and supervises same.
Conducts work condition control in public and private enterprises; takes or causes corrective measures to be taken.
Conducts studies on employees work condition, health, security, profession and work environments; causes the outcome to be implemented.
Collects, organizes, analyzes industry data, gives feedback for organizations; presents a report to the con-cerned body;
Follows up the implementation of work condition standards; controls and takes corrective measures.
Conducts study regarding the human resource of the region; identifies, analyzes and organizes employed and unemployed human power; prepares data and statistics; gives same to the concerned body;
Collects and identifies information about the market demand of man power; profession, need and vacant positions; organizes and distributes data and information; brings the work and worker together;
Gives awareness work opportunities and working cultures for the job seekers interested to work in the region; gives advice, provides necessary support.
Give, renew, cancel license to private agencies interested to engage in activities of bringing the work and workers in the region; supervise and control same
Follows up, controls regardding those private agencies licensed by the federal government and working in the regional state and reports to the concerned body where they are found working illegally.
Resolves the dispute arise between the employee and the private agencies by bringing the two bodies together and negotiate; provides them professional support.
Gives awareness raising trainings for the society regarding the prevention of human trafficking; follows up, supervises or controls; takes or causes to be taken corrective measures.
Conducts studies on causes of illegal human trafficking; prepares preventive strategies depending on the findings of the studies; implements or causes to be implemented with concerned body;
Conducts studies on the social problems, prepares preventive strategies depending on the findings of the studies; implements and follows up its implementation.
Organizes, implements and disseminates social security data;
Trains social development workers; deploys, supervises and gives support.
Encourage civil societies and self help associations to be organized; give, renew, cancel licenses of those who organized; educates them to participate on social and development activities.
Gives awareness raising trainings for the society on the issues of the rights of persons with disabilities; prevention of anti- social life and elders treatment; evaluates its outcome;
Works for the protection of rights and interests of persons with disabilities; implement programs prepared and laws issued regarding this matter; give support;
Works with a view to protect family welfare, gives professional support to strengthen the culture of supporting within the family; not to be exposed to social problems; facilitates means for the poor to get support.
Facilitates conditions in collaboration with concerned body for the disabled persons to get orthopedic serviced training and special need education; gives professional support.
Facilitates conditions for elders and persons with disabilities who want to participate on developmental activities in organized form to get professional support;
Facilitates conditions for the elders and disabled persons who have no support to get rehabilitative services in the community; provides professional assistances, arranges, rehabilitate that unable to get support in the society; administers the rehabilitation centers, follows up; assigns the necessary man power, supervises, gives support;
Facilitates conditions for the elders to have recreational centers; coordinates their indigenous knowledge and makes it pass to the next generation;
Provides rehabilitative services for those who are exposed to social problems; facilitates conditions to reunify them with their families or to the community and improves their lives;
Cause the establishment of social fund; collects resources used for social security; implements it up on approval, supervises, follows up, gives professional support.
Encourages non-governmental organizations to engage in social security affairs; coordinates, gives support, evaluates their work performance with the concerned body;
Controls whether foreign citizens who are engage in different activities in the region to have licenses; take or cause to be taken corrective measures on those who are engage in different activities without licenses, works with concerned body for measures to be taken;
Sets out an effective evidence collection and implementation system that make performance of the social protection program speedy and successful.
Examine and facilitate conditions for resolving various questions in relation withthe change or addition of construction activities, the price fluctuations, disputes relating on the construction projects,
Follow up, make parents for the projects of building constructions, roads, water, irrigation and other similar projects led by government; cause payment to be performed, evaluate its implementation; investigate the problem and deliver commendable view for the government.
Investigate the need of regional state construction and designs works; cause to be implemented.
Without prejudice to the power vested in the concerned body, set standards of construction activities; approve their implementation in accordance with the law.
Supervise the activities of construction branch; follow up its implementation; work with concerned body;
Undertake control regarding bid standard of construction and transfer of building, water, irrigation, road and etc constructions, ; take corrective measures;
Prepare various standards and cause to be implemented to make the building constructions be performed using local materials so as to minimize construction costs;
Evaluate request to become contractors and advisors and issue license for the contractors and advisors who intend to engage in construction works; renew, upgrade, register, cancel where it is used unlawfully and un ethically; notify sectors by classifying them based on their performance;
Decide the levels of advisors; investigate the performance reports of advisors; approve the payments of their services;
Examine the designs performed by the advisors or other bodies; approve, perform supervise and follow up of construction activities; approve payments;
Perform development activities and control of the activities of construction industry.
Perform investigation activities of the city's plan depending on the laws of building; evaluate the designs; provide construction and utilization licenses;
Organize building council office; manage; supervise; undertake research on the construction imputes; coordinate the higher learning institutions to participate on such research;
Encourage and provide necessary support for micro and small scale associations engaged in consultancy and construction activities in the region so as to enable them improve their abilities and be competent in the market;
Encourage the expansion of manually performed job opportunities in the construction activities;
Causes the transportation service system of the Region to be implemented in cooperated and organized manner;
Issues, renews and cancels license for investors who engaged in public and freight transport service; organizes them in association; gives, renews and cancels license of the association; support and supervise same;
Conducts Study on technologies used for transport service; sets out standards, evaluate and cause same to be implemented properly;
Facilitates condition to cooperate, expand and strength the transport service among regional states.
Registers motorized and non-motorized cars and those are pulled by animal power and also boats in the Region; gives and controls ownership certificate;
Approves the effectiveness of drivers, captains, cars and boats; may delegate and control other certified agency or organization those can examine competency of vehicle where deemed necessary;
Performs car price estimation service and changing the name of owner of the car; register and keep car purchasing and selling contract, car renting contract and cars kept as guarantee;
Sets out the managing system of transport service; facilitate condition; causes and follow up the competition tariff deployment system to be implemented; study and decide the transport tariff from departure to destination and follow its implementation;
Perform traffic movement control works on road transport; follows its implementation; organize the traffic security control in the Region; supervises; conducts study  concerning traffic accident; works with concerned body;
Facilitates condition for  raising funds for the traffic security movement and transport related work from the region and different organs; causes the funds to be properly implemented for the objective needed;
Causes the existence of adequate transport and deployment coverage in the region; study and ensure the deployment program of association and private engaged in public and freight transport; improve; follows up its implementation; takes correction measures where there is shortage;
Ensures efficiency of trans port operators; give license; register contact made between operators; take corrective measures.
Gives, renews, controls and cancels competency certificate for associations who produce, repair and renew transport service materials; and for associations engaged in car washing and providing training of driving profession training;
Prepares training criteria for organizations that give training of driving profession; follows its implementation; take corrective measure where there is limitation;
Gives competency examination for trainees who are graduated from driving training institute; gives driving license for those who passed the examination; renews; controls; cancel the same;
Constructs bus and boat station, freight terminal, parking, training and examination center with concerned body; cause to be constructed; supervise and control their service delivery; collect internal income from administration of the station; implement same properly;
Gives professional support regarding purchase of government and Public organization car;
Gives deployment for transport association or organization on necessary place and direction when there is emergency case; its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Gives license for organizations which examine competency of vehicles; renews; controls and cancels same.
Constantly collects and organizes any statistical data and other information related to the transport of the region;
Conducts research to modernize and expand transport of the region; cause to be conducted; causes theresult of the research to be implemented when approved;
Works with concerned body to minimize smoke, gas; evaporation and other environmental pollutant things emitted from cars, boat and other transport service related objects;
Extend a system which make the cars and boat shall be repaired; cause to be implemented
Give, renew and cancel Coffee, tea, scents and spices trade license for individual traders and organization engaged in coffee, tea, scents and spices trading based on the competency level set out; transfer the list to the trade and market development of the region;
Give extension development and quality approval service of coffee, tea, scents and spices to farmers and investors; cause to be expanded new technology and good experiences; follow its productivity;
Follow up, supervise and give technical support to make coffee, tea, scents and spices production modern and be prepared to the market in plenty and quality;
Set out system of controlling quality production of coffee, tea, scents and spices, follow up and its implementation; control the movement of illegal trade in cooperation with concerned body; take or cause to be taken corrective measures;
Facilitate system for coffee, tea, scents and spices producers and suppliers to get up dated and cost wise balanced materials required for preparation and control of high quality of the products;
Undertake research that enables strength and solve the chronic problem for development and market of coffee, tea, scents and spices;set out technical implementation of the research findings; implement with con-cerned body;
Cause to strengthen market center of first level coffee; construct where necessary;follow up its performance;
Implement the directive issued on quality group level, conservation and supply of exported coffee, control its performance.
Prepare meetings that strength development and market of coffee, tea, scents and spices with concerned body; participate in the prepared;
Conduct and cause to be conducted study and research on coffee, tea, scents and spices development; with concerned body;
Work with higher educational institution so as to obtain efficient man power.
The Powers and duties vested in Livestock Resource Development and Health Agency by Livestock and Fishery Resource Development, preservation and utilization of Oromia Regional State proclamation No. 178/2013 shall be implemented by Livestock and Fishery Resource Development Bureau established by this proclamation.
The powers and duties of supervision and monitoring of the construction works and designing activities as well as organizing building council vested in Industry and Urban Development Bureau by Oromia Re-gion building proclamationNo.174/2011, shall implemented by Construction Bureau established by this proclamation.
The Powers and duties given to Agricultural Bureau under proclamation to Decide the Procedure of Coffee Quality control and Coffee trade in Oromia Region No.160/2009 shall be implemented by Coffee and Tea Development Authority established by this proclamation.
WHERAS, it has deemed necessary to redefine the powers and duties of Oromia Roads Authority stated in the Proclamation enacted to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No 163/2011 with a view to establish a system by which the region’s road is to be constructed, preserved, maintained and its standard is improved;
NOWTHEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3)(a) of the Revised Constitution No. 46/2001 of the Oromia National Regional State, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as “Proclamation No. 185/2014,  A Proclamation to Provide for the Amendment of a Proclamation Enacted to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No.163/2011”
The following three new Sub articles 2(18), 2(19) and 2(20) are added following Article 2(17) of Proclamation No 163/2011 under definition part.
“Authority” shall mean the Oromia Roads Authority.
“Road” shall mean a road that its standard and level of services is determined by Federal Road Authority or the Oromia Roads Authority.
“Community Road” shall mean a road which is constructed or maintained, by the participation of the community, finance or capacity of Woreda Administration or aid constructed or maintained at its level.
Article 38 of Proclamation No 163/2011 shall be repealed and replaced by the following.
Initiate and study policy, strategies, programs and laws that help to expand roads, submit to the government, implement upon approval; cause to be implemented;
Administer, supervise, preserve, maintain, cause to be maintained and improve the standards of the roads of the region;
Prepare plan and programs that help to expand, maintain and improve the standards of the roads;
Based on the demands and economic development of the region prepare and implement service level and design of the region’s road; cause to be implemented.
Cause the construction, maintenance, improvement of roads and bridges by contractors or the community as the case may be;
Undertake and cause to be undertaken the study and research relating to road and road related activities; gather different evidence and statistics, organize, disseminate, submit a report;
Establish a mechanism by which road and bridge is studied, road design is prepared, as well as construction and maintenance of road is undertaken, implement and follow its implementation;
Conduct study continuously regarding technologies that help to expand, maintain, and develop road standard by low cost and implement;
Cause the community to bring together their human and material resource to construct, maintain and preserve community and other roads, deliver technical and construction materials support;
Supervise and cause to be supervised the quality of road construction and maintenance;
Follow up the implementation laws relating to road with a view to protect roads from destruction and out of service;
Work in collaboration with concerned bodies to build the capacity of associations, micro and small enterprises, small scale contractors organized to construct and maintain roads;
Determine and supervise the width of the road and its utilization;
Determine the utilization par- ticularly, the axial load and size;
Study and cause to be studied the standard and quality of road construction materials such as stone, pavement soil, selected soil and other materials, cause the utilization of those which fulfill the required standard and quality;
Utilize road construction materials such stone, pavement soil, selected soil and other materials with authorization of concerned bodies without payment;
Supervise the utilization of unlawful utilization of roads with a view to make the utilization of roads for intended purpose, take and cause to be taken corrective measures;
Remove and cause to be removed the properties found on the road in collaboration with concerned body;
Provide sufficient protection for natural resource and environment while constructing roads;
Pay and cause compensation to be paid for the land property expropriated for the construction road;
Work to strengthen the implementation capacity of road sector, deliver and cause to be delivered short trainings.
Without prejudice to the power and duties of the heads of the executive organs of the region given under Article 49 of the Proclamation No 163/2003, the General Manager of the Authority shall have the following additional Power and duties:
Undertake study regarding the salary scale of employees to be treated differently; submit to the Regional Administrative Council; implement same upon approval;
Without prejudice to the adjudication of the case through court procedures, cause the settlement of disputes between the Authority and contractors, associations, micro and small scale enterprises and consultants related with construction of roads to be handled based on the consent of the Authority and parties contracted with the Authority out of court; the particulars shall be determined by regulation issued.
Works undertaken prior to the issuance of this Proclamation shall be deemed as if they were started by this proclamation and their implementation shall continue.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter in to force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.
Whereas, the superpower of the Regional State ‘Caffee’ lead by speaker and different bodies organized under ‘Caffee’ in accordance to the Revised Constitution of the Regional State of 2001 are expected to carry out powers granted to them according to the Constitution and other laws in the direction that be acquainted with representation of the people;
Whereas, it has become necessary that the secretariat of ‘Caffee’ having legal personality, its organizational structure and power shall be able in the position to provide services and professional support for ‘Caffee’ and ‘Caffee’ Organs based on growth, organizational changes and procedures existing now and expected for the future;
Whereas, the secretariat based on the organizational structure and power granted to it by the law is obliged to render strong, quality, efficient and effective services and professional support in the activities of law making, over sighting and representation carried out by ‘Caffee’ and ‘Caffee’ organs following parliamentary organization and procedures;
Now, therefore, in accordance to the Revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State, Proclamation No. 46/2001 article 49 sub article 3 it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as, “The Proclamation to Provide for Reestablishment of Secretariat of ‘Caffee’, Proclamation No. 191/2015”.
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Speaker” means the speaker of Oromia National Regional State “Caffee”.
“Caffee” means the Oromia National Regional State legislative organ and supreme political power established in accordance to article 46 sub article 1 of the Revised Constitution.
“Constitution” means the Revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State.
“Government” means Oromia National Regional Government.
“Region” means the Oromia Region.
“Caffee Organs” means the assembly of the ‘Caffee’, the Secretariat, the Coordinating Committee, the Standing Committees and Whips of political parties having seat in the ‘Caffee’, the ‘Caffee’ affairs Advisory Committee and the ‘Caffee’ group organized in accordance to laws of organization and procedures of the ‘Caffee’.
“State Organs” means the legislative/ ‘Caffee’, the executive and the judiciary organ of the Oromia National RegionalState.
“Law” means proclamation, regulations and directives enacted by ‘Caffee’ and bodies delegated to do so.
“Secretariat” means the ‘Caffee’ secretariat reestablished by this proclamation having legal personality.
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine.
The Secretariat of ‘Caffee’ (herein after referred to as “the Secretariat”) is hereby reestablished by this proclamation having legal personality.
The Secretariat shall be accountable to the Speaker.
The Secretariat of the ‘Caffee’ shall have the following organizational structure.
Head of the secretariat; Advisors and appointees assigned by the speaker as it may be necessary; and Necessary employees and professionals.
The secretariat may have its own salary scale to be determined by the ‘Caffee’.
The secretariat shall have the following power and duties: Render administrative services to the ‘Caffee’, organs of the ‘Caffee’ and other internal structures.
Provide professional support for the activities of law making, over sighting and people’s representation carried out by the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Arrange and facilitate meeting halls for the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Register and keep properly the minutes, decisions and different documents of the ‘Caffee’ and the ‘Caffee’ organs.
Provide library, information, study and research services for the ‘Caffee’ organs and members.
Publish laws enacted by the ‘Caffee’ and other organs delegated to do so on the Megeleta Oromia; implement and make to be implemented the publishing and distribution of laws, bulletins and different periodicals.
Prepare and carry out strategy that strengthen the capacity of the ‘Caffee’ and peoples’ Councils exist at all levels.
Convey agendas and documents for the ‘Caffee’ members in accordance to the time of reading specified by the ‘Caffee’ procedural laws.
Provide necessary cordial reception services for the guests and organs of the ‘Caffee’.
Own property; enter into contracts; sue and be sued in its own name.
Based on law, implement other activities that enhance roles of the ‘Caffee’, the ‘Caffee’ organs and the ‘Caffee’ members.
Under the recommendation of the speaker, the assignment of the head of the secretariat shall be approved by the ‘Caffee’.
Subject to the directives from the speaker, carry out power and duties of the secretariat.
Notwithstanding to carrying out the power and duties of the secretariat, he shall have the following power and duties:
Prepare yearly work plan and budget to be presented by the speaker for the approval of the ‘Caffee’ and implement the same.
Based on delegation given by the speaker, pay out and put for the activities planned the budget approved by the ‘Caffee’.
Prepare and present activities and budget implementation report to the speaker and the ‘Caffee’.
Administer property of the secretariat according to the property administration law of the regional  government.
Delegate partially his power and duties to others.
Carry out other activities given by the speaker.
Source of budget of the secretariat shall be: Budget approved by the ‘Caffee’; Grants and support gained from different organs and legitimate sources.
The secretariat shall have complete and accurate financial books of accounts.
Books of accounts and financial documents of the Secretariat shall be audited by the Auditor General of the Oromia National Regional State yearly.
Notwithstanding the provision under sub article 2 of this article, the speaker of the ‘Caffee’ any time it deems necessary, can order audit of the account and financial documents.
The Proclamation to Provide for Establishment of Secretariat of ‘Caffee’, Proclamation No. 47/2001 is repealed.
Any laws and customary practices that inconsistent with this proclamation shall have no effect with respect to matters included herein.
Effective Date of the Proclamation This proclamation shall come into effect as of on the publication date on the ‘Megeleta Oromia.’
Whereas, it has been deemed necessary to reestablish Megeleta Oromia News Paper;
Now, therefore, in accordance to the Constitution of the Oromia National Regional State Proclamation Number 46/1993 Article 49(3) (a), it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This proclamation may be cited as, “Reestablishment Proclamation of the Megeleta Oromia News Paper, Number 186/ 2014”.
Legal News Paper known as, “Megeleta Oromia” and published under the control of ‘Caffee’ Oromia is hereby reestablished by this proclamation.
Proclamation, Regulations enacted, agreement entered by the Regional Government of Oromia and ratified by ‘Caffee’ and any law of the Region shall be published on Megeleta Oromia.
The Legislative, Executive and Judiciary body of Government and any natural or legal person shall have obligation to execute laws published on the Megeleta Oromia.
Megeleta Oromia shall be published with Afan Oromo, Amharic and English languages. Where difference in content arises between the three languages, version of Afan Oromo shall prevail.
Caffee’ Oromia shall organize publishing work of the Megeleta Oromia; And made facilitation to be published in Afan Oromo, Amharic and English languages.
The Proclamation establishing Megeleta Oromia Number 1/1993 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
This Proclamation shall enter into force as of 27 th day of March 2014.
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency.
A Proclamation to Establish Oromia National Regional State Urban Land Development and Management Agency
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to implement programs stated in the urban land development and management policy in an organized manner;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to make free this limited resources from misuse and rent-seeking through the realization of urban land development and management system within the urban areas of the region in a way that has transparency and accountability and to realize social and economic transformation;
WHEREAS, it is necessary to strengthen implementation capacity of urban by creating information and data system of urbanland by creating modern procedure and  technology as well as building skilled and competent manpower;
WHEREAS, it has become necessary to establish an organ that work on urban land development and management issues which has been executed at different place in a scattered manner;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3) (a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
This Proclamation may be cited as “A Proclamation to Establish Urban Land Development and Management Agency No. 179/2013.”
Unless the context required otherwise in this Proclamation:-
“Bureau” means Oromia Industry and Urban Development Bureau.
“Urban” means urban whose population is 2000 and more and where the livelihood of 50% of this popultion does not depend up on agriculture.
“Urban Land” means land found in the boundary of urban administration.
“Urban Land Management” means administering and leading urban land and land related property in a modern way.
“Urban Administration” means urban administration that acquired legal and concerned government organ recognition.
“Land Related Property” means urban land and immovable property found on it.
“Cadastre” means a system by which land and real propertiy found on it is registred and known.
“Urban Plan” means structural plan, local development plan or basic plan of an urban center including annexed descriptive documents which are legally endorsed by the authorized body and have legally binding effect.
“Person” means physical or judicial person or organization.
Provisions of this proclamation set out in the masculine gender shall apply to the feminine gender.
To enhance transparency and accountability in urban land use that is guided by urban plan to bring basic change in socio-economic of urban society as well as, fast growth and development of towns by creating organized urban land development and management system.
Oromia National Regional State Land Development and Mamanagement Agency hereafter called “Agency” shall be established by this Proclamation.
The Agency shall be accountable to the Bureau.
The head office of the Agency shall be in Finfine Town and it may have structure and office at Zonal, Urban, and Kebele level as it may necessary.
The Agency shall have the following organization. 1)	General Manager, 2)	Deputy General Manager and 3)	Other necessary workers.
The Agency shall have the following powers and duties:-
Implement urban land development and management policy and strategy, cause to be implemented, follow up, and control.
Provide modern urban land development and administration system; cause to be provided; support; control and follow up.
Execute request of change of ownership and type of investment land project with the concerned body; follow up its implementation.
Cause compensation to be estimated in accordance with the law for persons whose land is expropriated; cause compensation to be paid before their displacement.
Undertake research to make compensation payment correspond with the market value of the time; submit it to the concerned body and cause to be approved, implement and cause to be implemented with the concerned body.
Work in coordination with the concerned body to rehabilitate persons whose land is expropriated; support; follow up and control.
Provide a system in which urban identify, register rural land and utilize it for development and avoid illegal activities.
Provide a system which makes urban land delivery fruitful and urban economic development aim to be achieved.
Provide land preparation system and organize land data bank.
Shall give construction and land utilization license; follow up its implementation; where a problem is found take and cause legal measure to be taken with the concerned body.
Give and cause to be given a training that strengthen worker's implementation capacity.
Shall provide urban land utilization plan that ensures the realization of urban development goal, that could be implemented and as well as correspond with each other.
Issue Directives and guideline to ensure urban land use for maximum economical benefit in accordance with urban plan, cause its implement ation; follow up and control its implementation.
Issue Directive and guideline with the concerned body to control the expansion of illegal construction inside urban areas and on the borders; follow up, control its implimentation; take and cause legal measure to be taken.
Coordinate the collection and organization of data regarding land and property related to land in urban areas as per cadastral map system; control; cause its implementation.
Follow up, control cities whether they follow the master plan in a modern way; give the necessary support in the preparation of the town's master plan as per the standard.
Study and submit structure and salary of the employees of the agency to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council and implement the same upon approval.
Study and submit urbans that did not enter in to the lease system to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval and impliment the same upon approval; follow up its implementation.
Study and Submit initial lease price of urban land to Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council for approval; cause to be implemented; support.
Coordinate, control those organs ac- countabile to it.
Own property, enter in to contract; sue and to be sued.
General Manager of the Agency shall be nominated by the President of the National Regional State of Oromia and appointed by National Regional State's Administrative Council.
Powers and duties of the General Manager The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties.
Coordinate and administer duties of the Agency.
Implement the powers and duties of the Agency; cause to be implement.
May delegate some of his powers and duties to heads and other worker under him for better implementation.
Employ, administer and fire workers in accvordance with civil servant law.
Represent the Agency in all communications with the third party.
Prepare and submit work plan and budget to the concerned body and implement the same upon approval.
Administer, open bank account and run the budget of the Agency, as per financial law.
Prepare and submit work performance and budget execution report to the concerned body.
Represent the General Manager in his absence.
Perform duties given to him by the General Manager.
Income of the Agency shall be from the budget allocated by the government and various donations.
The Agency shall have full and clear book of account and financial documents.
Books of account and financial document of the Agency shall be audited by Oromia National Regional State Auditor General Office or by other auditor assigned by it.
All works and datas related with urban land started by various bodies shall be transferred to the Agency by this Proclamation.
The Oromia Urban Planning Institute and Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office shall be accountable to the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may establish different bodies by Regulation to ensure the proper implementation of the powers and duties of the Agency.
Oromia National Regional State Administrative Council may issue Regulation to implement this Proclamation.
The Agency may issue Directives to implement this Proclamation and the Regulation to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Article 13 Sub-Article (2)(f) of Proclamation No. 163/2011 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Articles 4 (6), (7), (9), (10) and (28) of Proclamation No. 170/2012 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Oromia Integrated Urban Land Information System Project Office Regulation No. 142/2012 Article 4 Sub-Article 2, Article 7 Sub-Article 1, Article 8 Sub-Article 11  nd Articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 Sub Articles 5 and 7 and Article 16 shall be repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistant with this Proclamation shall not be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
This Proclamation shall come in to effect as of the 13th of July 2013.
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclama- tion No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure and development found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares.
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
The Authority shall have: 1) General Manager, 2)  Deputy General Manager and 3) Required staffs;
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development  guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil  service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all itsdealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bu reau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred  to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent  with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013.
Proclamation No. 180/2013 A Proclamation to Establish Irrigation Development Authority of Oromia National Regional State
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to expand irrigation development to secure food self sufficiency and increase production and productivity to supply raw materials for industries without being dependent on erratic and uneven rainfall distribution;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to bring together different irrigation development activities which were under taken and followed by different bodies, which weakened the development activity and bring together the scattered resource to one place and use it;
WHEREAS, it is found necessary to establish an independent governmental organ to expand irrigation development in a sustainable manner without affecting the environment;
NOW THERFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3(a) of Proclamation No. 46/2001 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
PART ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This proclamation may be cited as “Irrigation Development Authority Establishment Proclamation No. 180/2013’’.
Definition
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:
“Scheme Adminstration’’ means to manage, follow up, care, and adminster different irrigation scale which their construction is completed to make them able to give sustainable irrigation supply.
“Irrigation Scheme’’ means an irrigation field having tradtional and modern irrigation infrastructure anddevelopment found at a defined place.
“Users’’ any person, private assocation or organization or that uses irrigation developemnt scheme.
“Tradtional Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using tradtional method, skill and local material.
“Modern Irrigation’’ means developing irrigation farming using irrigation infrastructures constructed in modern way having modern technology.
“Jallisii Bonne/Moisture Irrigation/’’ means developing irrigation farming using soil moisture.
“Micro Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of less than 2.5 hectares.
“Small Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of 2.5 - 200 hectares.
“Medium Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation which undertaken on an area of above 200 to 3000 hectares.
“Large Scale Irrigation’’ means an irrigation undertaken on an area of more than 3000 hectares.
“Irrigation Development’’ means to develop an irrigation farming using different technologies with ground or surface water or both.
“Irrigation Farming’’ means farming conducted using irrigation water.
“Drainage’’ means to drain excess water from farm land which is more than the need of the crop.
“Technology’’ means all the infrastructures and inputs required for the development of irrigation.
Gender Reference Provisions of this Proclamation set out in a masculine gender shall also apply to the feminine gender.
Establishment and Accountability
Oromia Irrigation Development Authority, here after referred as “The Authority’’ is hereby established by this Proclamation.
The Authority shall be accountable to the President of the National Regional State of Oromia.
Objective
Support by irrigation development, to hasten socio economic growth of the farmers and pastoralist community of the region, to alleviate shortage of food crops and for the people of the region to attain food selfsufficiency in sustainable manner.
Office of The Authority
The head office of the Authority shall be in Finfinne and may have offices at Zone, District and Keble level as necessary.
PART TWO
Organization, Powers and Duties of the Authority
Organization of The Authority
The Authority shall have:
General Manager,
Deputy General Manager and
Required staffs;
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises
Proclamation .................................................. Page1
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public
Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently, it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia,it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No. 181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution, construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council” means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from he net profit.
Gender Reference
Provisions of this proclamation set out in masculine gender shall also apply to feminine gender.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall be applicable on any existing public enterprise and on those established after the issuance of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER TWO
Establishment and Legal Personality of Public Enterprise
Requirements to be Met Before Establishment of an Enterprise
Before the establishment of an enterprise the Authority shall ascertain that:
The payment which is made in kind is valued properly by an expert
Cash paid as part of the initial capital is deposited in a bank and in the account of the enterprise.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article if the payment made in kind has audited accounts the book value of each payment in kind may be taken into account.
The experts stated under Sub-Article 1(a) of this Article shall prepare a report containing a detailed description of the property, the value given to each item and the method of valuation
Where any expenses incurred by the Authority for the establishment of an enterprise is confirmed by the auditors, it shall form part of the capital.
The sums deposited under Sub-Article 1(b) of this Article shall not be withdrawn from the bank until the establishment of the enterprise.
Establishment of the Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall be established by this Proclamation and the establishment law shall contain:
The name of the enterprise,
The objectives of the enterprise,
A statement that the enterprise shall be governed by this proclamation,
The authorized capital,
The amount of the initial capital paid up both in kind and in cash,
The address of the head office of the enterprise,
That it may have branches,
The duration for which the enterprise is established.
Working Procedure, Legal Personality and Liability of Public Enterprise
A public enterprise shall have legal personality.
A public enterprise may not be held liable beyond its total assets;
An enterprise shall follow the laws and systems of free market.
Without prejudice to the provision of Sub-Article 3 of this Article where found necessary the government may order the enterprises directly to intervene for the benefit of the public.
Address
The address of an enterprise shall be the place where its head office is situated and may have branch offices as may be necessary.
CHAPTER THREE
Organization and Management of an Enterprise
Organization
Any public development enterprise shall have the following organisation:
Board,
A General Manager and a Deputy General Manager as may be necessary;
The necessary staff.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Authority given by other laws, the Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Cause public enterprises to submit a plan and performance report; analyze; follow up; evaluate its performance and give feedback.
Propose the chairperson and members of the Board of public enterprises for appointment and assignment to the President of the Regional Government.
Fix allowance to be paid to the members of the Board, follow up its implementation.
Decide the standard of public enterprise based upon their capital and manner of establishment.
Cause the allocation of initial capital of the enterprises by the government.
Cause the allocation of reserve fund or funds by the Government so that the authorized capital of a newly established public enterprise to be fully paid up within five years.
Follow up, cause the implementation of the amount to be paid to government from net profit of the public enterprises.
Upon the request of the board, submit a request with its recommendation to the Administrative Council of the Government the amount of state dividend to be given to an enterprise, execute upon approval.
Undertake study on a means of building the capacity of public enterprises for effective achievements of their objectives, submit it to the Administrative Council of the Government, upon approval follow up its implementation.
Submit purchase plan of fixed assets that is necessary for the activities of an enterprise; submit to the Administrative Council for approval; cause its implementation upon approval. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Issue Directives with regards to writing off the accounts of public enterprises and follow up its implementation.
Formulate policy with regards to public enterprises, execute upon approval; provide strategic directions for public enterprises.
Without prejudice to the powers and duties given to the Board, perform other functions necessary for the protections of the ownership rights of the state.
Members of the Board
Based on the standard of the enterprise, the number of members of the Board may be from five to eleven.
Not more than one third of the members of the Board shall be elected by the general assembly of the permenant workers. The rest of the members of the Board shall be appointed by the Authority
The members of the Board shall be appointed or elected on the basis of their profession, experience and competence.
Any member of a Board may also be appointed as a Board member of any other non competing enterprise.
The term of office of the members of the Board shall be three years; where necessary a member of a Board may be reelected or reassigned at the expiry of his term of office for the next one term only.
Where any member of the Board resigns from membership, the chairperson of the Board shall bring the matter to the attention of the Authority so that another person is assigned in the same manner.
Where a member of the Board could not fulfill his responsibilities effectively; was consecutively absent from a meeting more than three times or was absent for or more than five times in one fiscal year, the Authority submits a proposal for his dismissal to the organ that assigned him.
Meeting Procedures of the Board
The Board shall have a regular meeting at least once a month.
The chairperson shall call a meeting where there is an urgent matter or here at least more than fifty percent of the members of the Board so request.
The agenda of the meeting shall be communicated to the Board members in advance.
The meeting commences where a majority of the members are present.
The Board shall take a decision by a majority vote, in case of a tie the chairperson shall have a casting vote
The Board shall have a minute signed by the members.
The Board shall select and assign a secretary from among the employees of the enterprise.
The General Manager of the enterprise shall attend meetings of the Board without having the right to vote
The Board shall draw its own working procedure.
Powers and Duties of the Board
The accountability of the board shall be to the Authority, and shall have the following powers and duties:
Appoint and dismiss the General Manager of the enterprise and decide his salary and allowance.
Propose to the Authority for the increase or decrease of the enterprise's capital.
Submit books of account to external and internal auditors, also periodic reports on the state of activities and financial reports of an enterprise to the Authority.
Study and propose the purchase of equipment and fixed asset that are necessary for the enterprise; and based on the decision cause to be implemented. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Approve the sale of fixed asset that is not necessary for the enterprise.
Ensure that books of accounts and properities of the enterprise are kept properly.
Without prejudice to Article 27 of this Proclamation, the Board may request the Authority for additional contingency fund and upon permission cause to be assigned, and decide on its use.
Approves the enterprises’ work plan, budget and internal regulations, follow up and report its implementation to the Authority.
Approves the employment, assignment, salary and allowance of those officers of the enterprise accountable to the General Manager.
Prepare strategic plan compatible with the mission of the enterprises based on the direction given from the Authority, and submit it for approval; upon approval cause its implementation.
Accountability of the Board Members
The members of the Board, shall carry out their powers and duties with due care.
The members of Board shall be accountable individually and jointly for the damage caused on the enterprise by their failure to perform properly.
Notwithstanding Sub-Article 2 of this Article, a Board member who dissented from the decision shouldhave to write and sign specifying his point of dissent so as not to be held accountable.
Powers and Duties of the General Manager of a Public Enterprise
The accountability of the General Manager shall be to the Board and have the following powers and duties:
Plan organize, direct, administer and control the activities of the enterprise.
Represent the enterprise in dealing with third parties.
Subject to the approval of the Board, employ, assign and define the functions of officers accountable to him.
Employ, assign, dismiss and determine the salary and allowance of other employees of the enterprises in accordance with its internal regulation and labor law.
Keeps proper books of accounts of the enterprise, and opens and operate bank accounts of the enterprise.
Shall sell fixed assets not needed by the enterprise based upon the approval of the Board and Directives of the Authority to be issued.
Prepare and submit to the Board the internal regulation as well as the work plan and budget of the enterprise and implement the same upon approval.
Implement and cause the implementation of the decisions of the Board.
Establish and preside over the meetings of the management committee; participate and brief, and submit a report on performance evaluation meetings conducted by the Authority.
Prepare a strategic plan inline with the directions set by the Board, submit to the Board for approval, implement and cause to implemented upon approval.
Perform other duties assigned to it by the Board.
Responsiblity and Liability of the General Manager
The General Manager shall be liable for the damage he causes on the enterprise through negligence or intentionally in the process of dispensing his responsibility.
CHAPTER FOUR
Capital of Public Enterprise
Capital Needed to Establish a Public Enterprise
Any public enterprise shall have a capital.
The Authority shall cause the initial capital needed to be allocated by the Administrative Council.
The capital of an enterprise may be in cash or in kind.
Where it is paid in kind the Authority shall ensure that the property is correctly valued in accordance with Article 5 and Sub-Article 1 (a) of this Proclamation or conforms with the book value thereof.
Paid Up and Authorized Capital
The amount of the paid up capital of an enterprise at the time of its establishment shall not be less than 25% of its authorized capital.
The authorized capital of an enterprise shall be fully paid up within five years from the date of its establishment.
Where the authorized capital is not fully paid up as provided under sub- Article 2 of this Article, the Authority shall, without prejudice to the right of the third parties adjust the capital to the level of the paid up capital.
Increase of Authorized Capital The Authority may cause the funds needed to increase the capital of an enterprise to be allocated by the Government or to be paid out of the income of the enterprise.
Decreasing of Capital The capital of an enterprise may without prejudice to the right of third parties to decrease, where:
The auditor proposes for the capital to be decreased;
It was decided for the capital to decrease following a proposal submitted by the Board;
The authorized capital of the enterprise has not been fully paid as provided for under Sub-Article 2 of Article 18 of this Proclamation.
CHAPTER FIVE
Name and Trademark of a Public Enterprise
Name of a Public Enterprise
The name of a public enterprise is the name under which the enterprise carries on its activities and shall clearly designate such activities.
The enterprise shall not go against government policy and offend the moral of the society, and also it shall not prejudice the right of third parties.
An enterprise shall display its name outside its premises.
Restrictions in the Use of the Name
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of the name of a public enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation and prohibit such enterprise from using the name giving rise to this dispute.
TrademarkA
trademark is a name, designation, emblem or any other distinctive sign used by an public enterprise to distinguish its goods and services.
Restrictions in the Use of Trademarks
A public enterprise may choose any kind of trademark.
The Authority shall ensure that the selection of a trademark of an enterprise is in accordance with the provisions Article 21 Sub-Article 2 of this Proclamation.
Before the trademark is used, it shall be registered by the appropriate government office and published in a news paper with wider circulation.
It may be decided on an enterprise to pay for the damage resulting from its act of violation of the provisions of Sub- Article 2 of this Article and/or prohibit such enterprise from using the trademark giving rise to the dispute
CHAPTER SIX
Accounts and Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
SECTION ONE
Public Enterprise Accounts
Accounting Principles
Any public enterprise shall keep books of accounts following a generally accepted accounting principles. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Financial Year, Closing of Accounts and Financial Reports
The financial year of an enterprise shall be from July 1st to June 30th E.C.
Any public enterprise shall close its accounts at least once a year.
The annual closing of accounts shall be completed within three months following the end of the financial year and shall be open to an external auditor
The enterprise shall prepare work performance report on plans of major activities and program to the Authority.
Failure to close, in due time, the account of an enterprise in accordance with Sub-Article 2 of this Article may entail liability.
Reserve Funds and Its Utilization
Any public enterprise shall have alegal reserve fund.
Any public enterprise shall annually transfer 5 % of its net profit to legal reserve fund until such fund equals 20 % of the capital of the enterprise.
The legal reserve fund may be utilized for covering: (a) Losses, and (b) Unforeseeable expenses and liabilities;
The Board of any public enterprise with the approval of the Authority, may cause the enterprises to secure other reserve funds and may decide on its usalization. The details shall be determined by the Regulation to be issued.
Payment of Taxes and Duties
The relevant laws concerning taxes and duties shall be applicable on the enterprises.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, the right of an enterprise to be exempted from taxes and duties under any other law, shall be effective.
Payment of State Dividend
Public enterprises shall pay state dividend within six months from the end of the budget year and deposit to the bank account of the Government development fund.
SECTION TWO
Auditing of Accounts of Public Enterprises
Assignment of an Auditor
Without prejudice to the powers and duties of the Auditor General of Oromia given by the law, the account of each enterprise shall be audited by an external auditor approved by the Authority.
The Authority shall ascertain that the external auditors assigned satisfies the criteria set by the Office of Auditor General of Oromia and that they are free from any form of influence.
The Authority shall determine the term of an external auditor
Obligation to Cooperate for Audit
Any person who has received, paid or expended or is in charge of the accounts of the money or property of the enterprise being audited shall, when requested have the obligation to produce to the enternal and external auditors the accounts to be audited and to provide the necessary information.
Accountability, Power, Duties of an Auditor
Accountability, power and duties of auditors related to this Proclamation is applicable in consistence with the commercial and civil codes.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Amalgamation and Division of Public Enterprises
Basic Principle
Two or more enterprise may be amalgamated by the decision of the Administrative Council and form a new enterprise or take over one enterprise.
An enterprise may be divided by the decision of the Administrative Council in to two or more enterprises.
The decision to amalgamate or divide shall be effected based on research proposal presented by the Authority.
Before amalgamation or division of the enterprises, the Authority shall inform the interest and accountability of the third party.
In the event that an enterprise which is being considered for amalgamation or division has obligation towards creditors, no decision shall be taken to amalgamate or divide, if the enterprise resulting from the amalgamation or division is unable to meet the obligation towards the creditors.
The accounts of an enterprise to be amalgamated or divided shall be closed and audited from the beginning of the financial year up to the date of the amalgamation or division
Transfer of Right and Obligation
The rights and obligation of an amalgameted enterprise shall be transferred to the newly created enterprise.
The Authority shall prepare a proposal with regards to the distribution of the rights and obligations among the enterprises divided and the newly established enterprises resulting from the division.
The proposal prepared by the Authority shall be submitted to the Administrative Council for decision; up on approval a copy shall be sent to the newly established enterprises.
As provided here under Sub-Article 3 of this Article, the Authority shall put the major points of decisions passed in a notice either on Afan Oromo, Amharic or English newspaper with wider circulation.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-Article 1 of this Article, where there is an obligation entered with a third party previously, the new enterprises resulting from the division shall be individually and jointly liable towards the creditors.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Dissolution and Winding–up of Accounts
Grounds for Dissolution of an Enterprise
An enterprise may be dissolved for any one of the following reasons;
On the expiry of the life of the enterprise fixed in its establishment law;
Completion of the venture for which the enterprise is established;
Failure to achieve the purpose of the enterprises and where its implementation is found to be impossibile;
Loss of fifty percent of the paid up capital or due to bankruptcy;
Where the Administrative Council passes a decision to dissolve the enterprise;
Decision of the court declaring the enterprise bankrupt.
Appointment, Duties and Powers of Liquidators
Where cases referred under Article 34 of this Proclamation occur, the Authority shall assign one or more liquidators outside the employees of the enterprise in line with the criteria set by the Auditor General.
The Authority may dismiss the liquidators and appoint other liquidators for good cause.
The liquidators shall take over the books and accounts of the enterprise under liquidation.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the liquidators shall take over the property of the enterprise and manage it.
Liquidators have the powers and duties of the Board and the General Manager given by this Proclamation.
The liquidators may not undertake new business other than the execution of contracts still running with third party or where the interests of the winding up so require.
The Board shall prepare a report for the liquidators on the affairs of the enterprise covering the period from the end of the last financial year to the date the winding-up started.
The liquidators and the Board shall jointly prepare and sign a statement of affairs summarizing the rights and obligations of the enterprise.
Unless the Authority decides otherwise, the Board and the General Manager shall assist the liquidators in carrying out their duties.
Calling on Creditors
The liquidators shall inform creditors of the proposed dissolution of the enterpriseand require them to file their claims with supporting documents.
Liquidators shall notify to the creditors by notice published in three successive weekly issued newspaper with wider circulation.
A notification shall be sent to those creditors whose address is known.
Creditors may submit their claims within 90 days from the date the letter is delivered or from the last issue of the notice in the news paper.
The liquidators shall prepare and submit financial statement of the enterprise and sequential term payment of a debt if any, and report to the Authority.
The Authority, after taking into consideration the financial statement and recommendation prepared by the liquidators shall decide the payment of the debt. (a) Authorize the payment of creditors who have filed their claims. (b) Where the balance of the enterprise is not sufficient to cover the debt due to creditors, authorize the liquidators to sell assets of the enterprise based on the Directive to be issued without affecting the right of the third party.
Where the total assets of the enterprise are not sufficient to pay off its debts and the authorized capital is not fully paid up, the liquidators shall submit to the Authority for the payment of the debt.
Provision of Creditors
Where known creditors have failed to file their claims within the time limit specified under Article 37 Sub-Article 4 of this Proclamation, the amounts due to them shall be deposited in a bank to the names of the creditors.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 37 Sub-Article 4, after the enterprise ceased to exist, creditors not cited in the books of the enterprise may claim from the surplus assets collected by the Government, provided their failure to claim within the time-limit was due to force majeure. Where the creditors have not been paid due to  the liquidator's negligence, the liquidators shall be accountable.
Sums shall be set aside to meet claims in respect of undertakings of the enterprise which are not completed or disputed claims where the creditors have not been guaranteed until the dispute is settled.
Final Balance Sheet and Publication of Notice of Dissolution
After the money to the creditors have been set aside to meet potential claims pursuant to Article 38 Sub-Article 1 of this Proclamation, the liquidators shall prepare a final balance sheet showing surplus assets, if any, and submit the same to Authority.
The liquidators shall submit a copy of the balance sheet to Auditor General's Office and Oromia Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
The Auditor General shall promptly forward its comments, if any, to Finance and Economic Development Bureau.
As per the permission of Finance and Economic Development Bureau, the Authority approve the final balance sheet, and shall submit the dissolution proposal to the Administrative Council and cause its approval.
The Administrative Council shall then repeal the establishment Proclamation and bylaws of the enterprise.
The enterprise's right and obligation shall cease to exist as of the date of repeal of its establishment Proclamation.
The books of the dissolved enterprise shall be deposited with the Authority where they shall be kept for ten years. Any interested organ may inspect such books after payment of the prescribed fee.
Assets Due to the Government
Any surplus assets of an enterprise dissolved and liquidated shall devolve to the Government account.
CHAPTER NINE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power to Issue Regulation
The Administrative Council may issue a Regulation for the implementation of this Proclamation.
Applicable Laws
Ethiopian Commercial and civil code shall be applicable on matters provided in this Proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
The Regional State Enterprises Proclamation No. 16/1997 is hereby repealed by this Proclamation.
Laws and practices inconsistent with this Proclamation, shall have no effect  with respect to matters provided for in this Proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall enter into force as of the 14th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa
President of the National Regional State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 14th of July 2013
A Proclamation to Amend Oromia Regional Government Cities Re-establishment Proclamation No.195/2016
Whereas, it is found necessary to amend some Articles from Oromia Regional State Government Cities Proclamation No. 195/2016;
Now, therefore, in accordance with Article 49 (3) (a) of the Revised Constitution of Oromia Regional Government No. 46/2002, it is proclaimed as follows.
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as " Proclamation No. 196/2016, a Proclamation to Amend Oromia Regional State Cities Re-establishment Proclamation No.195/2016."
Amendment
Proclamation No.195/2016 is hereby amended as follows:
Article 2(14) and Article 5(1) (a) are cancelled and the other subsequent sub-articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
The term 'regio-polis' in articles 2(3), 5(4 and 11), 12(2 and 3), 23(3), 28(1and 5), 33 and 34 is cancelled.
Article 5(12) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 5(12) The grade promotion of the cities which have city administration council and municipality shall be provided only where it is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional State Administration Council. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Following Article 5(12), a new sub-article 13 is added 5(13) The grade promotion of the growing municipality city shall be submitted by the Zonal Industry and Urban Development Office and approved by the Bureau. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 6(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 6(1)The request for legal personality of the residents of particular area whose population size is 2000 and above shall be decided by the Bureau after it has been submitted Zonal Industry and Urban Development Office through their representatives.
Articles 9 and 10 are cancelled and the subsequent articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
Article 18(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 18(1) The power vested in Dis trict Council by the Regional State Constitution shall be applicable on the Cities Council; and it shall implement; cause the implementation of the power and duties provided to the cities under Article 11 of proclamation No.195/2016.
The term described as "City District" under Articles 2(8), 2(15), 5(11), 12(1) (b and c), 12(2),14(1-3),17(3), 32, 32(1-5), 33, 34(3,4,6 and7), 36, 40, 54(2) is cancelled and replaced by the term subcity.
Article 32(1) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 32(1) A sub-city shall be a structure next to the city administration and may be organized by the population size of 40,000 and above. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 35(3) is cancelled and replaced by the following: 35(3) In the cities having legal personality, a city kebele may be established by population size of 5,000 and above. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
A provision stipulated under article 36 is cancelled and replaced by the following: 36 Power and Duties of Kebele: 36(1) The power and duties vested in the kebele Administration by the Regional State Constitution shall also be applicable on the City kebele Administration.
Without prejudice to subarticle 1 of this article, the citykebele administration shall share and implement the power and duties provided to the sub-cities at its level in the cities having sub-cities; and in the cities which have no sub-cities by sharing the power and duties provided to the city administrationb depending on the issue at hand. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 52(2) is cancelled and replaced by the following; and the new sub-articles 3 and 4 are added and the subsequent subarticles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
The regular income that the cities collect shall be performed depending on the annual income and budget plan provided from the Region; and the Regional Administration Councilshall decide the amount that the cities may use from the regular income they have collected in the excess of their budget. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
where the cities collect regular income beyond their plan, they may use it for the benefits of their city in the next fiscal year through proclaiming with the city council.
The Regional Administration council may allocate additionalbudget to the cities it believes require due consideration. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Article 58(2) is cancelled and the subsequent articles shall be read by moving away from each other consecutively.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and work practice contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered inthis proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Anybody has a duty to provide support for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come in to force from the date of its publication on 'magalata Oromia
Finfinne
April 3, 2016 Muktar Kedir
President of Oromia National Regional State
A proclamation to Revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation NO 195/2015.
Whereas, it is found necessary to make the cities of the regional state to be centers of development, industry, technology, information and trade as well as comfortable centers for life in a modern way observing their level of development.
Whereas, it has become necessary to provide a condition by which the cities shall be structured and their power and duties be determined based on the constitutional principles of the rights of the people to self administration at different levels;
Whereas, it is found necessary to create a favorable condition which can speed up the development of
the cities in the region by making their work procedures and structural organization to depend on the principle of good governance so as to enable them that by possessing higher development capacities, promote the growth of the regional state and improve the living standards of their residents;
By creating a conducive environment for the speedy and effective service rendering, and thereby increasing the participation and being beneficiary of the people, to enable them work to realize a viable peace and order and ensure rule of law in the cities as well as to ensure a fast development from which the people can benefit step by step throughstrengthening a solid integration within the different cities and between the cities and rural areas;
Now, Therefore, in accordance with article 49(3) (a)of the Revised Oromia Regional State Constitution, it is here by proclaimed as follows.
Part One
General Provisions
Short title
This proclamation may be cited as “A proclamation to revise Oromia Regional state cities establishment proclamation No. 195/2015.”
Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this proclamation:-
“Region” means the Oromia regional state
“City” means a city which has got legal personality as being a city
“City Administration” means a city which has got legal personality, and has its own council, administration council and the Judiciary established at Regio polis city ,principal city, higher city, intermediate city and growing city levels.
“Caffee” means Oromia regional state government “Caffee”.
. “Regi onalAdmi n i s t r at i on council” means the highest executive body of the Regional State Government Administration.
“Council” A body established as a representative at the city administration and kebele level by the election of the people.
“Court” means an ordinary court established at the city administration level that has jurisdiction over the matters to be tried at the ordinary courts and on the cases arising in the city.
“Administration council” means an executive body to be established at the city Administration, at the city district and at the city kebele levels.
“Constitution” means Oromia Regional State Constitution
“Mayor” means a chief executiv e officer of a city administration.
“City Manager” means an official who executes the municipal services of the city administration.
“Municipality Services” shall include Services such as water and sewage services, construction and maintenances of roads, fire dangers and accidents prevention, city land development, sanitation and beautification of a city , regular services provided to the residents and other activities to be decided and performed by the city.
“Bureau” means the Industry and Urban Development Bureau of Oromia.
“Regio polis city” means those cities that help to develop their surrounding cities by being centers of developments in various dimensions.
“City district” means the body in the organizational structure of a city next to the city administrationwhich has an administration council and established as having the power of executive body of its level and is given the level of district.
“ kebele” means the initial city administration structure replacing the former kebele administration of a city which has a council, executive organ and social court of its own in the cities of the regional state in accordance with this proclamation.
“The city enactment” means a mandatory law issued by a city which is enforced in the city concerned.
“Government activity” means Activities performed by the government sectors in the city administration.
“Regulation protecting body” means without prejudice to the law protecting power vested in other bodies, it is a body established for protecting and enforcing the laws in the jurisdictions of the cities.
“City Associations” means asso ciations established by the cities which have legal personality for their mutual development benefits.
Gender description
In this proclamation, any expression in the masculine gender shall also applies to the feminine.
Scope of application
This proclamation shall be applicable on any city of the regional state having legal personality.
Part two
The Establishment, level, Power and Functions of the cities.
The level and Accountability of the cities.
The cities of the regional state shall be grouped in to the following grades depending on the development they achieved and the criteria to be set.
The Regio polis city Administration
The principal city Administration
The Higher city Administration
TheIntermediate city Administration
The Growing city Administration
The Municipality city Admin istration
The Growing municipal city Administration
The Grade of the cities of the regional state shall be evaluated depending on the criteria Provided as follows:-
The income which the city collects
Number of population
The surface area of the city
Its being center of Administrati on seat.
The implementation of sub article 2(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The accountability of the Regio polis city, principal city, and higher city shall be to the city’s council and to the Regional State president office.
The accountability of intermediate city and growing city shall be to the city’s council and the Zonal Administration office.
The accountability of municipal city and growing municipal city shall be to the district council and district administration office.
The means of providing supports to the cities of the regional state with thegrades specified under sub articles (a-g) of this article shall be decided by the Regional Administrative Council through identifying their grades and the support to be made.
Regarding the rural kebeles having the characteristics of cities but fail to fulfill the criteria of a city, the cities serving as the seats of districts and not included in the grades of the cities of the regional state provided in this proclamation, the bureau may consider them as a growing municipality and give them legal personality and decide their powers and functions.
Notwithstanding to the provisions of sub articles 2(a-d) of this article, the Regional Administration Council may extraordinarily decide the grade of a city and issue additional evaluation criteria of the grades of the cities. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The ways as to how any city may may be promoted to the next grade or downgraded from its grade, the tenure of the grade and other matters shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city administrations which are on the grades of Regio polis and the principal city administrations may establish the city district structural organization where they fulfill the criteria provided for city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Promotion of grade of any city shall be given only where its proposal is submitted by the Bureau and decided by the Regional Administration Council. Its details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Acquiring legal personality
Residents of a particular area may submit their request of acquiring city’s legal personality to the bureau through their representatives.
The request to be submitted as per sub article (1) of this article shall be in writing and shall fulfill the following criteria.
Evidence revealing the boarders  of the living place of the applicants given from the concerned government body.
The surface area of the place and population number
A description about the socioeconomic activities and the services found at that place.
Evidence describing that 25% from the people residing in that area qualified for voting have supported the application.
The plan prepared for the city which is approved by the concerned body.
Other criteria provided by the directive to be issued by the bureau.
The bureau shall review and decid e on the application submitted for acquiring legal personality of being a city within three (3) months and provide evidence describing the legal personality of the grade of the city.
Where the request for acquiring legal personality is not accepted, a written response shall be given to the applying body or their representatives by clearly specifying the reason for its non acceptance.
The bureau shall provide an evidence of legal personality for the city where it decides to provide such legal personality to a city.
Their grades shall be described thereof when the evidence of legal personality of the cities is provided
The effect of acquiring legal personality.
Any city that has acquired legal personality in accordance with this proclamation shall have the right to be called in its name, implement the powers and functions specified in this proclamation, the right to enter in to contracts, the right to own properties and may sue or be sued.
Cancellation of legal personality.
The legal personality of a city may only be cancelled or revoked where the city concerned is unable to observe and exercise the criteria of a city by defending the legal personality granted to it.
The bureau shall provide the necessary support to a city before canceling or revoking the legal personality of a city.
Where the legal personality of of a city is cancelled or revoked, the rights and duties of the city shall be transferred to the body for which the city has been previously accountable. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Merging of the cities.
The adjacent cities may be merge d where it is believed appropriate for service delivery and administrative activities depending on the interest and agreement of the residents when it is approved by the city council and based on the research conducted by of the bureau.
In accordance with this article sub article 1, the merging of the cities shall be submitted to the Regional Administration Council by the bureau and shall be approved. Anybody shall implement such decision.
Change of name of a city Administration.
Any city shall called by the name name acquired legal personality the change of name of a city shall be made depending on the interest and agreement of the residents of the city submitted to the concerned city administration council and decided when deemed necessary.
The request decided by the city council as per sub article 1 of this article shall be approved by the Regional Administration Council.
The powers and functions of the cities
Any city shall have the powers and functions to:-
Decide on the social, econom ic and political activities in a way that participates the population of the city and make them the beneficiaries from the development achieved.
Work to ensure good govern ance, and lay a transparent and accountable system.
Prepare the social, economic and budget plan of the city and implement same.
Administer the budget of the city according to the law. Determine the tax and service incomes as per the law; collects or make to be collected, and spend them on the growth and development activities or purposes of the city
Borrow money based on the decisions of the regional state or the city’s council.
Legally administer the houses under the city administration.
Administer the human resource of the city in accordance with the regional states’ civil servant law.
Create legal relationships and contractual agreements with government bodies, private investors, community associations, and with other fellow cities.
Without prejudice to the provision under article 40 sub article8 of the constitution, it make one’s private property for public use by paying equivalent compensation in advance where the public interest requires so.
Create mutually beneficiary brotherly agreements with other cities in the country or outside the country depending on the provisions of this proclamation or other laws.
Ensure that the construction activities underway in the city to be in such a way that protects the cleanliness, beauty and plan of the city.
Administer and make productive the land under its master plan or which is found within its territory
Depending on the regulation and directives to be issued, register and provide legal personalities for persons who want to organize in association for building homes; it also conducts researches regarding residential homes constructed with savings; and implement where it is authorized.
Register contractual agreements of purchases and sales, house rents, houses attached in securities.
Provide a speedy, effective and just service for the residents; particularly it constructs and maintains or causes the construction and maintenances of basic infrastructural services such as roads, potable water, electricity, telephonen and mass transportations.
Perform environmental protecti ion activities such as wastes disposal, protection of environmental destruction, installation of pipe lines and other similar activities.
Provide social services like education, health services by emphasizing on preventive ways, HIV/AIDS prevention, Ambulance services, various evidences registration services, slaughter houses, Grave yards, markets and other similar services.
Provide sporting services, theate rs, refreshments, entertainments, Library, museum and other similar services.
Provide protection of peace and order of the society, justice services, protection of fire dangers, supervising medicines and foods.
Facilitate ways of providing nurturing services of elders, people suffering from physical incapacities and orphans.
Perform activities which help to improve the developments of the city and the lives of the society through implementing activities generating incomes and poverty reduction programs.
Prepare or cause the preparation of the plan of the city, amend, approve and implement it.
Lay a modern working system so as to enable the various services be delivered in high quality and speed and to ensure that the residents seats be arranged in a way that make them to be easily accessed.
Organize tourist attraction areas in the cities, follow up and prove the proper managements of archeological fossils and cultural materials
Work to improve the participa tion of the residents on the development activities by organizing them level by level, it also works to develop the participation of the society and make them beneficiaries particularly of the women and youth.
Considering the conduciveness of the services delivered by the cities to their residents, it may be made to be provided wholly or partially with other government bodiesor with private investor, or with the participation of the society or by other alternatives.
Part Three
Organization and management (managerial) Procedures of a city
Level of Administration power
Depending on the grade of a city, the level of power of the city administrations shall be provided as follows:-
City Administration: –The city administration having full power.
City district:-the organizational structure established following the city administration which has only the power of an executive body.
kebele: - the initial administrati on level which is established following a city district.
The structure of city district shall be established following the city administration only in the cities having the grades of Regio polis and principal cities.
In the cities other than the Regio polis and principal city grades, the administration structure to be organized following the city administration is the kebele administration.
Organization of government bodies at the city level.
The organization of government bodies of the cities shall be as follows-
The council:-the Law making body
Administration council:- the Law enforcing body
The Judiciary: - the law interpreting body.
Organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city.
The organization of management bodies of the lower levels of a city shall be made in accordance with the level of the city and based on the levels provided in accordance with this proclamation, and shall be established by a city district and the kebele
The management body of a city district level shall be organized by only executive body and it shall be an executive body next to the city administration which implements the power delegated to it from the city administration.
At the city district level, the struct ure of a court may be organized as deemed necessary by the decision of the government.
Organization of the city zone level government bodies.
Organization of the city kebele level government bodies shall be as follows:-
The council:- the city kebele level law making body
The administration council:- the city kebele level high executive body
The social court:- the city kebele level law interpreting body.
System of management of a city.
The system of management of a city shall be “the mayor’s council” systemwhich shall be implemented  only in the cities having their own councils. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city council
The regular election of the city council shall be made every five years
Members of the city council being odd number and shall be elected at the city and kebele levels by the residents of the city in accordance with their votes casted freely and secretly.
The number of members of the city council shall be implemented according to the law issued to determine the number of members of the district, city and kebele councils.
Where it is found that the number ber of Oromo nations residing in the city administrations having their own councils is less, the Oromia regional state “Caffee” may make that 51% of the seats in the city council to be reserved for them through comparing the number of the Oromo people with the number of other people in the city. This provision shall also apply on the kebele level city councils.
In the city administrations having their own councils 20% of the seats in the city councils shall be reserved for the rural kebeles bordering the city. The representatives of these adjacent rural Kebeles bordering the city shall be represented by the Kebele council or kebele councils from the elects.
Any person shall fulfill the criteria specified by the national election law to compete for the election of city councils and shall also know the working language of the regional state AfaanOromoo.
The municipal city and growing municipal cities without the need to establish their own independent council, shall have participation in the district council as kebele or kebeles.
The powers and functions of the city council.
The city council shall have the powers and functions to:-
Implement or cause the implentati on of the powers and functions of the city councils provided under article 11 of this proclamation
Without prejudice to the provision of this article sub article 1, the city administration shall have the powers and functions to:-
Issue city enactments or city ordinance on city matters being consistent with the policy, strategy and Laws of the regional state.
Review and approve the socioeconomic and budget plan of the city submitted to it by the mayor; follow up its implementation.
Decide the tax and service paym ents in accordance with the Law; Ensure its being collected.
Follow up and supervise the land in the city whether it is administered in accordance with the law.
Approve the organizational structure of the city administration; decide the structure and work procedures of the executive bodies of the city; follows up its implementation.
Establish permanent and temporary committees.
Elect the speaker of the council among the members, decide on his activities.
Elect the mayor of the city from the members of the council; approve his appointment.
Elect the deputy mayor of the city from the members or nonmembers of the council.
Establish the city administration council depending on the grade of the city; decide the number of members of the council depending on the recommendation of the mayor; approve the appointment of members of the council submitted by the mayor and decide about their work.
Approve the city’s plan; follows up its implementation.
Prepare work performance stan dards and the goals of the plan year and review the activities accordingly and pass decisions.
Issue code of conducts for its members and follows up its implementation.
Deliver work performance repo rts to the residents periodically
Term of office and Accountabili ty of the city council
The term of office of the city counc cil shall be five years
The city council shall be account able to the people and the Regional State“ Caffee”
The meeting procedure of the city council.
The city council shall have its regu lar meeting once in three months; extraordinary meeting may be called where the speaker or the mayor or 1/3 of members of the council requested so.
The presence of more than half of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the council.
The decision of the council shall be passed by the majority vote of the members participated on the meeting.
The meeting of the council shall be open to the public unless it is deemed necessary for the security of the city or moral of the public or to protect the rights of other members,
The council shall have a registry to register its activities and decisions.
The appointments of the speaker.
The speaker of the council shall be elected from the members of the council and is accountable to the council.
The term of office of the speaker shall be the term of office of the council.
Without prejudice to the provisio ns of sub article (2) of this article, the speaker may be removed from position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons.
Voluntary resignation of his position
Removed from his position by the council.
Interruption of his being memb ership of the council
Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively
The provision under sub article 3 (a-d) shall only be implemented where it is the city delivered to council and approved.
Particulars for the implementatio n of this article sub article 3(a-d) shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
Powers and Function of the speaker of the city council.
The speaker of the council shall have the following power and functions:-
Calls the council’s meeting; prepare agendas of the discussion, chairs the council’s meeting, organize the committees of the council.
Manages the administrative matt ers of the council, cause the enforcement of disciplinary measures taken on the members by the council and represents the city.
Extends the ways by which the council shall be organized by the permanent and temporary committee’s plans and follows up its implementation.
Prepares training plans designed for promoting or enhancing the members’ performance abilities; cause its implementation with the concerned executive bodies.
Ensure the transfer of decisions of the council to the concerned bodies; follows up its implementation,
Represents the council in all its relations with the third party.
Performs other activities assigned to it from the council.
The Appointments and Accountability of the mayor and deputy mayor
The mayor of a city shall be assigned from the members of the council and nominated by the council.
The deputy mayor of a city council shall be elected from the members or from the non-members of the council, and appointed by the city’s council.
The mayor of Rejio polis, principal city and higher city shall be accountable to the city’s council and to the president of the region.
Mayor of intermediate and grow ing cities shall be accountable to the city’s council and Chief Administrator of the zone.
Manager of municipal city and the growing municipal city shall be accountable to the district Administrator’s office.
The deputy mayor shall be accountable the mayor of a city.
The term of office of the mayor shall be the term of office of the council.
Subject to the provision of sub article 7 of this article, the mayor of a city may be removed from his position before the completion of his term of office for the following reasons:-
Voluntary resignation of his job
Suspension from his responsibi lity by the council
Interruption of his being memb ership of the council or
His Failure to discharge his responsibility effectively.
The particulars of the enforcemen t of sub article 8(a-d) of this article shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the city council.
The powers and Functions of the mayor
The mayor shall have the powers and Functions to:-
Serve as the head and chief execut ive of a city.
Ensure the respect of the constitution and constitutional system as well as the law in the city.
Implement the policy, strategy and and the laws of the regional state and those enacted at national level and the decisions passed by the city council and the regional state administration council’ and cause their implementation, submit performance reports to the council and an organ to whom it is accountable.
Select members of the administration council and submit his proposal to the city council for approval of their appointment; manage their activities in accordance with the law.
Select the manager of a city depen ding on the abilities and leadership quality and submit to the city council for approval of his appointment.
Ensure the rendering of speedy, effective and just services by the manager of the city.
Represent the city on holiday even ts celebrated at a regional, national and public level.
Prepare the plan and budget of the city by discussing with the administration council and submit to the city council; implement or cause their implementation up on approval.
Organize forums in collaboration on with the concerned bodies so as to enable the people forward their opinions on the plan, budget, work performances and other issues of the city.
Perform other activities assigned to him from the city council, Office of the president and from the administration offices of different levels depending on the grades of the cities.
The power and duties of deputy mayor
The deputy mayor shall have the powers and functions to:-
Represent and perform activities of the mayor where he is not at office.
Perform other activities assigned to him by the city council and the mayor.
The city Administration council
The city Administration council may be established from the members or from the non –members of the city council.
The number of members of the cities’ administration council shall be decided by the city council depending on the recommendation of the mayor. The particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Members of the city Administration council shall be individually and jointly liable for the decision they pass.
Term of office of the Administration council shall be the term of office of the council.
The city Administration council shall be accountable to the mayor and the city council.
The Power and Functions of City Administration Council
The city administration council shall have the power and functions to;
Follow up and ensure the implementation of laws, decisions and grades made by the regional state and the decisions and grades made by the city council; cause the protection of the constitution, constitutional system and laws.
Manage and organize the governm ent activities performed in the city.
Prepare the budget of the city; implement up on its approval.
Prepare the social and economic development strategies as well as operational programs of the city; implement same up on approval.
Perform other activities assigned to it by the council and the mayor of the city.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager and Deputy Manager
The manager of Rigio polis, prin cipal, higher, medium level and growing city shall be appointed by the city council upon the nomination by the mayor of the city, being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The manager of the municipal city city and growing municipal city shall be appointed by district council upon the nomination by the chief administrator of the district being evaluated in his professional ability and leadership efficiency.
The deputy manager shall be acco untable to the manager of the city.
The manager of a city shall be a member of the city administration council.
The Rigio polis and principal cities may have more than one deputy manager
The deputy manager of city shall be assigned by mayor of the city and nominated by the city council.
The accountability of the deputy ty manager shall be to the general manager of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager
The manager of a city shall have the power and functions:-
Serve as an executive of the city municipal services.
Manage and organize the city municipal services.
Develop and submit to the mayor, service delivery indicators and levels, ensure their implementations upon approval.
Ensure the implementation of policies, laws and levels approved by the regional state and the decisions of city council in the service delivery branches of the city.
Constitute and direct a management committee consisting of heads of service delivering bodies of the city.
Assign heads of service delivering bodies of the city
Recruit, administer and dismiss employees serving in the service delivering bodies of the municipal city according to the law.
Make recommendations, to the Mayor, for the establishment of municipal city service delivering bodies and alternative means of delivering different services; implement same when decided.
Organize and submit to the Mayor, standards and directives of service delivery; implement same upon approved.
Prepare and submit to the Mayor, the budget and work plan of the budget year of municipality service delivering bodies; implement same upon approval.
Receive and entertain the complaints of residents concerning the municipality services transparently; give speedy responses for the complaints.
Submit to the Mayor, periodic work performance and financial reports about services of municipality.
Power and Functions of Deputy Manager
Deputy Manager shall have the following power and functions:-
Serve as deputy manager and de partment organizer.
Act on behave of city manager, where he is absent or unable to perform his activities.
Perform his branch’s functions and other activities, which are specifically identified and assigned to him by the city manager.
Establishment and Accountability of sectorial offices of the cities
The sectorial offices and different services delivering institutions shall be established in accordance with the grade of the city and they may be accountable to the mayor or their superior. Its implementation shall be decided by the regulation to be issued by the regional state administration council.
Establishment of City District
The city district shall be the struct ture following city administration that may be organized with the number of population from 10,000 to 20,000. Its particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
The city district may estabilish by 4 (four) or more than kebeles.
The city district shall be accountable to the people and to the city administration.
The city district shall have its own government structure in order to provide speedy and effective services.
A permanently operating executive body shall be established in the city district and its functions shall be the functions of the city administration council provided under article 26 of this proclamation. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment and Accountability of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Rigio polis and principal city shall be proposed by the executive committee of city district and appointed by the mayor of the city.
Power and Functions of Manager of City District
The manager of city district of Regio polis and principal city, being accountable to the manager of the city and executive organ of the district and shall have the following power and functions:
Participate, without a vote, in the meetings of the city council.
Implement and cause the implementation of the service delivery activities of the city.
Being together with the manager of the city, make recommendation about alternative implementation of different activities for the services delivery in the city district and city kebeles; implement same when allowed.
Administer employees of the municipality of the city district in accordance with the law.
Submit work performance reports to the manager of the city.
prepare work plan of the city distri ct depending on the plan of the city; implement same upon approval.
Pass decision on issues relating to city services in the city district.
Perform other additional functions assigned to him by the manager of the city.
Establishment of City Kebele
The City Kebele shall be established by this proclamation as the lower administrative structure in the cities having or not having council.
The City Kebele shall be organized by the government power structures of the council, the administration council and the social court.
A City Kebele may be established having the number of population from 2,000 to 10,000. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The City Kebele shall have rules and regulations enforcement body.
Power and Function of Kebele
Without prejudice to the powers and functions give to kebele by Regional constitution , the city Kebele shall have the powers and function of its levels by sharing it from the city district. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Appointment of Kebele Manager
The manager of a city Kebele, being evaluated by his professional ability and leadership efficiency, shall be nominated by the chairperson of the kebele, and appointed by the Kebele council.
Part Four
Establishment of Regular and Social Courts of a City
Establishments of Regular Courts
Cities of different hierarchy shall have the court having judicial power, which shall be established in cities having their own councils as deemed necessary.
The city court to be established as per this proclamation shall be realized with the request of Oromia Supreme Court depending on the research.
The structure of these courts shall be in accordance with the structure and practices of the regional state courts.
As per this article, city matters entertained by the courts at the city administration level shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Establishment of Social Courts
A social court, which shall have jurisdiction over petty offences committed in the city, shall be established at City Kebele level.
The city kebele social court shall be accountable to the city Kebele council.
The powers and functions of the kebele social courts provided by proclamation shall be applicable on the city kebele social courts.
Establishment of Regulation enforcement body
Every city district and city Kebele shall establish rules and regulation enforcement body; whose number may vary according to the differences of the district or the kebele. Its particulars shall be decided by the internal regulation to be issued by the city council.
Part Five
Relationships of the Cities with the Residents and Other Bodies
Relations with the Residents
The relationship of the cities with the residents shall depend on the fundamental constitutional principle that says, “All power emanates from the people”.
It is only the people of the city who can elect or remove from their power members of the city councils. The people in the city alone may recall the representatives they have elected for the city administration council.
Ensuring the Peoples’ Participation
Residents, civic associations, and private sectors shall made to discuss and express their views on the work programs, budget proposals, project ideas, work performances, finance and audit reports of the fiscal year.
Whether the city have council or not, the city administration shall facilitate forums at least once in every three months to enable the residents of the city whether , civic associations, and private sectors to discuss and present their views on various issues concerning the city.
Without prejudices to this article sub article 2, A public meeting may be called by the city where the circumstance so requires.
The city administration shall devic e different strategies and facilitates conditions to encourage residents of the city to participate in the different boards or committees established for the purpose city matters.
Any city has a duty to give a prom pt response to questions and complaints raised by the residents.
Relationship Between the City and City Kebele
The power, function and internal organization of city kebele shall be based principle of decentralization, which its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
The city kebele council may make proposal to the city administration or district administration on matters relating to the development activities of the kebele.
Federal or Regional government function matters that used to be performed by the city kebele and excluded from the powers and functions of a city as per this proclamation may be performed in accordance with the agreement made between the regional government and the city administration.
Part Six
Relationships between the Cities and Regional Government
General Principles
Based on the recognition that cities are autonomous; accountable and responsible to the regional government; the relationship between the cities and regional government shall be guided by the spirit of cooperation, partnership, collaboration and rule of law.
The relationship between the regional government and the cities shall facilitate favorable condition for coordinated planning and flow of information.
Regional government and Cities Partnership
To perform its powers and functions the city may work together in coordination or by agreement with the administrative bodies or institutions of the regional government to play its role.
The regional Government may organize regional organs when deemed necessary or perform regional government powers and functions in the city.
Enactment and Enforcement of Laws and Standards
The regional government may provide necessary technical support to enable cities to perform their powers and functions by issuing necessary laws and standards.
The cities shall be responsible to ensure the enforcement of laws and observance standards.
The decisions rendered and work ing system established by the cities shall be consistent with the policies, strategies, programs and laws issued at regional state and at country level.
How the Regional Government Assists the Cities
Without prejudice to the grant regional government may give for the implementation of specific projects, the regional government shall provides development assistance to the cities basis of competitiveness and equity.
The regional government shall create favorable conditions within which cities can develop and grow.
Establishing Joint Committee
In order to strengthen urban-rural economic interaction, the cities may establish joint committee with the adjoining district to work cooperatively on issues of mutual interest.
Boundary dispute arising between the cities and the ad-joining rural kebele shall be settled amicably between the city and concerned rural kebele. Failing such amicable settlement, the decision of regional administration council shall be final.
How Cities Submit their Re-ports
The cities shall submit quarterly and annual work performance and financial reports to the body for which they are accountable; submit audit reports to the body for which they are accountable as found necessary.
The body to which the report is submitted may periodically review the reports and give feedbacks to ensure the accuracy of the reports.
Dissolution of City Council
"Caffee" may cause city council to be dissolved “” when it believes that operation of the city council poses a threat to the federal and regional state's constitution, or where serious security problems or human right violations which cannot be controlled as well as where it believes that serious injury to the public interest has been occurred.
Where the city administration council dissolves in accordance of sub article 1 of this article, the temporary administration shall be nominated by the regional council; caffee of the region shall make arrangement with the concerned body to make fresh elections within the time fixed. The details shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Part Seven
City Finance and Budget Administration
Fiscal year
The fiscal year of cities shall be the fiscal year of the regional government.
Revenue Sources of Cities
Income of cities shall be from the following sources:
Revenue and taxes authorized by law and service delivery fees collected from services they render.
Budget support granted by the regional government.
Loans and Assistances
Other income sources
Every regular income or revenue collected at the city level shall be income of the cities. The condition by which cities support each other shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Without prejudice to Sub-article (2) of this Article, it shall be effective from the next budget year.
The cities shall receive payment for the function they perform to the regional government.
Prior to the implementation of the loan of the cities in accordance with sub-article (1)c of this article, its importance shall be decided by regional state administration council.
The cities may borrow money from the federal or regional governments as well as from the legally recognized financial institutions. The loan obtained in such a way shall be allocated only for the expenses the of capital projects.
Details of the condition of loan and their payments shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Administration System and Books of Accounts
Every city shall have power and responsibility to systemically organize and administer its property.
The financial system of every city shall be implemented in accordance with the regional state financial system.
Every city shall have complete and accurate books of account and financial documents.
The Bureau shall make necessary supports for the cities to improve their efficiencies of budget preparation and performances. details of the condition shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Financial Reporting Systems
The mayor shall present the financial reports of the city administration to the city council twice a year; also discloses it to the public.
The manager of a city district, municipality, and growing municipality shall present the financial reports of the city periodically to the body to whom it is accountable; also discloses it to the public.
Auditing System
Every city shall have internal Audit.
The internal auditor, who shall be accountable to accountable to the head of the institution, shall ensure on day-by-day basis that the resources of the city are being implemented in accordance with the relevant financial regulations.
Part Eight
Human Resource Management of cities
General Principles
Recruitment and administration of human resource of the cities shall be in accordance with administration of civil servant law of the regional state.
Every city shall have power to recruit, administer, specify the power and duties, decide the salary and benefits and dismiss its employees in accordance with the regional state civil servant law.
Except for political appointees, the placement of city officers and employees shall be carried out depending on their efficiency and importance to the position based on sufficient examination.
Applicability of the regional state civil servants law
The Regional state government civil servant law shall also be applicable on the employees of the municipality service.
Part Nine
City Plan
Power to Prepare and Implement City Plan
Every city shall have the power to prepare, cause to be prepared, approve, amend and implement a city plan.
The cities shall observe the fundamental principles, guidelines and standards of plan preparation of the regional state and the federal government in the process of plan preparation. Its particulars shall be decided by the regulation to be issued.
Notwithstanding to the provision under sub article (1) of this article,the power to approve the planof the municipal and growing municipality cities shall be the district council.
The bureau, with the concerned body, may review the city plan to ascertain its conformity with the condition provided under sub-article 2 of this article; add necessary improvements on the plan if necessary; submit it to the city or district councils.
Enabling City Residents Participate
The residents of the city shall have rights to participate and forward their views in all phases of plan preparation and implementation.
The city shall device the system and favorable condition by which residents of the city can efficiently express their opinions and forward their views in the preparation and implementation of the city plan.
Part Ten
Association of Cities
Establishment
Cities in the region may establish associations of their own and actively participate in the operation thereof.
The association shall be registered by the appropriate government body and acquire legal personality.
The structural and manner of operation of the association shall be determined by its memorandum of association and internal regulation.
Power and Functions of Associations of the Cities
The association of cities, without prejudice to the power and functions provided under its memorandum of association and internal regulation; shall have the following power and functions;
Works to realize the existence of inter-city cooperation; sharing of experiences and ideas.
Represent cities and exchange their views on matters of common interest.
Work to strength the performance abilities of the cities by providing trainings and material support for its members.
Create strong relationships with local and foreign city associations in consultation with the Bureau; and
Carry out other activities that would enhance the developments of cities in the region.
Part Eleven
Miscellaneous Provisions
Power and Functions of the Bureau
Notwithstanding powers and duties entrusted to it by other laws, the bureau shall have the powers and responsibilities to follow up and ensure the implementation of all matters provided in this proclamation, and policies, strategies, and laws relating to the cities of the regional state,
Advice the regional state government on matters relating to cities; undertake or cause to be undertaken different researches concerning cities; submit it to concerned bodies; implement same when authorized,
Submit work performance reports of the cities to the regional state government
Prepare directives and working practices to enable the urban land to be used economically and for highly beneficial purposes in accordance with the plan of the city; cause to be implemented; supervise and control,
Conduct researches periodically concerning the technical and material supports necessary for the cities, as well as issues that strengthen their performance abilities; and submit to the concerned bodies; implement or cause it to be implemented when authorized,
Entertain and decide on the request of residents to obtain legal personality of being a city,
Reviews the request of the cities for promotion to the next grade and submit its proposal to the regional administration council; implements same upon approval,
Support cities of the regional state to create and strengthen relationship with other cities in the country and outside the country,
Work for the existence of favorable working relationships between the regional government and cities of the regional state government,
Transitory Provisions
The regional state government administration council may decide on how this proclamation can be implemented at different levels in various cities.
As per the provision of sub article (1) of this article, the current city administration may be made to continue functioning until the election of members of the city council by the next national election period stepwise.
The administration structure that had been functioning before the approval of this proclamation shall continue until the grades of the cities in the region are decided in accordance with this proclamation.
Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of article 23 of this proclamation, the designation and appointment of Mayor of Cities administration will continue until the election of council of city administration held.
Transfer of Rights and Obligations
The rights and obligations of the cities before the approval of this proclamation shall proceed in accordance with this proclamation.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directives
The regional state government administrative council may issue a regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Bureau may issue directives for the implementation of this proclamation and the regulation to be issued.
Inapplicable Laws
Any proclamation, regulation, directive and customary practices contrary to this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered by this proclamation.
Urban Local Government Proclamation of Oromia National Regional State No. 65/2003 and its amendment proclamation No. 116/2006 are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
A Proclamation to Reorganize and Redefine the Powers and Duties of Oromia National Regional State Executive Organs No. 163/ 2011 Article 61 Sub-articles (1-5 ) and proclamation No. 170/2012 article 2 sub article 3 (1-3) are hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Duty to Cooperate
Any organ shall have a duty to cooperate for the implementation of this proclamation.
Effective Date
This proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on MegeletaOromia
Finfinne This 2nd of October 2015
Muktar kedir President of Oromia National Regional state
A Proclamation to Amend/Revise Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Establishment Proclamation No. 71/2003
Whereas, it has become necessary to strengthen the fight against corruption to prevent the effect of corruption and impropriety on th socio-economic development, good governance and the enhancement of democratic system in the region;
Whereas, it has become necessary to establish effective transparent and accountable system with a view to prevent corruption and impropriety, to expand and enhance ethical conduct in the society, and to prevent
and control acts of corruption and improprieties Prevailed in public offices, public enterprises and public organizations;
Whereas, it has become necessary to authorize the commission by giving  the power to investigate and prosecute corruption offences committed in public organizations by revising the existing ethics and anti corruption commission establishment proclamation.
Whereas, it has become necessary to establish a system of gathering evidences, investigate and prosecute corruption crimes with the view to confiscate properties acquired and reinstate damages sustained through corrupt practices.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49(3)(a) of the revised Constitution of Oromia National Regional State, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
Part One
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “The Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission Amendment Proclamation No. 197/2016”
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context requires otherwise:
“Region” shall mean Oromia National Regional State.
‘‘Government” means Oromia National Regional State governmet
“President” shall mean the President of Oromia National Regional State.
“Commission” shall mean the Oromia National Regional State Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission.
“Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner” shall mean the Commissioner and deputy commissioner of the Commission respectively.
“Public Office” shall mean any office of the region the budget of which is fully or partially allocated by regional government or at any level in which any government activity is performed.
“Public Enterprise” shall mean any Public Enterprise or Share Company in which the regional government has ownership share or is fully or partially be a member.
“Public Organization” shall mean private sector which in whatever way administers money or property or any other resource collected from members or public or money property collected for the benefit of the public or other body which administer these property or which includes appropriate company and it shall not include the following:
Religious Organization;
Political party or organization;
International organization; and
Edir or other similar associations having cultural or religious objective.
“Appropriate Company” shall mean any private limited company which is established through the contribution of shares of public organizations and joint venture share company including other organizations which have established partnership with such organizations.
“General Assembly” shall mean the general assembly of the Oromia National Regional State Anti- Corruption coalition.
“Public Official” shall mean any person who is appointed in any public office or public enterprise of the region; or any person elected by the people as a member of the Regional 'Caffee' or district or City Council or any appointee at all level or any appointee assigned or elected as a head or board member or as a manager of public organization.
“Appointee” shall mean any person appointed or elected or assigned at regional, zonal, district, city administration or kebele level in any manner as well as in accordance with the organizational structure of the respective public office or public enterprise or public organization or in accordance with a law or regulation or memorandum of association of the public enterprise, public office or public organization and in accordance with professional ethics of the respective profession.
“Employee of Public Organization” shall mean an employee who is employed, appointed or elected by members to work either temporarily or permanently in a public organization and include leader of the board of directors or any person or committee involved in the formation of a share company or a charity organization.
“Public Servant” shall mean any person who is recruited or assigned or elected to work either temporarily or permanently in a public office or public enterprise in the exception of the provisions stipulated under sub article 11 and 12 of this article .
“Temporary worker” shall mean a person who works full or part or during leave time with or without payment in a public office or public enterprise. or public organization without being a employed permanently and shall include apprentice.
“Basics Ethical Principles” shall mean systems or mechanisms or the necessary conditions and other similar activities established with the view to reduce substantially unethical conducts and to encourage ethical conducts, professional competency and propriety work practices in the region, particularly in the public service delivery.
“Grave Ethical Violations” shall mean any ethical violation which entails dismissal from a job in accordance with ethical code of public office or public enterprise.
“Corruption Offences” shall mean relevant provisions of Federal Criminal Law, corruption offences provided for by the Corruption Crimes Proclamation No. 881/2015, and includes offences provided as corruption crimes in other relevant laws.
“Grave Corruption Offence” shall mean:
Corruption offences involving highly strategic public interest or huge money or property or transactions committed in Public Office, Public Enterprise or Public Organization; or
Corruption offences involving a public official, appointed or elected individuals; or
Corruption offences which cause or capable of causing a grave danger on the regional and national sovereignty, economy, security or life of the society.
“Informant” shall mean any person who provides information, where he believes that corruption offence is committed or to be committed, to appropriate organ or other justice organs, to the public office, public enterprise or to the head of public organization or anybody who is authorized to entertain corruption offences in accordance with the law or directives and shall include an auditor who audit the case relating to the corruption offence or an auditor who detects the commission of corruption offences in the course of his auditing duties and anyone who inspects or investigates such offences.
Terminate investigation, withdraw corruption charges, close investigation file, reinstitute terminated charges, reinstitute closed files in accordance with the law where it is necessary for the public interest. The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Cause the reinstitution of benefit or advantage acquired through corruption offences, cause to be reinstituted, cause the corruption offences under proceeding or under investigation to be resolved out of court proceeding; The details shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Search, follow up, detain any person’s residence or work places or car or any other property in connection with investigation of corruption offences as it may be necessary in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code or other relevant law;
Cause the detention of persons suspected of corruption offences at Police station not exceeding 48:00 hours without court warrant in accordance with Criminal Procedure Code and Anticorruption Special Procedure and Rules of Evidence, take finger print and photograph of the suspects;
Interrogate any person in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code or other relevant laws take statement, order any person or institution receive produced evidence;
Gather evidence by the order of the commissioner where there is reasonable suspicion or sufficient evidence in connection with corruption offences regarding money or property or share to be found or deposited in the bank by the name of the suspect or his family or the deposit of such money is with the name of other person or an evidence show that there is a share, retrain the money or property by the order of the court as it may necessary;
Register, cause the registration of property and source of income of officials, elected person, appointee and civil servants of public enterprises as well as public organization in accordance with the law in collaboration with the concerned body, keep evidence, verify, give certificate, disclose to the public.
Restrain the assets of any person which is acquired, gained or proportion of the damage sustained through corruption offences under investigation by court order; where it is proved that the property of any person is being obtained or gained through corruption offences it shall forfeit by the court order, or cause reinstatement of property proportional to the damage sustained or shall deposit the income to the government through selling by auction or without selling such property by the court order;
Cause the preparation of code of ethics in public office, public enterprises and public organization, give professional support, ensure its preparation, follow up its implementation;
Follow up the observance of anticorruption laws and code of ethics, ensure its observance, cause its observance,
Give and cause to be given physical protection and job security to whistleblowers, witnesses and their family in accordance with the law in collaboration with concerned organs;
Summit to the authorized organ the suspension of immunity right of those person having such right suspected of corruption offences or to be prosecuted by such crime; investigate, prosecute upon approval;
Establish the system of evaluation and award through which persons or public offices or public enterprises or public organization or other institutions that are successful in the struggle undertaken to prevent and fight corruption; implement upon approval; follow up its implementation;
Work in collaboration with other organs of the region, other regions or Federal or other having similar objectives;
Cause the preparation of directives of ethics infrastructure, organizational structure and work procedures; follow up its implementation; summit report to concerned organ corrective measure to be taken in case of failure;
Own property, sue and can be sued;
Undertake other activities that support objective of the Commission;
Power and Duty of the Commissioner
The Commissioner shall have the following power and duty:
Leads the work of the Commission;
Implementsandcausestheimplementation of power and duties of the Commission provided under article 15 of this proclamation;
Recruits, administers and dismisses the employees of the Commission in accordance with general principles of Civil Servant law, this proclamation, regulation and directive issued to implement this proclamation;
Prepares work and budget plan of the Commission, submits to the president of the region, implements upon approval, cause its implementation;
Based on the work plan of the Commission, administers the budget allocated to the Commission in accordance with financial laws;
Organizes the commission with human and material resource; organize various department that enable to perform its power and duties entrusted to it by the law;
Orders heads of departments, investigator or public prosecutor of the commission to investigate, prosecute, detain or put under custody of those persons suspected of grand corruption offences in accordance with the law; The particulars shall be determined by the directive to be issued.
Gives order as it found necessary the search and collection of evidences regarding cases under investigation in respect of bank account of the suspect, his family, public offices, public enterprises, public organization or any other person having relation with the suspect.
Prepares work and financial performance report of the Commission and submit to the President of the region;
Represents the Commission in its relation with third party;
He may delegate part of his powers and duties to other officials or employees of the Commission for the effectiveness and efficiency of activities of the Commission;
PowerandDutiesofDeputyCommissioner
The accountability of the Deputy Commissioner shall be to the Commissioner and shall have the following power and duties:
Supports the Commissioner in planning, organizing, leading and coordinating functions of the Commission;
Leads core department of the Commission in accordance with organizational structure of the Commission;
Unless decided otherwise by the Commissioner, the senior appointee of the Deputy Commissioner shall represent the Commissioner in his absence;
Perform such other duties specifically entrusted to him by the Commissioner.
Term of Office and Removal of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner
The term of office of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner shall be six years; however, he may be reappointed where it found necessary;
The Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner may not be removed from his office before lapse of term of office, unless:
he has violated rules of relevant code of conduct;
he can no longer carry out his responsibilities on account of illness;
he becomes incompetent and inefficient;
he requests to be removed by his consent;
The Police and Prosecutorial Power of the Commission
The investigation and prosecutorial power entrusted to the regular Police and prosecution in accordance with the Criminal Procedure Code and other laws in investigating, prosecuting and other matters specified under this proclamation shall be entrusted to Commission’s Police and prosecutor;
Without prejudice the provision of sub-article1of this article the Commissioner may delegate part the power of the Commission to other relevant body as it is found necessary;
Notwithstanding the provision of sub article 2 of this article, in case where any organ entrusted with the power to investigate offence has begun without having the power to investigate corruption offences shall notify the case to the Commission within five days from the commencement of such investigation. The Commission may order the investigation to continue or may take up such case.
Unless delegated by the Commission, any organ having prosecutorial power shall not have the power to prosecute corruption offences.
Confidentiality
Any employee of the Commission shall have a duty to keep the secrecy of facts he comes across while performing his duty unless it is ordered by the court or concerned head.
Recruitment and Administration of Employees of the Commission
The recruitment, administration, suspension and dismissal condition of the employees of the Commission shall be determined by the regulation to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this proclamation and general principles of civil servant laws of the region.
Rights and Duties of the Employees of the Commission
The employees of the Commission shall have the following rights:
Every employees of the Commission shall obtain a salary and allowances in accordance with salary scale and allowances approved by the government.
shall be provided with attorney service at the expense of the Commission for any responsibility or liability which is caused to him while he is performing his duty; the particulars shall be determined by the regulation to be issued;
Is entitled with the right of pension, annual leave, sick leave, mourning leave, marriage leave, maternity leave as well as special leave in accordance with the relevant laws.
Shall be entitled the protection of his right for the total or partial damage or accident he has sustained or ought to sustain in relation to his duties in accordance with pension law and other relevant laws.
The employees of the Commission shall have the following duties:
to keep the secrecy of the facts he comes across and to give evidences while performing the power and duties of the Commission while he is in the Commission and after leaving the Commission.
to observe and cause the observance of the laws and work procedures of the Commission.
Establishment of Ethics Basic Principles
Basic Ethics Principles shall be established in public offices, public enterprises and public organizations;
Basic Ethics Principles shall have work relation with the Commission; the detail shall be determined by the regulation to be issued.
Part Three
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The Source of income of the Commission shall be from the budget allocated by the government.
Books of Account
The Commission shall have complete and accurate book of account.
The Commission’s book of account and financial documents shall be audited by the General Auditor of the region or an organ assigned by it.
Relations of the Commission with Other Organs
The Commission shall work in coordination and collaboration way with regional and federal anticorruption Commissions and other organs having similar objectives to strengthen ethics education, prevention, investigation, prosecution of corruption offences and reinstituting or the damages sustained through corruption offences with a view to create an awareness of the society which cannot tolerate corruption.
Duty to Cooperate and Notify
Without prejudice to the administrative or disciplinary measures taken by the public office, public enterprises or public organizations, where there is suspicion that serious ethical violation or corruption offence is committed they shall have a duty to report or notify immediately to the Commission or to the relevant authorized organ to investigate the matter.
Where there is a suspicion that acts of corruption offense is committed or ought to be committed any public office, public enterprises or public organization, official or employee shall notify to the Commission or to the organ authorized to investigate the matter.
Whosoever in connection with the power and duty of the Commission shall have a duty to cooperate, particularly, concerned public offices, public enterprises, public organization or any person shall have a duty to give necessary support where professional support is requested by the Commission.
Anybody authorized to investigate corruption offences in accordance with this proclamation may request at any time to have the access or be provided evidences which necessary for investigation in public offices, public enterprise, as well as public organizations of the region or federal government.
Without prejudice to this article sub article 4, heads or employees of any public offices, public enterprises or public organizations of the region or the federal government found in the region shall have a duty to show or to provide or to handover necessary evidences upon request by the Commission.
Every Police Commission structure of the region found at all level shall have a duty to give lawful support to the Commission in keeping the detainee or the custody of person by the Commission suspected of corruption offences.
Penalty
Unless punishable with severe penalty under other law:
Whosoever attempts to influence, harm or punish or who influences, harms or attempts to harm or punishes or attempts to punish any person who deliver information or evidence relating to corruption offences shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than three years and not exceeding fifteen years; and with fine not less than Birr six thousand and not exceeding Birr twenty five thousand.
Any official or employee of the Commission who abuses the powers and responsibilities legally entrusted to him, disclose secrecy, produce false evidence or destroy or conceal evidence without prejudice the forfeiture of any advantage gained there from, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than five years and not exceeding fifteen years, and with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Whosoever, with the intent to mislead the Commission or to harm others, produce a false report or allegation or information to the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than one year and not exceeding five years; with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Any officials or employee or whosoever violates article 27 of this proclamation or who fails to notify or not volunteer to support the Commission, shall be punishable with not less than six month and not exceeding four years imprisonment; and with fine not less than Birr one thousand and not exceeding Birr eight thousand.
Whosoever obstructs or attempts to obstruct the activities of the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than two years and not exceeding ten years; and with fine not less than Birr five thousand and not exceeding birr twenty thousand; where the offence is accompanied by violence, the penalty shall be the maximum penalty prescribed in this sub-article.
Whosoever commits a deceitful act by pretending as if the employee of the Commission shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment of not less than three years and not exceeding ten years; and with fine not less than Birr three thousand and not exceeding Birr ten thousand.
Whosoever disclose or publicize in written form or distribute an investigation of corruption offence is to commence or underway or knowing that the case is under investigation without the authorization of the investigator, shall be punishable with not less than six months and not exceeding four years imprisonment; and with fine not less than one thousand Birr and not exceeding five thousand.
Without prejudice the administrative measure taken by his respective institution, any public official or employee of public offices or public enterprise or public organization, who fails to inform the corruption offences committed to an organ authorized to investigate corruption offences being aware of it in his respective office or institution shall be punishable with simple imprisonment not exceeding five years and with fine not exceeding ten thousand Birr.
Where the offences specified insub-articles 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this article are committed by juridical persons responsible under the penal code, the punishment with a fine shall be five fold.
The Application of Other Laws
Anti-corruption Special Procedure and Rules of Evidence Law Issued by the Federal Government.
Transitory Provisions
Any corruption offences and cases committed in relation with corruption and whose investigation has been started or under investigation or under proceeding prior to the coming into force of this proclamation shall be resolved in accordance with the previous law.
Power to Issue Regulation and Directive
The regional administrative council may issue regulation for the implementation of this proclamation.
The Commission may issue directive for the implementation of this proclamation and regulation to be issued depending on this proclamation.
Inapplicable Laws
Oromia Ethics and Anticorruption Commission Establishment Proclamation no. 71/2003 is hereby repealed by this proclamation.
Any Laws and work practices inconsistent with this proclamation shall not be applicable on matters covered under this proclamation.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of its publication on Megeleta Oromia.
Finfinne
April 3, 2016
Muktar Kedir
President of Oromia National Regional State
Proclamation No. 181/2013
Oromia National Regional State Public Enterprises Proclamation
WHEREAS, it is found necessary for the government to put an effort to bridge the market gap through capacity building by enhancing the role of the private sector in accelerating economic development for sustainability of the economic development;
WHEREAS, public enterprises have to continue under state ownership, it is necessary to provide them with such guidance so as to enable them to improve their effectiveness, to be competitive and profitable and thereby play appropriate role in the implementation of the economic development;
WHEREAS, it becomes necessary to establish clear and legal procedures that public enterprises follow in the free market economy, to participate in the stabilization of the market for public benefit and/or efficiently implementation of the mission given to them;
WHEREAS, to enable the Regulatory Authority, in leading and supporting public enterprises to fulfill their objectives efficiently, it is necessary to establish conducive environment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 49 Sub-Article 3 (a) of Proclamation No. 46/1994 of the Revised Constitution of the National Regional State of Oromia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows.
CHAPTER ONE
General Provisions
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as “Public Enterprise Proclamation No. 181/2013”.
Definition
In this proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
“Authority” means Oromia Government Public Enterprise Regulatory Authority.
“Board” means the management board of government public enterprise.
“Net Profit” means any excess of all revenue and receipts over costs, salary and operating expenses properly attributable to the operations of the financial year including depreciation, interest and taxes.
“Public Enterprise” means a wholly or partially state owned public enterprise established by the government to carry on manufacturing, distribution, construction service rendering or other economic development and related activities.
“Initial Capital” means total assets assigned to the enterprise by the government at the time of its establishment and later.
“Regional Administrative Council” means supreme excutive organ of the National Regional Government.
“Government” means the National Regional Government of Oromia.
“Auditor” means a natural or juridical person who is enpowered to audit the accounts of public enterprise.
“State Dividend” means the remaining balance after deduction of legal reserve and other reserve from the net profit.
Powers and Duties of the Authority
The Authority shall have the following powers and duties:
Prepares and submit policies, strategies and programs related to irrigation to the government and implement the same upon approval.
Undertake and cause the undertaking of the study, design, construction and scheme management of traditional, micro, small, medium and large scale irrigation.
Fully administer, follow up, execute technical work of those medium and large scale irrigations whose construction is completed up until the users are self sufficient to administer; conduct maintenance work and cause to conducted where it is found to be beyond the capacity of the users, and turn the administration over to them when they are self sufficient.
Undertake awareness creation advice and follow up on fee collection and saving to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of irrigation scheme.
Conserve the water resource in the region for sustainable irrigation development in collaboration with the concerned bodies.
Undertake drainage work where it is necessary in the region.
Undertake water harvesting for irrigation development.
Undertake a study with the concerned body on problems related with areas of irrigarion development, drainage, also on irrigation technology; coordinate; dessiminate research findings and improved technology; prepare demonstration plots.
Taking the responsibility of following up, supporting, strengthening micro and moisture irrigation to be undertaken by community.
Collaborate with stakeholders who contribute to the sustainability and growth of irrigation development.
Follow up, administer, irrigation development funds obtained from different funding agencies as grant or loan is utilized for the intended purpose and report its implimentation to concerned the bodies.
Shall handover completed small scale irrigation projects to the users, provide technical support, follow up, conduct maintenance, cause to be conducted where it is found beyond the capacity of the users.
Collect irrigation construction investment cost from the users; where it is allowed by the government invest it back on irrigation projects; collect different service and maintainance fees and utialize it back.
Select technologies that enables to speed up farming, work with the concerned bodies on the quality of the selected technologies.
Expand irrigation extension and irrigation development farming advisory service.
Identify, record and scale up best practice of irrigation development from all levels and disseminate.
Strengthen community participation on irrigation development.
Organize water user associations, train, assist and follow up in the the preparation of thier by laws also work with the concerned bodies for them to get legal personality.
Work and facilitate conditions for women and youth to be participants and users of irrigation development;
Gives necessary technical support and supervise those organs working on irrigation development.
Look for fund through different methods for irrigation and drainage coverage increment.
Work with the concerned bodies to minimize the negative impact that irrigation development may cause on the environment and human being.
Evaluate, the outcome and problems of irrigation development and drainage works undertaken at any level.
Works with the concerned bodies to supply different irrigation farming development inputs that assists in increasing production and productivity.
Facilitate conditions with the concerned body for irrigation development users to get credit service; and follow up.
Works with concerned bodies to control migratory and regular pests which can affect irrigation crop product.
Works with concerned body on conservation and watershade development related with irrigation development areas based on the regional watershade development guideline.
Impliment irrigation development related laws in the region.
Use water without permission for small scale irrigation development for the benefit of the community.
Facilitate conditions for farmers and pastoralists to produce market oriented products and work with the concerned body for them to get market for their products.
Work with the concerned body to cause payment of compensation to those affected by construction of irrigation development in accordance with the law.
Give capacity building training to upgrade the execution capacity of experts and users of irrigation development; provide the required material for the employees; facilitate conditions and follow up its outcome.
Own property, enter into contract, sue and be sued.
Power and Duties of the General Manager
The General Manager shall have the following powers and duties;
The General Manager executes the power and duties given to the Authority;
Plan, organize, coordinate, direct, administer and control the activities of the Authority;
Employ, administer and fire employees in accordance with the civil service law of the region;
Represent the Authority in all its dealings with third parties;
Prepare and submit plan and annual budget to the government and implement the same upon approval;
Administer the budget, open and operate bank accounts of the Authority
Prepare and submit financial and performance report of the Authority to the regional government;
Where found necessary for the effective performance of his activities, may delegate part of his powers and duties to the officials that are accountable to him.
Power and Duties of the Deputy General Manager
Where in the absence of the General Manager acts on behalf of him;
Execute works given by the General Manager.
PART THREE
Miscellaneous Provisions
Source of Income
The source of income for the Authority is the allocated budget by the government, financial assistance and fees paid for different services.
Books of Account
The Authority shall keep complete book of account and financial documents.
Audit
The books of account and property of the Authority shall be audited by the Auditor General of Oromia or by an auditor represented by it.
Powers to Iissue Regulation
The Administrative Council of the National Regional State of Oromia may issue a Regulation to execute this Proclamation.
Provision of Transition
Rights and obligation related to irrigation development which was given to Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau is transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation;
Works related to irrigation development which were constructed and those that are under construction by Oromia Water, Mine and Energy and Oromia Agriculture Bureau are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Works related to irrigation scheme administration activities which were undertaken by Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise, assets, data and materials for this work are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Assets, data and materials which were used for irrigation development activities at Oromia Agricultural Bureau and Oromia Water Mine and Energy are transferred to the Authority by this Proclamation.
Repealed Laws
Article 17 Sub-Article 13, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs Proclamation are repealed by this Proclamation;
Article 24 Sub-Article 2, 3 and 4 of Proclamation No. 163/2011, Executive Organs are repealed by this Proclamation.
Article 2 Sub-Article 2(b) of Regulation No. 58/2005 issued to amend Regulation No. 14/1999, Regulation to Provide the Amendment of Oromia Water Works Construction Enterprise Establishment is repealed by this Proclamation.
Any law and practice inconsistent with matters provided for under this Proclamation shall be inapplicable.
Effective Date
This Proclamation shall come into force as of the 13th of July 2013.
Alemayehu Atomsa President of the National Regional State of Oromia
Finfinne, the 13th of July 2013
Preface
This hand-book of Africa, which is entitled "African Almanac" is the first of its kind to be published in Ethiopia.
Even though it does not contain all details and particulars as "World Almanacs" do, it is believed that the future publications of this "African Almanac" would be complete and detailed, in the proper sense of the word "Almanac."
This year, seventeen African countries have achieved their independence. That is why the year 1960 came to be known as the "African year."
For the same reason, there is no doubt that the year "1960" should be given a special importance in the history of Africa.
Thus, His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia, a staunch supporter of African freedom, has ordered that this first "African Almanac" should be prepared as an expression of His deep satisfaction during this "African year," and dedicates the book in honour of the new African Independent countries and of those who are struggling for their independence.
ETHIOPIA
Geographical Situation:Situated in the North-east of Africa, Ethiopia is an Empire dating back over 3000 years as an independent state.Its boundaries are: in the north, the Republic of Sudan and the Red Sea, in the south, Kenya and the Somali Republic, in the east, French Somaliland and the Somali Republic, and in the west, the Republic of Sudan.
Area: 450,000 sq. miles.
Population:20,000,000
Capital City:ADDIS ABABA, other important towns are: Asmara, Massawa, Assab, Harar, Dire-Dawa, Jimma, Gambela, Gondar etc.
Language: Official in Amharic, main dialects are, Galigna, Tigrigna, Somali etc.
Government: Constitutional Monarchy, with a Parliament composed of two Houses - the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate.
Members of the Chamber of deputies are elected by a universal adult suffrage for a period of four years, after which they may be eligible for re-election.
The present Chamber consists of 210 Deputies.
The members of the Senate are appointed by the Emperor. The number of Senators does not exceed one-half of the total number of Deputies.
All laws are approved by the Parliament and ratified by the Emperor.
Ruler: H.I.M. Emperor Haile Selassie I.
His Imperial Majesty, descendant of the oldest and longest royal line in recorded history, ascended the throne on November 2, 1930, with the title of 'Hail Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia.'
Born on July 23, 1892, at Ejersa Goro, Harar Province, Emperor Haile Selassie is the great grandson of King Sahle Selassie who was a descendant of King Solomon and Queen of Sheba. His father His Highness Ras Makonnen, a hero of the famous battle of Adwa, in 1896, was Emperor Menelik's trusted diplomat and a general of great valour. Upon the completion of His education, during the early years of His age, Emperor Haile Selassie was called upon to serve His country in many outstanding posts, before He, finally became the leader of the country.
He led Ethiopia to become a member of the League of Nations in 1923.
Seven months after his coronation on November 2, 1930. Emperor Haile Selassie, He, of his own volition, graciously decreed the first written constitution and Parliament in the history of Ethiopia, making himself a constitutional monarch.
In 1935, the Italian Fascists launched their aggression against Ethiopia, and in June 1936 Emperor Haile Selasie, before the League of Nations at Geneva, personally pleaded the cause of his country and coincidentally that of international morality. Although the League of Nations put up a deaf ear to his country and coincidentally that of international morality. Although the League of Nations put up a deaf ear to his historic appeal, Emperor Haile Selassie never lost confidence. It was primarily through his wise judgment and astute statesmanship that the day of liberation came, when on May 5, 1941, five years after the Fascist invasion, He rode triumphantly back into the capital of his Empire, at the head of his conquering patriots, with the help of the British troops.
Since the liberation, both in internal and external affairs, His Imperial Majesty has proved to be the dynamic architect of Modern Ethiopia. Upon his return, He found the country in a war-torn condition, ad soon He embarked on a huge programme to give life to the nation. He opened new schools, built modern hospitals, constructed new roads and improved communication facilities. On November 2, 1955, on the day of His Silver Jubilee Coronation anniversary, He of His own will, once again gave a new revised constitution, thereby, granting the country a general election of the basis of universal adult suffrage. Freedom of press and speech is also granted in the constitution.
A staunch supporter of the U.N., Emperor Haile Selassie, inaugurating the U.N. Economic Commission for Africa, said, "The United Nations is a living and tangible testimony to the value of cooperative efforts among all men to improve their way of life and preserve peace." Above all, He has committed Himself to the preservation of two principle - "Collective Security" and "independence for oppressed peoples."
A supporter of African Nationalism, Emperor Hail Selassie welcomes and entertains, at his court, many African Nationalists, with whom He exchanges ideas. He has devoted Himself to the cause of African freedom, ever since be returned from Britain in 1941, where be went on exile, seeking outside help against the fascist aggression in His country.
Speaking of African independence, on November 2, 1958, on the occasion of the 28th anniversary of His Coronation, He said, "Time has demonstrated that those Africans, who believed that the existence of an independent Ethiopia would open the door to freedom for all of Africa, were not mistaken in their beliefs.
The family of independent nations in Africa is today growing apace, and no power on earth can now arrest this process."
Economic Development: Ethiopia is mainly an agricultural country. Due to the fertility of most of the country, many of its regions yield two crops a year. The chief crops are maiz, wheat, barley, rye, cotton, sugar-cane, millet, hemp, teff (the common bread grain), and coffee.
Ethiopia has embarked on a plan to set up industries which produce domestic necessities. It exports coffee, hides and skins, cereals, oil seeds, meat, gold and platinum. Ethiopia imports textiles, iron, steel, machinery, motor vehicles, agricultural machinery and tractors, pharmaceutical and petroleum products.
Monetary unit: Ethiopian Dollar.
Religion:Mainly Christian (Official Religion) and a number of Moslems.
Defence: Ethiopia has re-organized her armed forces into three parts. The ground force comprises the Army and the Imperial Body Guard. The Air Force in will organized and equipped with jet fighter-bombers. Though, the navy is still young, it has shown on active progress to be developed. In addition to these, the Territorial Army is being established. Projects are underway towards the expansion of the defence system which is controlled by the Ministry of National Defense.
LIBERIA
Geographical Situation:The State was proclaimed an independent Republic on July 26, 1847. Liberia is situated in West Africa, and is bounded in the north by Guinea and Ivory Coast, in the west by Sierra Leone, in the south by the Atlantic, and in the east by Ivory Coast.
Area: 43,000 sq. miles.
Population:2,500,000
Capital:MONROVIA, other important towns are: Marshall, Harper and Bachanan.
Language: Official in English, tribal dialects are also spoken.
Government: Republic.
The Constitution of Liberia is similar to that of U.S.A. The Legislative power consists of two separate branches: the Senate and the House of Representatives, which together form the "Legislature.' Members of the House of Representatives and Senators are elected by a universal suffrage for a period of four and six years respectively. The executive power is vested on a President, elected for a period of eight years, after which he may be re-elected for a term of four years, as many times as the people wish to elect him.
Head of State:  President William V (acanarat) S (hadrach) Tubman. "the Maker of Modern Liberia." took office as President at the beginning of 1944  and has stayed on ever since.
Though his True Whig party has ruled the country since 1870, President Tubman's triumph is counted in Liberia as something very personal.
Liberia, was settled in 1822 by freedom seeking Americans of African origin from 27 American states, the colonization societies being motivated by a great desire to found a Christian nation in Africa.
President Tubman's aim from the beginning has been to weld the many different racial groups into one homogeneous nation. He has traveled extensively in the backwoods (the first president to do so), has given these people the vote and is encouraging them to take a more important part in public life and in the government.
Economically, his hope has been to cram into his 16 years of office "a hundred years of progress and modernization," concentrating on health, public welfare, education, road building and the development of industry, commerce and natural resources. He facilitates concessions to foreign firms whenever they are going to be a benefit to Liberia as well. Industrial undertakings begun under his regime, have transformed great untried areas and galvanized the people into taking a more direct interest in world affairs.
President Tubman, who was born on November 29, 1895, descended from settlers, in known among his people as "Bodor Shad" (Brother Shadrach). Unanimous votes in his favour on big occasions in this one-party country are often described in the Liberian press and "expressions of a nation's gratitude."
Economic Development: The Agricultural and Industrial potential of the country is being extended. Principal exports are crude rubber, iron ore, raw gold, piassava palm, kernels, palm oil and small quantities of cocas & coffee. Diamonds are also exported. The chief imports are metals, machinery, rice, tobacco, manufactured goods, provisions, salt, hardware glass, earthenware, building materials, vehicles and petroleum products.
Religion:Christians (Official) with Moslems & Animists.
Defence: Liberia's army of about 4,000 men is organized on militia basis.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA
Geographical Situation:The Union of South Africa which came into being on May 31, 1910, is g97hded in the south by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, in the west by the Atlantic and South West Africa. In the north by Bechuanaland and Southern Rhodesia, and in the cast by the Indian Ocean. .
Area: 472,359 sq. miles.
Population:14,418,000 (of which 3 millions are Europeans).
Capital:Pretorin and Cape-toun. Other big towns and Johannesburg. Durban. Port Elizabeth, East London and Kimberly.
Language: Official - English and Afrikaans. The natives speak Bantu dialects.
Government: The governor general represents the Queen of United Kingdom, who is sovereign also over the Union of South Africa. But, in October of this year, a referendum which was voted only by the white population was held to change the status of the Union into a Republic, which will be declared on May 31, 1961. The prime Minister is more powerful and has almost a dictatorial authority.
The government of South Africa is entirely dominated by the European population, mainly composed of Boers (Dutch originated South African whites) and English descendants. The original South African constitution does not guarantee the white supremacy over the colourd people, which the present rulers of the country practice as their main policy. This policy of apartheid is rejected by the coloured people who as a result staged political demonstrations several times: and in March 1960 a brutal massacre of innocent natives was done by fascist whites and militant rulers of the Union. This brutal action was condemned by all peoples of the world.
There are two African Political parties behind the massive resistance against apartheid. These African parties are:
The Pan African people's Congress
African National Congress.
Head of Government: Dr. Hendrik Frensch Verwoerd, 59-year-old Prime Minister of South Africa, is the chief advocate of Apartheid, by which is meant the strict segregation of the 3,000,000 white and 11,000,000 black people of the Union.
To the rest of the world and to the basic principles of human freedom and equality, apartheid becomes inacceptable, but to him (to Dr. Verwoerd), apartheid is designed "for happiness, security and stability, by providing the Bento, as well as the whites, with their own home, language and administration."
He believes it will bring "peaceful co-existence and justice to all people in our beloved Homeland."
South Africa is not, in fact, Dr. Verwoerd's homeland. He was born in Amsterdam of Dutch parents, but the family settled in the Union when be was still a baby.
His early career was spent as a Professor of Applied Psychology, and of Sociology and Social Work at Stellen-bosch University (1927-39).
His introduction to politics came through his editorship of the Nationalist party newspaper Die Transyaler (1937-48).
He entered the South African Parliament as a Senator in 1948, and two years later became Minister for Native Affairs.
For eight years be devoted himself to a series of measures enforcing Apartheid, over-riding hostility from the Africans, from Churches, and from some politicians and businessmen.
As Premier, Dr. Verwoerd has worked to speed the day when his country will become a Republic, a policy now endorsed by a referendum.
By this step, like his "Bantustan" segretation laws, be seea as a move to preserve "This frontier outpost in the Dark Continent."
Dr Verwoerd was shot twice in the head while opening a trade fair at Johannesburg in April, 1960.
Three months later, fully recovered, he said: "We believe we were spared by a Higher Hand, not for our selves but to render a service to the people and to the Fatherland."
Economic Development: The Union of South Africa is well developed agriculturally and commercially. It is the largest producer as well as consumer of necessary materials, in the whole continent of Africa. Its gross national income is the highest in the continent, followed by that of Nigeria and the former Belgian territory of Congo. The Union exports iron, gold, diamonds, uranium, coal, wool, meat, fruits and other items. It imports industrial machinery, motor vehicles, pharmaceutical products, petroleum products, consumer goods, furnitares and textiles.
Currency: South African Pound.
Religion:Christian & Animist.
Defence: South African has its own Air Force and Navy. Its army is well organized. The Ministry of Defence is in charge of these forces.
United Arab Republic
Geographical SituationThe U.A.R. came into being on February 1, 1958, after the federation of Syria with Egypt. The Egyptian region of the U.A.R. as ,an African country (which achieved independence on Feb. 24, 1922), borders, the Mediterranean in the north, the Gulf of Akaba and Israel in the east, Sudan & the Red Sea in the south, and Iibya in the west.
Area:Egyptian region of U.A.R. is 386.190 sq. miles.
Population:24,000,000
Capital:CAIRO, other important cities are Alexandria, Suez, p.ort Said, Luxor, Ismaelia and Gaza.
Language Arabic
Government:Republic
The United Arab Republic has a government system of which executive power is vested in the President. The National Union, which is the Parliament, is filled by a universal franchise from both regions of the Republic. The U.A.R. Consisting of two regions: Egypt and Syria, has in the capitals of both regions an executive council appointed by presidential decree. This executive council has the competence to examine and study matters pertaining to the execution of the general policy in the Region.
Head of State: President Gamal Abdel Nasser
Abdel Gamal Nasser, first President of the first Egyptian Republic and now President of the United Arab Republic, is one of the most inf1uential leaders in the Arab world and a key figure in Middle-East affairs.
The son of a postal department employee, he was born at Beni Mor, Assiut Province, on January 15, 1918, and graduated from the Egyptian Military Academy. He was an ardent nationalist from his youth and during the Palestine War of 1948/49 - in which he fought and was wounded - he denounced a national arms scandal.
In 1952 he was one of the chief organizers of the army coup which drove King Farouk from his throne, but he first remained in the background, leaving the public leadership to General Neguib. He soon emerged as the decisive figure in the Army council of the revolution and ousted General Neguib, when the latter tried to end the military rule and return to a parliamentary system.
He was elected President for six years in 1956 and is chairman of the sole political party, the National Union.
In the summer of 1956, President Nasser seized the Suez Canal under a nationalization decree and weathered the storm of the Anglo-French armed intervention which followed Israel’s invasion of the Sinai Peninsula and his rejection of an Anglo-French ultimatum to stop the fight¬ing. Under world pressure through the United Nations, the Anglo-French forces withdrew and' Egypt kept the Canal.
In 1958 he became President of the United Arab Re¬public, created from the states of Syria and Egypt, with which the independent kingdom of Yemen federated. He maintains a neutralist position between the great power bloes.
Economic Development: The U.A.R., despite its being an agricultural country, has now mobilized all its efforts to industrialize the state.
Its trade is gradually developing, and it imports such as con¬sumer goods, industrial machineries and constructional materials, iron and steel, agricultural commodities, phar¬maceutical products and fuel. It exports cotton, cement, goods, petroleum and some other items. Monetary unit: Egyptian Pound.
Religion:Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: The United Arab Republic has reorganized its armed forces into three services. The army is 130,000 man strong and is well equipped. The Air Force has different made aircraft in numbers. The Navy has many ships of different types and include submarines.
Libya
Geographical Situation: The North African Kingdom of Libya became an independent sovereign on Dec. 24, 1951. It is hounded in the north by the Mediterranean, in the south by Niger and Chad Republic, in the west by Algeria and Tunisia, in the east by the Egyptian region of U.A.R.
Area 680,000 sq. miles
Population 1,153,000
Capital TRIPOLI and BENGAZI, other important towns are: Homscousabt, Derna, Barke and Tobrouk
Language Official is Arabic, Berber and Italian are also spoken
GovernmentConstitutional monarchy, federating three provinces. Government is a two-chamber parliament. The Senate equally divided between the three provinces, is nominated half by the king and half by the three Provincial Legislative Councils. The House of the Representatives is an elected body. The three Provinces of T'ripolitania, Cyre¬naica 'and the Fezzan are each administered by a Govern¬or, assisted by an Executive and a Legislative Council.
Ruler: H.M. King Idris I.
Born on March 13 1890, His Majesty Kind Idris is the hereditary religious leader of the Senussi Muslem brotherhood and was proclaimed King on December 3, 1950.
Part of the Ottoman Empire for many years, the three territories were takne y the Italians in the 1911-12 war. During Italy’s Fascist regime, Kind Idriss (then Emir) found refuge in Egypt, but he kept in close contact with his lieutenants.
In World War II a desert war was fought out in Libya, the British Eighth Army being assisted by a native military force raised by Kind Idriss.
His grandfather, Muhammed ibn-‘Ali Al-Senussi, founded the Senussi sect for the purification and propagation of Islam. Today it symbolizes the political loyality of the nation and the successful fight for independence.
Economic Development Libya is working to expand its economy by improving its agricultural conditions: and light industries are being established to meet the demand of the country. Very recently oil has been exploited and its potentiality has paved a good road to Libya’s prosperity.
Libya imports textile goods, cereals and machinery. It exports palm dates, maiz and recently some oil. Monetary unit: Libya Pound.
Religion:Moslem and few Christians
Defence: In 1953 Libya concluded a treaty of Alliance and friendship with Britain. Libya has a limited size of army, and Britain has supplied her with craft and offices to establish a naval training school.
Sudan
Geographical Situation: The republic of Sudan proclaimed its independence on January 1, 1956. It boundaries are in the north, the Egyptian region of the U.A.R and Libya, in the east, Ethiopia and the Red Sea, in the south, Congo Republic (Leopoldville) Kenya and Uganda, and in the west, Chad and Central African Republic
Area:968,400,000 sq. miles
Population:11,400,000
Capital: KHARTOUM, other important towns are: Omdurman, Kassala, Port Sudan etc.
Language: Official is Arabic, English and different tribal tongues are also spoken
Government:Sovereign Republic.
After the military takeover in November 1958, Marshal Ibrahim Abboud came into power as President of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces and Prime Minister of the Republic of Sudan.
In December 1959, President Abboud created a con¬stitutional Reform Commission under Chief Justice Abu Rauat, saying that he was considering means through which the citizens could play a more effective part in the government of the country.
The Council of Ministers. whose chairman is the Prime Minister, EI Ferik Abboud, exercises the functions of the government.
The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, presided over by Marshal Abbound, is the highest ruling body in the Sudan, and is composed, purely of military leaders.
The council of Ministers, on the other hand, is composed partly of military leaders who are also members of the Supreme Council, and partly of civilians who are not members of the Supreme Council.
Head of State:General (Ferik) Ibrahim Abbound.
General Abbound is the president of the Supreme council of Armed Forces, Prime Minister and Minister of Defence.
General Abbound, British trained Commander of the Army, rose to power in a bloodless coup on November 17, 1958. When he relieved the Prime Minister, Abdullah Kahlil and his colleagues of their Posts, General Abbound said the parliamentary democracy was suffering from political wrangling and self-seeking leaders, and the army was putting an end to corruption and bringing back security and stability for all.
Born in Mohammed Gol of the Red Sea, on October 26, 1900, General Abbound is a military engineer who has passed through all army commissioned ranks to colonel and has held corps and staff appointments.
General (Ferik) Ibrahim Abbound has his elementary education in Sudan, and in 1915 he joined the Gordon Memorial College at Khartoum, where he studied for three years. After a long military service he was appointed General in 1956.
Later in 1958 he became Al Ferik or Marshal of Sudanese Armed forces.
During the Second World War he commanded the Sudan Defense Force in the Eritrean (Northern Ethiopia) and North African Campaigns.
Economic Development: Sudan is building dams on the Nile for electric power and agricultural irrigations. It is expanding its economic development mostly in agriculture. The most spectacular example of successful irrigation techniques in the Sudan is the Gazira, where 1,000,000 artificially watered acres produce the bulk of the cotton crop. Work is proceeding rapidly on the Managil Extension which will draw water from the Senar Dam and irrigate an adjoining area nearly equal to Gezira in size.
It exports cotton, cotton-seeds, gum, hides and some cereals. Principal imports of Sudan are textiles, iron and steel ware, motor vehicles, machinery, flour, coffee, bags and sacks, petroleum products, medicines and tobacco.
Monetary unit: Sudanese PoundS.
Religion:Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: Sudan has a well organized army
Morocco
Geographical Situation: Morocco, which became independent on March 2, 1956, is situated in North African. Its boundaries are in the north the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean sea, in the east Algeria, n the South Spanish Sahara and Algeria and in the west the Atlantic.
Area:174,500 sq. miles
Population:10,000,000
Capital: RABAT, other important towns are: Tangier, Casablanca, Fez and Marakesh
Language: Official Arabic: Berber and French are also spoken
Government:Constitutional monarch. In May, 1958. H.M. King Mohamed V promulgated a royal charter providing for the establishment of a Deliberatice Assembly which is to share with him the exercise of legislative power.
The character also stressed the principle of individual and collective responsibility of Cabinet Ministers to the monarch, and provides for elections for rural and municipal councils which in turn elect representatives to the Deliberative Assembly.
Ruler H.M. King Mohammed Ben Youssef V.
King Mohammed V of Morocco is 49 years of age and is one of the few monarchs who has successfully led a revolutionary movement.
As Sultan Sidi Mohammed been Yussef the French released him fro jail in 1928, at the age of 17, so that he might succeed his fathr on the throne of Morocco. Being a traditional Arab ruler, however, did not prevent him keeping in the closest possible touch with Moroccan political leaders. This resulted in his becoming leader of the all powerful nationalist Istiqlal Party formed during the war.
The French deposed him in 1953 when he had the enmity both of the French settlers and the hereditary tribal leaders, led by El Glaoui, aged Pasha of Marrakesh. He was exiled to Madagascar. His absence, however, only turned him into a national hero and the French brought him back to Morocco in November 1955, Four months later he was leading Morocco to independence and on August 18, 1957 he was enthroned as Kid.
His fighting, revolutionary past enables him to hold together the warlike berber tribesmen of the mountains and the new proletariat of the towns.
His advocacy of new methods of farming and modern methods in education, put into practice with his own children, have from time to time aroused the resentment of orthodox Muslims.
Economic Development: Morocco has made good progress in agricultural and mineral exploitation. Dams are under construction to utilize electric power and water irrigation system. Morocco exports cereals, fruits and vegetables, espartograss, skins and hides, wool, phosphates, manganese, iron ore, lead and zinc, it imports petroleum products, agricultural and other machinery, medicines, cotton goods and spices.
Monetary unit – Moroccan Franc.
Religion:Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: Since its independence in 1956, Morocco has a well organized army of about 20,000 man-strong.
Tunisia
Geographical Situation: The North African State of Tunisia proclaimed its independence on March 26, 1956. Its boundaries are in the north and in the east, the Mediterranean, in the south, Libya, and in the west, Algeria.
Area:48,39 sq. miles
Population:,800,000
Capital: TUNIS, other important towns are, La Goulette, Sfax, Sousse and Kairouan
Language: Arabic is official, Berber and French are also spoken
Government:Republic The executive power is vested by the Constitution in the President, who is elected for five years and may be re-elected for two additional terms. Legislative power is vested in a National Assembly elected by a universal suffrage, but neither the President nor his Cabinet are responsible to the assembly.
Head of State:Habib Ben Ali Bourguiba
President Bourguiba of Tunisia is generally regarded by Tunisians as the man who has done the most in the struggle for his country’s independence.
He has expressed a deep affection for France and has made it clear in political campaigns directed by other Arab states or by the Russians that he is firmly attached to the West.
He was born in a small fishing village near Tunis in 1903, went to a French lycee, read law in Paris and married a French woman.
Returning to Tunisia, he became one of the leaders in the Dominant Destour Muslim freedom movement and then in the more Westernised but outlawed Neo-Destour, which he helped to from, exiled by the French and imprisoned, his devotion to his second country (France) remained undiminished. When the Germans released him in 1942 in the hope that he would bring the Tunisians to their side, he did the reverse, his sole object being to rid Tunisia of foreign rule.
After the war the French imprisoned him again. But he negotiated for internal autonomy and got it in 1955. Returning from exile, he became the first Prime Minister of independent Tunisia in 1956. In July 1957, wlen Tunisia became a Republic he was chosen as the first President.
In view of his own struggle for freedom, he sympathizes with the Algerian nationalists but always tries to help their relations with France.
One of his declared aims is to build a North African Federation Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria on the principle with inter-dependence.
Economic Development: Agriculturally developed Tunisia, has 80% of her trade with France and Algeria. Mining is the country’s most important industry. The outstanding mineral wealth consists of phosphates, iron, lead and zinc. She exports cereals, olive oil, phosphates, iron ore, lead, wine and many other items. Tunisia imports cotton made goods and silks, iron and steel, machinery, farm commodities and provisions.
Monetary unit: Tunisian dinar
Religion:Predominantly Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: Tunisia has a limited army
Ghana
Geographical Situation: Situated in the West coast of Africa, Ghana, which won its independence on March 6, 1957, is bounded in the west by Ivory Coast, in the north by Upper Volta, in the east by Togo and in the south by the Atlantic Ocean.
Area:9,000 sq. miles
Population:6,690,70
Capital: ACCRA, other important towns are: Secondi, Takoradi, Kumasi, Cape Coast, Koforidua and Ho.
Language: Official is English, more than 60 dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The legislative power is exercised by a Parliament which consists of the President and the National Assembly. The President is elected by a direct vote of the people for a period of five years, and his election is linked with the election of members to the National Assembly, by a universal adult suffrage, in such a way that the President will be the leader of the party which commands a majority in Parliament. The President is the Head of State as well as Head of Government, and he is assisted by a Cabinet drawn form members of Parliament.
Head of State:Dr. Kwame (Francis Nwia-Kofi) Nkrumah
Dr Nkrumah is Prime Minister and President of the Republic of Ghana. He was in prison o charges of sedition and fomenting the so called, an illegal general strike, when his Convention People’s Party swept to pear in the first general elections in February 1951. He was released by the British governor to form a government.
Son of a goldsmith, Dr. Nkrumah was born on September 21, 1909. He was educated at mission schools and at the teacher training college at Achimota. In 1935 he left the Gold Coast as it was then called, to study at Lincoln and Pennsylvania Universities in the United States. He also studied in England at London University where he joined Gray’s Inn to study law. While in London, he played a leading part in several West African organizations. At the end of 1947 he returned home to become general secretary of the newly-formed United Gold Coast Convention the first popular nationalist movement for self-government founded by Dr, J.B. Danquah.
In the summer of 1949, impatient with the progress, he broke away from the U.G.C.C. and formed the Convention People’s Party to campaign for immediate self-government. He is now life chairman.
After his election nsuccess while in prison, Dr. Nkrumah was made the leader of government business, and in 1952 was given the title of Prime Minister. He became president of Ghana when it became a Republic on July 1, 1960.
In the preface to his autobiography, “Ghana,” (1957). Dr. Nkrumah wrote: “Ghana’s independence will be incomplete unless it is linked up with the liberation of other countries in Africa.”
In a radio broadcast on July 1. 1960, after he became President, he pledged that Ghana would not relax efforts to forester the concept of African unity and the creation of a real political Union of African States.
Economic Development: Ghana’s economy is based on cocoa production, but plans are well advanced to carry out the Volta river dam project to furnish power for an aluminum industry and other manufactures. Main imports are manufactured goods and constructional materials. Main exports are cocoa, gold, manganese ore, timber and diamonds.
Monetary unit: Ghanaian pound.
Religion:Moslem, Christian and Animist
Defence: Ghana has recently established Air and Naval Schools which are the nucleus of her non-ground forces. The army is organized by British Officers.
Guinea
Geographical Situation: Guinea proclaimed itself an independent state of October 2, 1958, and is situated in the West coast of Africa. It is bounded in the north by Portuguese Guinea and Senegal, in the north-east by the Mali Republic, in the east by Ivory Coast, in the south by Liberia and Sierra Leone and in the west by the Atlantic.
Area:97,000 sq. miles
Population:2,500,000
Capital: CONAKRY, other important towns are: Kankan, Boke, Milo etc
Language: Official is French, tribal dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The constitutional law, voted by the National Assembly, was voted on November 10, 1958, and was promulgated on the 12th, of the same month.
The president of the Republic assisted by a Cabinet, exercises the power of the Government f the Republic. Re-legible the President of the Republic is elected by a universal suffrage for a period of seven years. He alone is responsible to the National Assembly for the policy of his Cabinet.
Head of State:President Sekou Toure was born on January 9, 1922 the son of a farmer. He was raised as a Moslem. His formal education ended in his expulsion (for leading a food strike) from the Georges Poiret Technical College in Conakry at the age of 15. He completed his education himself.
He rose to his present prominence in the country by way of the trade union movement. In 1948 he was elected secretary general of the territorial union of the Confederation General de Travail (C.G.T) the largest of the three French trade union federation. Two years later he became secretary general of the confederation’s co-ordinating committee for French West Africa and Togoland.
In 1946 he was one of the founders of the African Democratic Rally (R.D.A) an autonomist poular front in twelve French African territories. It had close ties with French Communists but drove them out.
His career in the government started in 1950, when he was elected to the Guinea Legislative Assembly. In 1953 he became territorial counselor for Beyla and in 1955 Mayor of Conakry. The following year he won a seat in the French National Assembly.
He was been secretary general of the Guinea Democratic Party, the local branch of R.D.A since 1952. E was elected president of the C.G.T in Africa in 1956. In 1957 he was an organizer of the U.G.T.A.N the general Labour Union of Black Africa, which was independent of the C.G.T. In the same year he was made territorial counselor of Conakry and grand counselor for French West Africa. As a result of new French constitutional laws, he became Vice-Premier of the Governmental Council of Guinea equivalent to prime minister, under the French Governor.
Economic Development: Guinea is developing its agricultural and mineral potentials. Main imports are manufactured consumer goods and constructional materials. Guinea exports coffee, bananas, palm kernels, iron ore and bauxite.
Monetary unit: Guinean France
Religion:Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: Guinea has an army of 2000 man-strong
Cameroon
Geographical Situation: The West African state of Cameroon, which achieved its independence on January, 1, 1960, is bounded in the north by Chad Republic, in the east by central African Republic, in the south by Congo Republic (Brazzaville), Gabon Republic, Spanish Guinea and the Atlantic, and in the west by British Cameroon and Nigeria.
Area:167,000 sq. miles
Population:,187,000
Capital: Younde, other bit towns are: Douala, Caroua, Manoua and Foumbana
Language: Official is French. Tribal dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The legislative power is exercised by only one National Assembly, whose members number one hundred, elected by a universal suffrage for a period of five years. The executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister who is invested by the National Assembly, with an absolute majority. The National Assembly was elected on April 10, 1960. The President is head of State.
Head of State:Ahmadou Ahidjo President
Ahumadou Babatoura Ahidjo has been President of the Cameroon Republic since May 5, 1960. M Ahidjo’s party, the nationalist Union Camerounaise, is apparently pro-French but is against joining the French Community.
It is the leading party in the coalition government. M. Ahidjo formed it when he became Prime Minister under the French in February 1958.
A mber of the Fulani trib,e M. Ahidjo was born at Garoua (Cameroun) on May 10, 1922, and educated at the Ecole Superieure Administration at Yaounde. He was trained as a radio operator and did not take up a political career until 1947.
He was elected to the fist Representative Assembly of Cameroun in that year and ever since has been closely assisucated with the constitutional development of the country.
From 1955 to 1958 he was a member of the Assembly of the French Union and from 1956 to 1957 president of the Territorial Assembly for Cameroun. In May 1957 he was appointed Vice-Premier under the French governor.
Head of Government:Charles Assale – Prime Minister
Charles Assale (born on Novermber 4, 1911) has been Prime Minister of the Cameroun Republic since May 1960.
Ub tge dats wgeb M. Assale was campaigning for independence from French trusteeshp, together with other leaders of his Cameroun National Action Movement (M.A. N.C), he warned that political outbiding on the popular independence issue could lead only to trouble and politicla instability.
Two years before independence he said: “Independence does not rule out harmonious relatins with France.” These harmonious relations have since proved a reality. At that time M. Assale was in opposition to the prime Minister of the day, M. Andre-Marie M’Bida, whose ideas he thought too authoritarian.
Mr Assale, son of an African planter, began his career as a male nurse, studying at the nursing school at Ayos. He entered politics with the Cameroun Naitonal Action Movement, over whci he presided, and from 1946 to 1950 was Secretary-General of the General Workers Union (C.G.T) in Cameroun.
While holding this post, he became a member of France’s Economic Council, an advisory body in paris. On March 30, 1952, M. Assale was elected for the first time to the Territorial Assembly, beginning a legislative career which continued in the legislative Assembly, in which he representaed the National Acition Movemet, and the National Assembly, in which, since his eleciton on April 10, 1960, he heads the moderate Cameroun Progressist Group.
Before becoming Prime Ministr, M. Assale had scope for his administrative talents as Finance Minister in M. Ahmadou Ahiudjo’s governmetn from February 19, 1958 to Mya14, 1960, stepping into M. Ahidjo’s shoes when the latter became President of the Republic. M. Assale married Mlle Jeanne-Marie Ayo in 1935. They have eight children.
Economic Development: Cameroons is working to develop its economic potential in trade and agriculture. It exports coffee, cacao, manganese, timber, cotton and banana.
It imports iron made articles, machinery and textile goods, petroleum products and medicines.
Monetary Unit: Cameroon France
Religion:Moslem with Christian and Animist minority
Defence: Since independence, Cameroon is organizing its own defenses.
Togoland
Geographical Situation: The state of Togo which became independent on April 27, 1960, is situated I the West coast of Africa, and is bounded in the West by Ghana, in the East by Dhomey, in the North by Upper Volta an in the South by the Atlantic Ocean.
Area:,000 sq. miles
Population:1,100,000
Capital: Lome, other important towns: Anegho and Savalou
Language: Official is French, Many dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The legislative power belongs to the chamber of Deputies, whose members are elected by direct universal suffrage for a period of six years. The deputies and the Prime Minister possess the initiative of the law. The Chamber of Deputies can censure the government policy by a vote of absolute majority. The Chamber of Deputies can be dissolved by decree of the Prime Minister according to certain modalities.
The executive power is exercised by the Government directed by a Prime Minister. The Prime Minister, designated for a period equal to that of the term of office of the deputies receives the investiture from the Chamber, by a vote of simple majority: he appoints the ministers who constitute with him the Cabinet, and he can ask for a vote of confidence, which, if denied, must be only by an absolute majority, and in which case the dismissal of the government will result.
Head of State:Sylvanus Olympio Presidnet and Prime Minister
Sylvanus Olympio – both the mirror ad the conscience of Togo, who was born on September 6, 1902 is the son of a wealthy Ewe merchant whose forefathers had come to Africa from Brazil. After attending German and British schools through the secondary level at Lome, he studied for several years in England and in 1926 received a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the London School of Economics. Upon his return to West Africa he joined the Untied Africa Company as clerck in the firm, and in 1938 he became the General Manager of the Company.
Politics begun to command his attention in 1943, when Olympio was interned at Djougou in Northern Dahomey on suspicion of Pro-Allied sentiments and opposition to the Vichy government of France. He was one of the founders and prime movers of the Ewe Unification movement, the “Comite de l’Unite Togolasie,” and susbsequently became its vice president. In 1946 his Party garnered a majority in the elections for French Togoland’s first Representatives. Olympio’s Party boycotted the elections held in 1955 and the 1956 referendum in protest against French manipulation. Throughout this period, Sylvanus Olympio was a frequent petitioner before the U.N. General Assembly in New York, where he spelled out in eloquent detail the sins of the Trust Authority and had much to do with the 1956. U.N. decision that new and carefully-supervised elections should be held in Togo before ending the trust status. On April 27, 1958 elecitons, Mr. Olympio’s Party swept over the French supported one, and he was elected leader of the nation.
Prime Minister Olympio is an ardent nationalist and prefers to lead his country in “neutralist line.”
Economic Development: Togo is mainly an agricultural country. Among the items that Togo exports are cacao, coffee, maiz, palm oil and may others.
Imports are machinery, textiles and household materials.
Monetary unit: Togo-France
Religion:Christian, Moslem and Animst
Defence: Sicne independence Togo is organizing its own defenses.
Congo (Leopoldville)
Geographical Situation: Situated in Central Africa the Republic of Congo (Leopoldville) Proclaimed its independence on June 30, 1960. Its boundaries are: in the north, Central African Republic and the Republic of Sudan, in the south, Northern Rhodesia and Angola, in the east, Uganda, Ruanda-Urundi and Tanganyika, in the west, the Republic of Congo (Brazaville) and the Atlantic.
Area:905,000 sq. miles
Population:Over 13,000,000
Capital: LEOPOLDVILLE, other important towns are Elisabethville, Stanlyville, Luluabourge coquilhatville, Albertville, Jadotville and Matadi
Language: Official French, over 250 dialects are spoken by different tribes
Government:Republic
The Congo Republic has a President as head of State, and a Prime Minister as head of the Government, Legislative power is exercised by the National Assembly which is composed of two Houses Chamber of deputies and senate. The deputies are elected by a universal suffrage; and the Senate is filled (84 members) with tribal leaders and chiefs elected by the provincial assemblies, to represent the six provinces of Congo. The Prime Minister appoints his cabinet members, who are responsible to the parliament.
Head of State:Joseph Kasauubu President of the Congo Republic,
Mr Kasavubu first came into prominence, when as leader of his Abako Party (Alliance des Bakongos) he took an active part in the independence movement.
Mr Kasavubu was born in 1910 at Kuma Dizi, Tshela Territory, in Leopoldville Province. He attended the Roman Catholic Mbata Kiela Seminary School for eight years (1928-1936) and subsequently received a teacher’s certificate in 1940 from the Kabwe Seminary in Kasai Province. After a decade of service as chief cleark in the Government General, Mr Kasavubu joined the ABAKO and was elected president in 1954. He immediately began transforming it from a cultural society into a political organization. In 1957, he was elected burgomaster of the commune of Dendale and took the occasion of his installation to spring one of the first cautiously nationalistic speeches in modern Congolese history. He was arrested after the January 1959 Leopoldville riots, but was release in March of the same year.
Kasavuba, acutely conscious of the strong tribal traditions of the Bakongo people, has enhanced his political strength by enshrouding himself in a unique religious mystique combining both tribal animism and certain aspects of Christian revivalism.
At the end of the general election, when Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba was forming his government, a post was reserved for Mr. Kasavubu as Head of State, the reason being to avoid dissidence between the two rivals. Thus, Mr. Kasavubu became the President of the Republic of June 30, 1960.
Head of Government Patrice Lumumba – Prime Minister
Patrice Lumumba, 34 year old Prime minister, rose to power in the Congo on a call for “unity” for a country split into scores of disunited tribes after the Belgians with drew from the Congo.
A member of the Mutetela tribe, he was a post office clerk. He is leader of the National Congolese Movement (M.N.C) which was founded in October 1958 to press for independence for the Belgian Congo after President de Gaulle had offered independence to the French Congo.
He was imprisoned on charges of inciting people to overthrow the Belgian Governmetn but was released in time to attend the Brussels Conference (January 20 – February 20, 1960) which unexpectedly granted independence to the Congo within four and a half months. Following decisive victory at the polls, Mr. Lumumba was invited by the Belgians to form the Congo’s first national government.
His nearest rival, Joseph Kasavubu (10 per cent of the votes, compared with the MNC’s 27 per cent) was made President in a move to avoid dissension in the new republic.
Economic Development: The former Belgian colony of Congo now an independent Republic is one of the richest nations in Africa. It has made substantial advance agriculturally, industrially and commercially. Congo exports iron ores, cobalt, diamonds, tin, copper, manganese, timber and agricultural products, such as coffee and cotton.
It imports machinery constructional materials motor vehicles, pharmaceutical products petroleum products iron made materials steel and agricultural commodities.
Monitory unit: Congolese franc
Religion:Christian with Animist minority
Defence: The Republic of Congo has an army of 25,000 men, known as the “Force Publique.”
Somali – Republic
Geographical Situation: The Somali Republic which proclaimed its independence on July 1, 1960, is situated in the eastern part of the Horn of Africa. Its boundaries are in the north the Guilf of Aden, in the west Ethiopia, in the east the Indian Ocean, and in the South Kenya.
Area:88,000 sq. miles
Population:1,86,584
Capital: MOGADISCIO other important owns are: Hargeissa, Berbera, Buro, etc
Language: Arabic, Somali, English and Italian
Government:Republic
The legislative power is exercised by the National assembly, which consists of deputies elected by universal, free, direct and secret suffrage or of deputies by right.
Each legislature is elected for a period of five years. The president is elected by the national assembly and becomes head of the state. The presented has the right to dissolve the national assembly before the end of its term of office, after having hearted the opinion of the president of the Assembly.
The executive power is functioned by the government whose head is the Prime Minister, appointed by the president of the republic. The government is composed of the prime minister and the ministers, who are responsible to the National Assembly. The president of the republic can dismiss the prime minister as well as the ministers who are appointed by him on the proposal of the prime minister.
Head of State:Aden Abdulla Osman – Presidnet
Newly chosen president of the Somali Republic and former president of the Somalia legislative assembly, ABDULLAH OSMAN, 52, is warm, quiet, moderate, and skillful in reconciling disputes. From 1929 to 1941, he worked in various capacities with the Italian Administration. He was president of the Somali Youth Leagae from 1954 to 1956 and took over again the 1958 after his successor, Hagi Mohammed Hussein, was expelled for pursuing an extremist policy. During the trusteeship period Osman served as vice-president of the Territorial council and as presented of the Legislative Assembly. In foreign affairs, he is a “neutralist” with inclination towards the west.
Head of Government Dr. Abdi Raschid Ali Shermarche – Prime Minister
Dr Shermarche, the first prime minister of Somali republic was born in Harrarder in Obia district.
In 1932 he entered a local Konan school, after which he went to Mogadiscio to attend an elementary school. He entered a government service, and a year later he left it and shifted his interest to economic activities.
It was during the British control of the former Italian territory that Dr. Abdi Rashid was able to continue his interrupted education.
Upon the completion of his studies in administration, Dr. Shermarche was given a post in his field of study. Which he held until the British handed over the administration of the territory to Italy. During the trusteeship period, he started again his studies in administration in which he graduated in 1952. The following year, he went to Italy for his advanced studies.
He returned to Somalia in 1954. Later he was enrolled in the High Institute of economic studies in Rome, where, after a three years work he took his doctorate in political science, from the University of Rome.
Dr Abdi Rascid Shermarche is one of the first members of the Somali Youth League when the party was founded. In the 1959 election, he was elected member of the Legislative Assembly. In 1956, he represented Somalia at the Bandung Conference. He became Prime Minister of Somali Republic in July 1960.
Economic Development: Somalia is a land of nomads, wandering form place to place looking for grazing pastures and water. Its economy is based on cattle grazing. The government is encouraging for a settlement and agricultural development. Among the chief exports, are bananas, incense, skins and hides. It imports cereals, agricultural commodities machinery and textiles.
Monetary unit: Somalos
Religion:Predominantly Moslem
Defence: Somali is organizing it own defenses.
Madagascar
Geographical Situation: The island of Madagascar which proclaimed its independence on July 30, 1960, is entirely bounded by the Indian Ocean and its situated off the shores of South-Eastern Africa
Area:30,163 sq. miles
Population:5,090,000
Capital: Tananariv, other important towns are: Majunga, Tamatave, Diega, Suarez, Fianarantsoa and Tulear
Language: Official Malgash and French
Government:Republic:
Madagascar voted its constitution on April 29, 1959-. The legislative power is exercised by two Assemblies: the National assembly elected for five years by direct universal suffrage, and the Senate, designated for six years. The president of the republic, who is at the same time head of government, is the holder of the executive power. He is elected for seven years by a college comprising members of the national assembly and of the senate, members of provincial councils, and delegates of municipal and rural assemblies.
Head of State:Philibert Tsiranana – president and prime minister. Philibert Tshiranana, who as president of the Malagasy republic (formerly the French colony of Madagascar) also combines the functions of Prime minister and minister of defence, is the chief architect of his country’s independence and at the same time, one of the leading champions of Franco-African co-operation.
He was born on October 18, 1912 in a mountain village in Northern Madagascar, he was twelve before he went to school but proved a brilliant students, becoming a teachers and later a professor. He has retained the practical outlook of his peasant background.
In 1946 he was selected for training at the Ecole Normale (Teachers’ College) of Montepellier in France and on his return to Tananarive was appointed professor of technical education.
About 1945 M. Tsiranana joined the Socialist Party. In 1952 was returned unopposed as a councilor in the Madagascar Representative Assembly. In 1956 he was elected deputy to the National Assembly in Paris from the Cote Ouest constituency of Madagascar. In the same year M. Tsiranana founded his own party the Parti Social Democrate (P.S.C) whose philosophy is based on Christian Socialism.
During the revision of the status of France’s African colonies in 1957 and 1958 M. Tsiranana served as vise President of Madagascar’s local cabinet under the French governor and president of the provisional government.
He reached perhaps the greatest moment in his political carer on May 1, 1959, when he was voted first president of the Malagasy Republic. Under the constitution he is also prime minister.
On July 23, 1959 general de Galle appointed him minister adviser to the French community. M. Tsiranana’s P.S.D party won a general election in September 1960.
Economic Development: Madagarscar is predominantly agricultural with cattle raising as chief occupation. There are several food-processing and textile plants. Its products are: rice, coffee, sugar, cacao, fiber, graphite and mica. Chief exports are: coffee, rice and tobacco. Chief imports: machinery, textiles, motor vehicles, pharmaceutical products etc.
Monitory unit: Malgash franc
Religion:Mainly Christian
Defence: Since its independence, Madagascar is organizing its own defense.
Dahomey
Geographical Situation: The west African state of Dohomey, which proclaimed its independence on August 1, 1960, is bounded in the west by Togoland, in the north by Niger and Upper Volta, in the south by the Atlantic, ad in the east by Nigeria
Area:45,000 sq miles
Population:1,719,000
Capital: PORTO NOVO, other important towns: Cotonu, Parakou and Abomey
Language: Official is French Tribal dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The republic of Dahomey voted its Constitution on February 14, 1959. The legislative power is exercised by a legislative assembly elected by an absolute majority. The judiciary power constitutes an independent authority of the legislative and executive.
Head of State:Mr. Hubert Maga – Prime Minister
Hubert Maga is leader of the Democratic Rally of Dahomey, a moderate nationalist party which fully supports the independence of Dahomey within the French Community which was achieved on August 1, 1960.
M Maga was born in August 1916 at Parakou. He was educated at the Ecole Normale de Goree, became a school, teacher, ad until 1951 was headmaster of a school at Nabitingou.
His political career began in 1947 when he was made a territorial councilor. At that time M. Maga belonged to the Dahomian Progressive Union, the party led by his rival, M. Sourou Migon Apithy. But left this party in 1951 to form the Groupemnet Ethnique de Nord, which in January 1953, became the Dahomian Popular Movemetn and four years later the Dahomian Democratic Rally.
A depaty for Dahomey to the French National Assembly from 1951 to 1958, M. Mago was a frim supporter of M. Leopold Senghor of Senegal in his efforts towards African unity.
M Maga was under secretary for labour in the French Cabinet headed by M Felix Gaillard from November 1957 to May 1958. He was grand councilor for art for Dahomey from 1948 to 1957. He held the post of Minister of labour and social affairs in the dahomey governmental d on April 2, 1959 was elected to the legislative assembly of the dahomey republic. He became a member of the senate of the French community on April 30, 19959 and was elected prime minister of Dahomey on May 18, 1959.
Economic Development: Dahomey is an agricultural country producing coconut, olive palm products, cotton, milled sorgho. Chromite and iron ore deposits were discovered recnelty, also large quantities of rutile and ilmenite. It exports palm products cotton and coffee. It imports machinery, textiles, motor vehicles etc
Monitory unit: Dahomey Franc
Religion:Majority: Animist: with Christian and Moslem minority
Defence: Since independence Dahomey is organizing its own defences.
Niger
Geographical Situation: Formerly known as part of French West Africa, Niger proclaimed its independence on August 3, 1960. Its boundaries are in the north Algeria and Libya, I the east Chad, in the west upper Volta and Mali rep., and in the south Nigeria and Dahomey.
Area:495,000 sq miles
Population:2,500,000
Capital: NIAMEY, other important towns are: Zinder, Agades, Tahoua.
Language: Official is French. There are also tribal dialects
Government:Republic
The republic of Niger voted its constitution on February 25, 1959. The legislative Assembly elected on December 1958 by universal suffrage for five years exercise the legislative power. The president of the council, invested with an absolute majority by the assembly is chief of the execute. The independence of the judiciary authority is guaranteed by the constitutions.
Head of Government:Hamani Diori – Prime Minister
Hamani Diori became prime minister of the Niver in December 1958 when he replaced his principal rival, diiho Bakary, leader of the Sawaba (Liberty) Party as head of government
M Bakary advocated a vote of “no” in France’s 1958 constitutional referendum, which would have meant immediate independence for the Niger. Bu the country preferred to become a member state of the French community. Independence cam eon Augut 3, 1960.
As the beginning gof 1959 M. Diori annulled the election of Sawaba deputies, consolidating the supremacy of his Niger Progressive party which is the local section of the autonomist popular front movement. The African Democratic Rally. M. Diori’s party now holds all the seats in the legislative assembly and all the ministerial portfolios.
He was born on June 16, 1916 at Soudoure, was trained as a teacher at the William punthy school in Dakar Senegal. In 1946 he became one of the earliest members of the African democratic Rally (R.D.A) founded his Niger progressive party and was elected deputy from the Niger to the French national assembly.
He continued as deputy until 1951 and was re-elected in 1956 to serve until 1958. From June 21, 1957 until December 9, 1958 he was a vice-president of the national assembly, and on March 13, 1958 he became a member of the European parliamentary assembly.
In the Niger he was a territorial councilor from March 1957 to December 1958. He became prime minister of Niger’s provisional government on December 18, 1958 and prime minister of the republic on January 5, 1959.
Economic Development: The chief economic apparatus are crop growing and livestock. The main market crop is ground nuts which accounts for three quarter of exports. It also exports livestock, meat, hides, and skins. Mineral products include tungsten, tin and salt. It imports machinery, textiles, motor vehicles, pharmaceutical products, agricultural machinery and petroleum products.
Monitory unit: Niger Franc
Religion:Mainly Moslem
Defence: Niger, as an independent state, is organizing its own defenses.
Upper Volta
Geographical Situation: The independent republic of upper volta which is in central west Africa, proclaimed its independence on August 5, 1960. It is bounded in the north and west by the Mali republic, in the east by Niger and Dahomey, in the south by Ivory Coast, Ghana and Togoland.
Area:106,000 sq mils
Population:,500,000
Capital: OUAGADOUGOU, other important towns are: Bobo, Dioulasso, Batie
Language: Official is French Tribal dialects are also spoken
Government:Republic
The republic of Upper Volta voted its constitution on February 28, 1959 (approved by referendum on March 15, 1959). The legislative power is exercised by a legislative assembly of seventy five members, elected for a period of five years by a universal suffrage. The executive power is exercised by the president of the council (invested with an absolute majority by the legislative assembly)
Head of government:Maurice Yameogo – Prime Minister
In January 1959 M. Yameogo took part in the constituent assembly of the Mali Federation, although he did not share the Federalistic tendencies of an important section of his party the Volta Democratic Union (U.D.V).
A few weeks later the constituent assembly of the upper Volta adopted a form of constituon which contained no reference to the Mali federation, and committed upper Volta to the rejection of the federalization formula.
M Yameogo was born on December 31, 1921 at Koudougoa and is a member of the Mossi race.
He began his political career in 1946 when he became a territorial councilor. In 1946 he began to work in the administration of French West Africa and in the same year became a member of the Grand council of French West Africa (A.O.F).
M Yameogo is a trade unionist, and was vice-president of the territorial branch of the confederation franchise de Travailleurs Chretiens (C.F.T.C) in 1954. He later belonged to all the parties which were formed in upper Volta before he became a member of U.D.V the local section of the autonomist African Democratic Rally (R.D.A) in January, 1958.
He was given his first government post in 1957 as minister of Agricultural economy. In the following year he was appointed minister of the interior. In July 1958 he was elected prime minister of the upper Volta government.
M Yameogo became prime minister of the upper Volta republic on April 25, 1959 and also holds the posts of minister of information justice and ex-soldiers.
Economic Development: The principal industry of upper Volta is livestock, for which there are fairly favorable natural conditions and a good proportion of which is raised for export, exports are meat, butter, hides, cotton, cattle, karate and groundnuts.Chief crops are ground nuts, rice, cotton, sorgho and millet. Its imports are manufactured goods agricultural machinery and textiles.
Monitory unit: Voltaic franc
Religion:Christian and Moslem minority
Defence: Since its independence the republic of upper Volta has started organizing its own defenses.
Ivory Coast
Geographical Situation: The republic of Ivory Coast, which proclaimed its independence on August 7, 1960, is bounded in the east by Ghana, in the west by Liberia and Guinea, in the north by Upper Volta and Mali republic and in the south by the Atlantic.
Area:13,500 sq miles
Population:,000,000
Capital: ABIDJAN, other important towns are Bouake, Daloa, Mal, Sassamdra
Language: Official is French Tribal dialect are also spoken
Government:Republic
The republic of Ivory Coast voted its constitution on March 26, 1959. The legislative power is exercised by only one assembly, elected by universal suffrage. The prime minister, invested by an absolute majority of the assembly, is the holder of the executive power. The legislative assembly, whose members number one hundred, was elected on April 12,. 1959 for a period of five years.
Head of government:M. Felix Houphouet-Boigny – Prime Minister
M boigny was the founder in 1946 of the African Democratic Rally (R.D.A) one of the strongest political movements in Black Africa, and is now its president. The R.D.A is an autonomist organization which links parties in twelve territories of former French Africa.
M Houphouet-Boigny has a long and distinguished recored in French politics. He represented the Ivory Coast in the French Constituent Assemblies and in the national assembly from 1945 to 1959 and held posts in asuccessive French cabinets from January 1956 to May 1959.
He was born on October 18, 1905 at Yamoussokio, studied at the Ecole de Medecine in Dakar, Senegal, ad from 1925 to 1940 worked as an intern in native dispensaries.
He retured to his father’s cocoa plantations in 1940, and was elected chief of his canton. From 1957 to 1958 he was president of the Federal Grand Council of French West Africa, and was appointed president of the Ivory Coast Territoiral Assembly in 1957.
He was invested as Primary Minister of the Ivory Coast on May, 20, 1959 resigned from the French cabinet led by M. Debre.
On July 23, 1959 he was named minister adviser to the French community but resigned on September 9, 1960, just over a month after he had proclaimed the Ivory Coast’s independence (August 7).
M Houphouet-Boigny is expected t become the Ivory Coast’s first president. The draft constitution presented to the National assembly in Abidian on October 18, 1960 would give him complete executive power, and make him responsible only to the electorate
Economic Development: Economically, Ivory Coast is rated as the most developed territory of former French West Africa. Diamonds are mined and timber is also an important industry of the country. Its main exports are coffee, coca and timber. Its imports are manufactured goods, machinery petroleum products and pharmaceutical products.
Monitory unit: Ivory Coast franc
Religion:Christian Moslem and Animist
Defence: Since its independence Ivory Coast has began organizing its own defenses
Chad
Geographical Situation: Formerly known as part of French Equatorial Africa, the independent republic of Chad proclaimed its independence on August 11, 1960. It is bordered in the north by Libya, in the east by Sudan, in the south by the Rep. of Cameroon and central African republic, and in the west by the republic of Niger
Area:496,000 sq. miles
Population:2,750,000
Capital: FORT LAMY, other important towns: Moundou, For-Archambault and Abeche
Language: Official is French: Arabic and other dialects are spoken
Government:Republic
The republic of Chad voted its constitution on March 31, 1959. The legislative power is exercised by only one assembly, elected by a universal suffrage, for a period of five years. The executive power is exercised by the Prime Minister, designated by the assembly with a simple majority and then invested with his ministers by a two third majority. The legislative assembly with its eighty-five seats, was elected on March 31, 1959.
Head of government:Francois Tombalbaye – President and Prime Minister
Francois Tombalbaye is 50 years of age. He became president of the Chad Republic on August 12, 1960, the day after his country became independent of France. He is a member of the moderate Chad popular party, the local section of the autonomist African Democratic Rally.
M Tombalbaye was born at Bodaya, and was first a businessman and then a school official. He is a former president of the Union des Syndicats Autonomes due Chad.
He was a territorial councilor in 1952 and again from 1957 to 1959, and a member of the Grand council of French Equatorial Africa from 1957-59.
From 1957 to 1959 he was vice-president of the Grand council.
He has been a member of the Chad Legislative Assembly since 1959 and was invested as Prime Minister on March 26 of that year.
Economic Development: The semi-arid land of Chad is pastoral and agricultural. The chief product, which is the backbone of Chad’s economy, is cotton.
Cotton accounts for four fifths of exports. Other exports are fish and cocoa.
It imports manufactured goods, agricultural machinery and pharmaceutical products.
Monitory unit: Chad franc
Religion:Mainly Moslem with Christian minority
Defence: After its independence on August 11, 1960, Chad has begun organizing its own defense.
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
GeographicalSituation :The Central African Republic, which proclaimed its independence on August 13, 1960, is bounded in the east by Sudan in the west by the Cameroon Republic, in the north by Chad, and in the south by the two Congos (Brazzaville and Leopoldville).
Area :238,224 sp.miles.
Populatiion :1.130,000.
Capital :Bangui. Other important towns are: Berberati,and Bambari.
Language :Officials is French.Tribal dialects are also spoken
Government :Republic.
The Central African Republic voted its constitution on February 9,1959.
The legislative power is exercised by an Assembly, for a period of five years. The Prime Minister, elected by the Assembly (absolute majority in the first round, relative majority in the second round) is the holder of the executive power. The Judiciary power functions independently of the legislative and executive authority. The legislative Assembly (with fifty members) was elected on April 5,1959.
Head of the Government : David Dacke – Prime Minister.
David Dacko became Prime Minister of the Central African Republic (formerly Oubangi Chari, and now and member state of the French Community) on April 30,1959 after the death in an air crash of his cousin, M.Barthelemy Boganda.
He is 28 years old, and a former Minister of the Interior, Economy and Commerce.
MDacko is leader of the ruling Movement pour  I’Evolution Sociale de L’Afrique Noire (,E.S.A.N.),the moderate pro-French party, founded by M. Boganda,which favorus the French Community.
In October 1959 M.Dacko dissolved the government by decree after and attempt to censure his had been made by a group that broke away from his party.
The group accused M.Dacko of attempting to by-pass the assembly and rule by decree,and accused the government of failure, particularly in the economic filed.
Economic Development : The principal occupation is agriculture. Almost all the land is savanna. The crops being cotton and coffee,account practically for the entire exports; gold and diamonds are mined in the cantry. Its imports are: agricultural machinery, motorvehicles and manufactured goods.
Monetary Unit : Central African franc.
Religion :Christian minorities and Animist.
Defince : As a new independent state, the Central African Republic has begun organizing its won defences since its independence.
CONGO (Brazzaville)
Geographical Situation :The former French territory of Congo, which became independent on August 15,1960, is bounded in the East by Congo  (Leopoldville), in the North by the Central African Republic and the Rep.of Cameroons, in the West by Gabon and the Atlantic and in the South by Congo (Leopoldville) and the Atlantic Ocean.
Area :132,046 sq.miles.
Population : 760,000.
Capital : Brazzaville, other towns : Pointe-Noire, MInduli
Language : Official French.
Government : Republic. The Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) voted its constitution on February 23,1959.The legislative power is exercised by a legislative Assembly elected by a universal suffrage for a period of five years. The executive power is exercised by the Prime Insister. Elected by the Assembly with an absolute majority (first round) or relative majority (second round).The legislative Assembly (sixty one seats) was elected on June 14,1959.
Head of State : Abbe Fulbert Youlou-President of the Congo Republic (now a member state of the French community)is a Roman Catholic priest. He was “suspended” by the Bishop of Brazzaville in 1956 for taking part in politics and standing for election against the wishes of the ecclesiastical authorities,
He is the leader of the ruling Democratic Union for the Defense of African Interests. He founded the party, which is the local section of the autonomist African Democratic Rally.Hi favours a one-party system as  the best type of Parliamentary democracy for the Congo, claiming that the two-party system is out of date for the new African states.
The son of a businessman.Abbe Youlou was born at Momboula on the outskirts of Brazzaville on June 9,1917.
He was educated in the Mission School at Brazzaville and later at a seminary in neighboring Gabon.
In 1946, after his ordination he became a priest in Brazzaville.
He fought his first political campagn ten years later, but was sunsuccessful in his attempt to win  the Middle congo seat in the French National Assembly. Later in the same year--- on November 18 --- he was elected Mayor of Brazzaville.
He was elected to the Territorial Legislative Assembly in March 1957 and served in the cabinet as Minister of Agricure from May 1957 to December 1958. He became prime Minister on December 8, 1958.
He formed a new government on July 4, 1959 with himself as prime Minister and Minister of Justice and Foreign Affairs. He became president of the republic, retaining the post of prime Minister, on November 21, 1959, and proclaimed independence on August 15,1960.
Economic
Development: The country is an agricultural land with tropical forests
Which supply valuable timber of special qualities. Crops
Produced are: coffee, cotton, sorgho, bananas, pine apple,
Tobacco and cacao. Most of the products, pine apple,
Including timber. Its imports are: manufactured goods,
Motor vehicles, machinery and pharmaceutical products.
Currency: Congo franc.
Religion:  Christians and Animists.
Defence : Congo isorganizing its own defence since since its independence
G A B O N
Geographical Situation The Republic of Gabon, which proclaimed its independence on August 17,1960, is situated in the West coast of Africa.
Area103,089 sq. miles.
Population : 403,000.
Capitol:LIBREVILIE, other important towns: Port-Gentil, and Makolou.
Language: French is official. Other dialects are also spken.
Government:    Republi.
The Republic of Gabon voted its constitution on February 19,1959. The legislative powe is exercised by a legislative  Assembly, elected by a universal suffrage, for a period of five years.The executive power is vested on the prime Minister (elected by the Assembly with an absolute majority in the first two rounds of the ballot, with a relative majority in the third). The territorial Assembly (forty members) which was elected in 1958. And then a legislative Assembly on February 19,1959
Head of Government: Leon MBa-prime Minister of the Gabon Republic.
MMBa rose to his present position in Gabon through the ramks of the Civil service. He worked in the Army commissariat colonial administration and the customs service before taking up a political career.
He was born at Libreville on February 9,1902, and educated there at the college de sainte-Marie, becoming mayor of Libreville in 1956.
He was elected territorial councilor in 1952 under the banner of the Gabonese Democratic Bloc (B.D.G.), the local section of African Democratic Rally (R.D.A),a popular front, with autonomist aims linking parties in October 1958, and prime Minister of the Republic on February 19,1959.
In the referendum of September 1958, Gabon, a former state of French Equatorial  Africa. Chose to be an independent member state of the French Community.
Economic Development: Gabon is practically covered with tropical forest.
Religion:      Animist with Christian minority.
Defence:     since its independence, Gabon is organizing its own defences.
S E N E G A L
Geographical Situation: the Mali Federation which became independent on June 20, 1960, was formed of Senegal and sudan. On August 20, 1960, Senegal announced its secession from the federation, And at the same time it proclaimed itself an independent Sovereign state. The west African state of Senegal is bounded in The east by Mali Guinea and Gambia, in the west, by the Atlantic And in the noth, by Mauritania.
Area76,000,000.
Population 2,300,000
Capital:      DAKAR, other important towns are: St. Louis and Thies.
Language: official is French. Tribal dialects are also spoken.
Government: Republic. he Republic of Senegal voted its constitution on anuary 24, 1959, the legislative power is exercised by A legislative Assembly, elected by a universal suffrage for A period of five the president of the council (invested with an Absolute majority by the legilslative Assembly) holds the executive Power in its totality. The legislative Assembly (with its eighty members) Was elected on March 22,1959.
A new Senegalese constitution adapted on August 25, 1960, by the Senegalese constitution adapted on August The president is elected for a seven-years term, with
A possibility of further re-election, by an electoral college composed of the National Assembly and representatives of regional and municipal authorities.
(a) Head of State:  Leopold sedar senghor president.
Mr senghor, who was president of the Mali Federal As Sembly, and now, president of the Republic of Senegal Was considered almost certain to become the first pres dent of the Mali federation until his country seceded from it, causirg its break-up, on August 20, 1960.
M senghor and M Dia, wanted a loose and liberal federation, in opposition to M keita’s aim of strong centralization.
On September 6,M, senghor was elected president.
M senghor, who is 54 years old, has well absorbed the culture of France and he has an international reputation as a poet and philosopher.
He has always been an advocate of the emancipation and unity of Africa.
M senghor was born on October 9, 1906 at Joel. He studied in paris and in 1953 became the first west African to obtain his aggregation at the Sorbonne. He remained in France as a teacher.
He was mobilized in 1939 and taken prisoner by the Germans.
He was interned in various prison camps where he helped to organize prison resistance groups. Later he worked in the French resistance.
At the end the second world war he was elected Deputy for Senegal to the French constituent Assembly in Paris, sponsored by the French socialist party. He represented Senegal in both Constituent Assemblies and in the French National Assembly from 1946 to 1959.
In 1948 he left the socialist party to from his own party, the Senegalese Democratic Bloc. This later became the Senegalese Democratic Bloc. This later become the Senegal Progressist Union and in March 1959 the local section of the African Federation Party.
M Senghor is now the party’s secretary-general. Of a moderate ritht-wing tendency, it is the ruling party in Senegal.
M Senghor saved in the cabinet of MEdgar Faure from  February 1955 until January 24, 1956. He was a member of the Grand Council of French West Africa in 1957 and in the same year became a territorial councilor for Senegal.
A year earlier he had been elected Mayor of Thies.
(b) Head of Government: Mamadou jDia – Prime Minister.
Mamadou Dia is Prime Minister of the Republic of Senegal, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Minister of Relations with the French Community.Hi has always been a supporter of M. Leopold Senghor (President of Senegal) in his efforts towards African unity. He was one of the initiators of the short-lived Mali Federation, of which he was vice-president. M. Dia was born on July 18,1910 at Khombole. He studied at the Ecole Normale William Ponthy at Dakar, is an arts graduate and worked as a teacher.
He was general councilor of Senegal in 1946: from 1946 to 1957 was a member of the Grand Council of French West Africa. From 1948 to 1956 he was Senator for Senegal to the Council of the French Republic, and was elected deputy for Senegal to the French National Assembly on January 2, 1956. In November of that year he was elected Mayor of Diour bel. He was appointed territorial councilor in 1957.
In May 1957he was vice-premier under the French governor of the Senegal government, and in August 1958 was elected Prime Minister, Minister of Economy and International Relations. He was elected a deputy to the Senegal Legislative Assembly on March 22,1959. On April 4, 1959 he was elected Prime Minister of the Republic.He became vice-president of the government of the Mali Federation in April 1959. M. Dia is leader of the moderate Right Wing Senegalese Progressive Union (U.P.S.), which on March 25,1959 was transformed into the African Federalist Party (P.F.A.).
Economic Development : Senegal is an agricultural country. It produces mainly peanuts. Its exports include : maiz, millet, rice, cotton, peanut-oil and phosphates. It imports agricultural machinery, vehicles, pharmaceutical products, textiles and house hold furniture’s.
Monitary Unit : Senegalese franc.
Religion : Moslem, animst and Christian.
Defence : Senegal is in the process of organizing its won defences.
MALI REPUBLIC
Geographical Situation : The mail Republic, which was part of Mali Federation, that proclaimed its independence on June 20,1960, under the name of Sudan, became to be known as a separate independent state, right after the secession of Senegal from the Federation on August 20, 1960. It is bounded in the north, by Algeria, in the south by Guinea, the Upper Volta and Ivory Coast, in the east by Niger, in the west by Mauritania and Senegal.
Area: 464,865 sq. nukes.
Pipulation :3,700,000.
Capital :BAMAKO, other important towns : Gao, Kayes, Timbucktu.
Language : Official is French. There are tribal dialects.
Government : Republic.
The Mali Republic (formerly French Sudan Republic), voted its constitution on January 23, 1959. The legislative power is exercised by only one Assembly, elected by a universal suffrage for a period of five years, with one round majority ballot. The President of the Council, designated by the President of the Assembly, is invested with an absolute majority is guaranteed by the Constitution. The legislative Assembly (eighty members) was elected on March 8,1959.
Head of State :Modibo Keita – President and Prime Minister.
Modibo Keita, Prime Minister of the Mali Republic (formerly French Sudan) was one of the central figures in the events which led to the break-up of the short-lived mali Federation (French Sudan and French Senegal) on August 20, 1960.After differences in policy between the two countries had flared into a crisis, the Senegalese seceded. The Senegalese claimed that Mr.Keita, who was Prime Minister of  the Federation, was attempting  to stage a coup d’etat  when he declared a “state of urgency” and dismissed Senegal’s premier, M. Mamadou Dia, from his Federal post as Defense Minister. The  function between the Senegalese and Sudanese leaders arose over whether the Federation should have a strong central government as M. Keita wanted, or be a loosely-knit federation as advocated by the Senegalese leaders, M. Leopold Senghor and M. Dia. On September 22, following the break-up, the Sudanese Republic was renamed the Mali Republic. M. Keita was born at Bamako in 1915. At the age of 21 he became a teacher. He was one of the first members of the Autonomist African Democratic Rally (R.D.A.) and 1947 was elected secretary general of its Sudanese branch, the left wing Union Soudanaise.  This later became the African Federation Party.
Economic Development: The Northern region of Mali Republic is desert, but the Southern part is fertile and humid. The Sansanding dam, built on the river Niger, is used for irrigation system. Main exports of Mali Republic are: peanuts, cotton, maiz, millet, rice, Karatas, and timber. It imports agricultural machinery, pharmaceutical products, vehicles, textiles.
Monetary unit: Mali franc.
Religion: Moslem, animist and Christian.
Defense:  Mali  Republic is in the process of organizing its own defenses.
NIGERIA
Geographical Situation:Nigeria became an independent state within the British Commonwealth on October 1, 1960. Nigeria is situated in West Africa and its boundaries are, in the north Niger and Card, in the east British Cameroon and the Republic of Cameroon, in the west, Dahomey, in the south the Atlantic Ocean.
Area:339,169 sq.miles.
Population:36,000,000.
Capital:Federal capital Lagos; Principal towns: Ibadan, Kano, Port Harcourt, Kaduna, Ogbomoshu, Iwo, Iwo, Enugu, Sokoto.
Language:Besides native tongues, Arabic and English are spoken. English is official.
Covernment:As an independent country Nigeria is a member of British Commonwealth. Its government is a federal system. On Octobver 1, 1954 it became a federation comprising three regions: the Northern, the Eastern and the Western. Each regions has got its local government with a governor and a Prime Minister. The federal government seated at Lagos exercises all federal authority with the  governor  general and Federal Prime Minister at its head.
The Federal Legislature consist of tow houses. The lower house, the House of Representatives, is composed of 321 members elected by direct adult suffrage, universal in the Eastern and Western Regions, but confined to men in the Northern. The representation of the Regions is in proportion to their populations: the Northern Region returns 174, the Eastern Region 73, the Western Region 62 members, and the federal territory of Lagos three members.
The  Upper House is the Senate, with 12 members from each region, nominated by the Regional Legislatures, together with four members from Lagos and four special members nominated by the Governor-General. The Senate has revisionary or delaying powers. The Queen of United Kingdom is Queen of Nigeria, and she appoints a Govenor-General to carry out most of the functions of the Head of State.The Federal Prime Minister, who is Head of the Government, heads a coalition of his own party and the national council for Nigeria and the  Cameroons. The Council of Ministers is Nigeria’s Cabinet.
(a) Representative Head of State: Nnamedi  Azikiwe – Governor General.
DR NNAMEDI AZIKIWE who became Governor-General of the Federation of Nigeria on November 15, 1960, was the President of the Nigerian Senate. Formerly he was Premier of Eastern Nigeria and leader of the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons, Eastern Nigeria’s governing party.
Dr Azikiwe. Popularly known as “Zik” was born in 1904 in Northern Nigeria, son of a Government clerk. He was a brilliant pupil at Methodist schools and at the  age of 20 left Nigeria to continue his studies in the United States, financed by his father’s meager savings. There he had bitter struggles against adversity, poverty and loneliness but he paid his college fees by working his won way. After nine years he had gained tow honors degrees. M.A. (Philosophy) and M.Sc (Anthropology) at Lincoln and Pennsylvania Universities, honorary doctorates form Lincoln and Howard Universities and was a lectured in political science at Lincoln University.
On his way back to Africa in 1934 he stopped off in Ghana, then the Gold Coast, when he spent nearly three years acquiring journalistic and political experience for his project of furthering the Nationalist cause. On his return to Nigeria he quickly became one of the leading personalities in the Nationalist movement, and beginning with the well-known “west African Pilot” newspaper in Lagos, he established a chain of newspapers and campaigned vigorously gains Colonial rule.
When the National Council for Nigeria and the Cameroons was formed in 1944 “Zik” the idol of  his people, the Ibos, became its secretary-General. Two years later he was the president, firmly established as  first-class orator and organizer. He was a member of the old Central Legislative Council and the first leader of the N.C.N.C. Opposition in the Western House of Assembly.
In 1953 his party won 72 out of 97 seats in the Eastern House of Assembly  and Dr. Azikiwe became leader of the Government and Minister of local Government. When the 1954 Constitution came into force he became Eastern Nigeria’s first Premier. As Premier he initiated big educational programmes, introduced adult suffrage for the first time in Nigeria, reorganized the administration and established a House of Chiefs, or second chamber.
Dr Azikiwe is the author of a number of books on African and Nigerian nationalism and economics. He writes poetry, is fond of classical music and is devoted to his family, three boys and a girl.
He is firmly committed to a strong, united Nigeria.
(b) Head of Government: Alhaji Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa.
Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa is prime Minister of the Federation of Nigeria. He was born in 1912.,son of a District Head. His education Began in the elementary school in Tafawa Balewa, the village of his origin in Northern Nigeria, and he later qualified as a teacher from Katsina College.
His political ideas developed when he was studying  at London University (Institute of Education) and in 1946 he returned to Nigeria and entered politics as a rising man in the Northern People’s Congress party. He was a commoner among the aristocratic Fulani leadership of the Hausa people  but quickly gained influence and popular appeal.
By 1948 he was in the Federal Parliament and represented Nigeria  at a Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in London.
Sir Abubakar gained his first Ministerial post in 1952 when he became Minister of Works in the first Nigerian Council of Ministers.
In the House of Representatives (the Federal Legislature) he led the Northern People’s Congress, its largest party, and in 1957, after three years service as Minister of Transport, he became Nigeria’s first Prime Minister.
His Government at the time of independence in October 1960 was a coalition between the N.P.C. and the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons, whose leader, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, became the new Governor General.
Sir Abubakar is a devout Muslim, a conservative, a shrewd politician and  mediator who supports the West but has made it clear that the Federal Government should not as a matter of routione associate itself with any of the big power blocs.
He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth in May 1960, while in London for the final conference on Nigeria’s independence.
Economic Development:Nigeria is mainly an agricultural country. Among  its chief exports are cocoa, cattle, timber, hides and skins, palm kernels. Oil is also exploited.
Mineral exports include columbite (95% of the world) and tin ore. Coal is also produced, but it is used for local consumption. Imports are textiles, machinery, iron and steel manufacture, commercial vehicles, tobacco, petroleum products, medicine and drugs. Nigeria has made industrial progress as well.
Nigeria’s economic advance has made her to be prosperous in the rest of Africa. Its gross national income is the biggest among Africa, only surpassed by that of the Union of South Africa.
Monetary unit: Nigerian Pound.
Religion: Animist and Christian. Defense:Although Nigeria has been under British Protection, it maintains its own military organizations.
In April 1958 the government of the federation took over control of the Royal Nigerian Military forces, formerly part of the Royal West African Frontier Force.
The  forces now consist five battalions of the Queen’s won Nigeria Regiment, a Reconnaissance company, one Squadron of Field Engineers, and one Squadron of Signals.
The Naval  force was formally created in May 1958, its title is Royal Nigerian Navy.
MAURITANIA
Geographical Situation: Known as Islamic Republic of Mauritania, the country became an independent sovereign state on November 28, 1960, and is situated in N.W. Africa. It is bounded in the north by Spanish and French Sahara’s, in the east by Mali Republic, in the south by Senegal and Mali Republic, in the west, by the Atlantic Ocean.
Area: 419,000 sq. miles.
Population:623,800.
Capital:Nouakchott, other important towns: Akjoujt, Fort-Gouraud and Atar.
Language:Arabic is National while French is official. Berber is also spoken.
Government:Republic. The Republic of Mauritania voted its constitution on March 22,1959. The Legislative power is exercised by only one National Assembly, elected by universal suffrage for a period of five years. The executive power is visited on the Prime Minister, elected by the Assembly (absolute majority in the third round). The judiciary authority is independent of executive and legislative powers. The National Assembly (forty members) was elected on May 17,1959.
Moktar Ould Daddah, Prime Minister.
MDaddah is leader of the Islamic Republic’s fight to maintain its national borders against the claims of Morocco and Senegal. Senegal has claimed part of Mauritania (which is now a member state of French community) and Morocco claims that Mauritania is a Moroccan province. But M. Daddah has said that his country would fight any aggression aimed at partitioning the country.
“Mauritania wants to be a bridge between Arab and Black Africa,  belonging to neither block, but maintaining her won individuality.” He said in March 1960. M.Daddah was born in December 1924 at Boutilimit. He is a Moor. He studied at the University of Paris form 1949 to 1955, taking a degree in law and a diploma in Oriental languages. M. Daddah,  who is leader of the ruling Mauritania Regroupment Party, which stands for an independent Mauritania, was elected Prime Minister on January 14, 1958, after being vice-premier under the French governor from May 1957.
Economic Development:Economically, Mauritania is a backward state; iron and copper are mined in little quantity and the country exports gum Arabic. Cattle quantity and the country exports gum Arabic. Cattle breeding is also an important copper, salt, and drugs, and petroleum products.
Monetary unit: Manuritanian franc.
Religion: Moslem and Animist with Christian minority.
Defiance:Mauritania is organizing its own defiance system.
DEPENDENT COUNTRIES
MOZAMBQUE
Geographical Situation: the southe East African of Portugal is bounded in the west By the Rhodesias, in the north by Tanganyika and Nyasaland, In the east by the Indian ocean, in the south by the union of South Africa and Indian Ocean.
Area: 302,328 sq miles.
Population: 6,23,000.
Capital: Lorenco Marques, others big towns are Beira, Quelimaue.
Language:  Portuguese and native tongues.
Government: Administered as Portuguese Overseas territories.The Native people do not share any responsibility in governments
Ruler: portuese head of state.
Economic: Development: Mozambique is mainly an agricultural country.It exports also forest products Currency-portuguese Escudos.
Religion: Mainly Animists with Moslemsa and Christians.
Defence: Under Portuguese defence system.
SOUTHERN RHODESIA
Geographical Situation: situated in southern part of central Africa. S. Rhodesia is Bounded in the north by Northern Rhodesia and  Mozambique, in the east by Mozambique, in the south by south Africa and Bechuanaland, and in the west by Bechuanaland.
Area: 150,330 sq. miles.
Population: 2641,500.
Capital: Salisbury, principal towns: Bualawayo Umtali, Gwelo Fort Victoria, Que Que and Gatomma.
Language; Offical is English, native tongue are Bantu dialects.
Government; The self-governing territory of Southern Rhodesia has got its own local governmet with a governor at its   head. The European dominated government has a legislative Assembly,and there is a cabinet of minsters headed by a premier. African political movemetes are not represented in the governmentnoor any important post is given to a native citizen.There is a stong agitation from African political parties which favour African majority government. The European. Domination seems unlikely to surrender j’self. The National Democration party of Southern Rhodesia is the main African Political Body.
Politi. Leader; Joshua Nkomo.
Joshua Nkomo an exild leader of the National Democra-tic party of Southern Rhodesia, (he calls himself “directcr of external and international affairs”) is opposed to any plan to fedrate his country with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland “against the will of the Africans.”
He was president of the Southern Rhodesia African Nationl Congress when it was banned on February 26,1959.
Nkomo had been a social and was general sectary of the Rhodesian Railway Workeres’Union at Bulawayo when he became chairman fo the Bulawayo branch of the African Nationan Congress. Sir Godfrey Huggins, the prime minster (now Lord Malvern) asked him (April 1952) to go with the Southern Rhodesian delegation to London fer talks on the eonstitutional fature of the territory. Early in 1953 Nkomo in landon eritieised any proposeal to force Africans into the Fedratin. In 1958 he wanted the abolition of the Government’s colonial-stye African Affairs Board (administered by a European )contending that frem the point of view of Africans it had raisd falsd false hopes and served no purpose.
In successive months he called for the dissolution of the Federation shortly after one such appeal (in February 1959, to an Afro-Asian Youth Congress ) his party was decred illegal in Rhodesia.In August 1960 Mr. Nkomo, now based in London, said his party was determined to bring to the noticeof the united Nations Assmbly the case for the Afrecans of Southern Rhodesia (they number 2,590,000 against 211,000 Europeans.)In October he said he wanted the United Nations to intervene, theough they did not wish to became a Untited Nations trusteeship territory. Later he left for New York.
Economic Development; Southern Rhodesia as  an  Agricultural pastoral country is also relatively industrialized with mineral works. It has good f acilities for communications. Its products are to bacco, coen ,peanuts, meat, hides and skins. Minerals are asbestos, gold, coal and chrome ore. Manufacturing in dustry has gained an inecresing importance.
Religion; The majority of the Africans adhere to their traditional faith, but many are christioans with a few Moslems.
Curreney; centeral African Fedeal pound .
Defence; the Fedration of Rhodesias and Nyasaland has its own army and Air Force.
BASUTOLAND
Geographical Situation: the Br. Territory of Basutoland is entirely bounded by the union of south Africa.
Area:   11,716 sq. miles.
Population: 64,900.
Capital: Maseru, other towns are: Mahale’s Hoek and Hlotse.
Language: Native Bantu Tongue, official language for administrative purpose is English.
Government: administrated by British Resident commissioner who is adviced by the council, nominated by native chiefs.
Leader: paramount chief Constantine Bereng seeiso (born 1938) was installed in March, 1960, on the very day of the first meeting of the Legislative council of Basutoland.
He cut short his studies at the school of philosophy,Politics and Economics at oxford, England, for his coronation ceremory at  Maseru.
The young descendant of Moshesh (founder of the Basuto nation) took over from the Regent- his stepmother, princess Mantsebo seeiso- who has served as paramount chieftainess for 20 years.
The 56-year old princess tried her best to postpone The installation until her stepson had ganed his degree and married. But he threatened not to return to oxford unless she handed over power to him. On the eve of his installation he said he had hopes of returning to oxford during 1961.
Princess Mantsebo was the only important Basuto to miss the coronation ceremony. She pleaded illness. A senior chief took her place. The new chief declared on his coronation: “I give myself to you to work for the nation as paramount chief,” and expressed the hope that his reign would be one of “peace and loyatly” The British High commissioner, sir john Maud,Presented him to the Basutos as their” undoubted chief”
Before the coronation Mr. Ntsu Mokhele, leader of the Basutoland Congress party, the largest left-wing force, said they stood for the traditions of Moshesh and recognized the new paramount chief.
The paramount chief nominates one of the eight members (three are elected) of the Basutoland Executive Council.
Political Leader: Ntsn Mokhele leader of Basutoland Congress Party.
Economic Development: the economy of Basutoland is predominatly agrarian.
It produces corn, wheat and sorghum. Livestoke  industry
Includes cattle breeding sheep raizing, horses mules, donkey and goats.
Currency: south African pound.
Religion: Christian and Pagan.
Defence: Under British protection.
TANGANYIKA
Geographical Situation; situated between the great lakes of Central Africa and the lndian Oeean and lying just South of Equator, Tanganyika, one of the British East African Dependencies is a U.N. trust territory adminsteres by U.K.
It is bounded in the north by keny and U ganda,  in the north by Kenya and Uganda, in the east by the Indian oeean, in the south by Mozambique, Nyasaland and Northern Rhodesia, and in the west by Ruanda Urundi and Congo (Leopoldville ).
Area: 362,688 sq. miles.
Population: 9,077,000.
Capital: Dar-es-salaam, main towns Tanga, Tabora, Marogorogo and Kigoma.
Language: official is English, Swahili and other vernacular tongues are spoken.
Government: After the mid-1960 general elections, the Tanganyika African National Union party won over 95% of the seats and its leader Mr. Julius Nyerere was elected  chife Minister of the government. There is a governor who is advised by the council of ministers.
Leader: Julius (Kambarage) Nyerere-Chief Minister.Mr. Nyerere became the first Africa Chief Minister of Tangayika (Trust territory under United Kingdom administration) on sebtember 3 1960 he immediatery declared that his aim was self-government in 1961.
He said it would be achieved as a result of the existing cooperation of the British and the united Nations Trusteeship Council.
His party, the Tanganyika Africa National union, won 70 of the 71 Legislative Assembly seats in the 1960 elections.
Although it also won a big victory in the 1959 elections, Nyerere  refused  office, preferring to lead the Opposition in the Legislative Council.
He has been described as a politician of vision who can bring together Africans, Asians and Europeans. He has said that the “one man, one “principle does not mean Europeans being shipped out of the country by the African majority.Son of Chief Nyerere, Burto of the Zahaki, he was horn in 1923. He was edu cated –he is a Roman Catholic at what is now the Universilty College of East Africa and at Edinburgh University. Studying economies and industry, he graduated as a Master of Arts.
Returning to Tanganyika, he took a teaching post and rejoined the Tanganyika African Assocition. Originally a social socity formed by  a group of british civil servants .Becoming president in 1953,  he drafted a new conistitution which made it political. Under his leader ship the organization became far less extreme.
Following a visit to Tanganyika  by a united Nations mission in 1954, Nyerere flew to New Yourk (1955) to address the Trusteeship Council. On his return he abundant teaching for full-tim politics.
Development: Tanganyika is mainly an agricultural eoutry which produces        sisal coffce, cotton, peanuts , sugar. Sagar-eane and tea. Mainexports are sisal (2/5 of the world output )coffee. Eotton and tobacco. Minerals include goldand diamonds. Forest prorest such as gum Arabie. Beeswax. And timber is also exported.
Religion: Moslem, Christian, Hindu and Animist.
Defence: Under the British East African Command.
NYASALAND
Geographical Situation: situated in the Eastern sides of central Africa, the British Protectorate of Nyasaland is bounded in the east by Mozambique and , in the south by Mozambique, in the west by Mozambique and Northern Rhodesia, the north by Tanganyika.
Area: 49,177 sq.miles.
Population: 2,740,100.
Capital: zomba,important towns: Blantyre, Lilongue and karonga,
Language: official English, Nyanja is a lingua franca and is the language of education.
Government: The status of Nyasaland is protectorate and it was added to the so cold centeral African federation of Rhodesias and Nyasaland whose capital is Salisbury. Due to internal political pressurs, the British government was forsed to make a constitution conference for the territory’s future which took place in London on july 1960. As a resaltof the conference the territory will hold a general election and it is presumed that an all Africa legislative majority will take over the administration of the territory. European minority is also assured to participate in the government.
RUANDA URUNDI
Geographical Situation: situated in the heart of Africa the U.N. Trust territory of Ruanda Urundi is bounded in the north by ugadna.in the east and in the south by Tanganyika,in the  west by congo Republie (Leopoldville).
Area:  20,916 sq. miles.
. population:4,4,000,
capital:Adminisitratve; Nianza (Ruanda); kitega (urundi) commereial :Kigali  (Ruanda) and usumbira (urundi).
Language: official French. And several tribal dialects are spoken.
Government: The U.N. Trust territorv. Administstered by Belgium. Due to Become indenedent in 1962. Is governed by Belgium. Governor general who is responsible for the functions of localgovernment. The territory is divided into two kingdoms, namely Ruanda and Urundi.
Ruler: (1) Charles Mutara Rudaghigwe- Mwami (king) of Ruanda (2) mwami Mwambutsa (king) of urundi.
Economic Development: predominantly an agricultural country, sierra Leone has her main trade with Britain (63%). It exports diamond, iron ores, palm kernnes, coffee and cocoa. Imports are manufactured goods, machinery,vehicles, fuel oils and other finished goods.
Currency: W. African pound.
Religion: Animist, Moslem and Christian.
Defence: British defence system.
ALGERIA
Geographical Situation:Annexed by France in February 1842, Algeria forms part of Metropolitan France  in Africa. Nevertheless,  the Nationalist movements and patriotic struggles by exiled Algerian leaders have made the emergence of Algerian Provisional Government which has gained resignations from many  world nations.
Algeria’s boundaries are: in the north the Mediterranean Sea, in the west Morocco and Mauritania, in the south Mali Republic and Niger Republic, and in the east Libya and Tunisia.
Area: 855,900 sq.miles.
Population:10,210,000.
Capital: Algiers, other towns are Oran, Constantine, Bone, Tizi-Ouazeu, Phillipeville, Mascara.
Language: Official – Freeh and Arabic, Berber is also spoken.
Government:Administered by a governor general who is assisted by a consultative council of 15 members and a Superior Council of 60 members, Algeria is considered as part of mainland France. It sends its deputies to Paris.
On the other hand the Algerian Provisional government seated at Tunis in exile, has Council of Ministers headed by a Prime Minister.
Ruler:President Charles De Gaulle.
Nationalist-Leader:Ferhat Abbas- Prime Minister.
Ferhat Abbas, Prime Minister of the “Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic, ”first came into prominence in 1943, when he was interned by the French fro 15 days for issuing an independence manifesto.
He is descended from a well-established Algerian Berber family, and was born in the Constantine province of Algeria on October 24,1899. His father was a caid (local governor).
He went to school at Philippeville, then studied pharmacy at the University of Algiers, established himself in local politics, and volunteered for the French army in 1939.
He returned to Algeria in 1940, and in 1943 took part in the formation of the Union Democratique du Manifeste  Algerienne (Seeking autonomy but within the French Union).
When his party led a raid on When his party led a raid on Algiers at the end of the war in Europe in 1945, Mr. Abbas was again arrested, and was imprisoned for about tow years.
He was leader of the party from 1948-56.
He was elected to the French Constituent Assembly in 1946, and later to the French Union Assembly. In 1948 he became the first Moslem candidate to be returned in the first elections for an Algerian Assembly.He want to Cairo in April 1956 to become a member of the exiled Algerian National Liberation Front (F.L.N.),and the following year became a member of its executive committee.He was elected Prime Minister in 1958. His political life began with the hope of Algerian assimilation with France, bat developed into a claim for independence.
Economic Development:Algeria,formerly an agricultural country, jhas now turned its efforts towards oil industrialization. Its efforts towards oil industrialization. Its economic wealth is mainly agricultural products. Algeria exports
ANGOLA
Geographical Situation: The West African Portuguese colony of Angola is bounded in the north by Congo (Leopoldville) , in the east by Congo (Leopoldville) and Northern Rhodesia, in the south by South West Africa and in the west by the Atlantic Ocean.
Area: 481,351 sq. miles.
Population: Over 4,500,000.
Capital:LUANDA, others Lobito Hoambo, Benguella Malange, Mocamede Uwigi and Najowo.
Language: Official is Portuguese, different tribal languages are spoken.
Government:The constitution of March 19,1933 makes Angola technically an integral part of Portugal. A governor general is appointed by the Portuguese Council of Ministers for a term of 4 years, after which he may be reappointed.
The governor  general is responsible to the Minister of Overseas territories. He has executive and legislative authority. The legislative council in Angola has twenty six members partly elected and partly nominated, by white legislators.
There is no idea of development towards self government or political freedom due to the strong suppression  of Nationalism.
There is a forced labor system imposed on the native population even sometimes without any wages or pay.
Nationalist Leader:Jose Gilmore, President of Angola people’s Union Party. This party is the only big political party which demands complete independence for Angola. Exiled jose Golmore,Angolese nationalist leader, attended the Second African independent States Conference at Addis Ababa, in juine 1960, and addressed the conference appealing for the cause of his country.
Economic Development: primarily an agricultural country, Angola produces coffee, cotton, cocoa, maiz, sugar, palm kernels and oil, sisal, peanuts and rice. Mineral products consist of diamonds, Lignite, copper, petroleum oil, manganese, iron ores and coal. Chief exports are diamonds, coffee and fish products.
Currency.  Conots.
Religion:  Animists, but there is a strong catholic influence.
Defence: Portuguese defence system.
BECHUANALAND
Geographical Situation: the British protectorate of Bechuanaland is bounded in the south and east by the union of south Africa, in the west by south west Africa, in the north by S.W. Africa and S. Rhodesia.
Area: 75,000 sq. miles.
Population: 4,000.
Capital:  administered from Mafeking in cape province, Union of south Africa.
Language: official English,bantu language.
Government: New constitution advances for the British protectorate of Bechuanaland were outlined in a British government white paper on October 3, 290.
They provide for a Legislative council of between 31 and 35 members with the resident commissioner as president and an Executive Council of ten.
The Legislative council will have 21 elected members, of whom ten will be Europeans, ten Africans and one Asian. There will be seven nominated official members and three ex-official members.
European Voters will elect the European elected member of the Legislative Council, an African council will lect the African members and Asian Voters will elect the Asian representive.
Leader: seretse Khama- Tribal chief.
Seretse Khama (born July 1, 1921) was chief Elect of the Bamangwato people of Bechuanaland when he was banished by the British Government (March 6, 1950) following his marriage to an Englishwoman, Ruth Williams. The wedding of the tall, dignified ruler of 100,00
People started one of the greatest racial controversies known in the British Commonwealth. It also caused a split in the tribe and differences betwea. It also caused a split in the tribe and differences between seretse khama and his uncle, Tshekedi Khama, the  Regent, who was bitterly opposed at the time to any child of mixed blood one day ruling the Bamangwato people.
It was not until September 25, 1956 that the Government in London announced that seretse Khama could return as a private citizen, having formally renounced for himself and his children all claim to the chieftainship.
Since his return the Bamangwato have been governed by a tribal council, with his cousin, Rasebolai kgamane as African Authority.
The possibility of restoring seretse Khama not only to the chieftainship of the Bamangwato but also to the paramount chieftainship of the whole of Bechuanaland has been discussed in the protectorate. Serestse khama has never been addressed as other than chief. He has succeeded to Tshekedi’s post as tribal secretary (Tshekedi died in June 1959) which makes him chief in everything but name. His wife, who has borne him four children, is accepted as one of the trible.
Economic Development : the country is pastoral with cattle raising and dairy farming as chief as chief industries. Gold, copper and siver are mined. Timber is produced for home consumption.
Religion: Mostly pagan.
Defence: Under British protection.
BRITISH CAMROON
Geographical Situation: the  west African territory of British Cameroons is Bounded in the north and west by Nigeria, in the east and south by the Cameroon Republic and the Atlantic respectively.
Area: 34,081 sq. miles.
Population: 1,440,00.
Capital: BUEA, other important towns are Victoria and Tiko.
Language: English is official, other native tongues and Arabic are spoken.
Government : U.N. trust territory administered by Britain, integrated for the time being with Nigeria. It is decided to hold a plebiscite in the future to integrate the territory either with Nigeria or with the Republic of Cameroon
Leader: John Ngu Foncha- prime Minister. John Ngu Foncha has been premier of the southern Cameroons since January 1959, when his party, the kameroun  National Democratic party, was victorious in the general election. He has addressed the united Nations Trusteeship council on the future of the territory.
Born in 1916, he has been headmaster of to Roman catholic schools. He was a leading spirit in the formation of the Bamenda Teachers’ union and formed a branch of the Nigerian union of Teachers.
In the early days of Dr. Endeley’s kameroun National
Federation, now the kameroun National congress, he was An active supporter.He was one of the original members of the Eastern House of Assembly when, between 1951and 1954, the southern Cameroons sent members there.
In 1954 he formed the kameroun National Democratic party with the aid of Mr. k.N. Jua, now his Minister of social services. In the House of Assembly of the southern Cameroons. For the following period, until winning the 1959 Election, he was leader of the opposition.
Economic Development: cattle breeding and guinea-corn production are the main industry. It also exports bananas, rubber, cocoa, palm oil and kernels, coffee and timber. Imports are textiles, petroleum, consumer goods and iron made materials.
Currency: Nigerian pound.
Religion: Moslem and pagan.
Defence: British defence system.
FRENCH SOMALILAND
Geographical Situation: the French East African territory of Somaliland is bounded in the noth and west by Ethiopia, in the south by someali Republic and in the east by the Gulf of Aden.
Area: About 9,000sq. miles.
Population: Over 60,000.
Capital:   DJIBOUTI, other towns are Ali sabieh and obock.
Language: official is French, somali and Dankhali are spoken.
Government: French Somaliland is administered by a governor responsible to the French government, and is assisted by arepresensative council. In the 1958 referendum, the French Somaliland Voted to remain an overscas territory within the French community.
Head of state: General Charles De Gaulle (French president).
Development: the country is largely arid and scarcely populated. Its importance lies chiefly in the port of Djibouti, the main outlet for Ethiopia’s trade, via the Djibouti Addis Ababa railway chief exports are salt and hides.
Currency: Djibouti Franc.
Religion: Moslem with Christian minority.
Defence: under French defence sysem.
kenya
Geographical Situation: the Br. E. Afri. Colony of Kenya is bounded in the north by Ethiopia and sudan, in the east by the Indian ocean and Somali Republic, in the west by Uganda, in the south by Tanganyika.
Area: 4,960.
Population: 6,51,00.
Capital : Nairobi, other towns Mombasa the chief port, kisumu, Eldoret, Lamu, Nakuru, nyeri.
Language: official is English. Swahili and other native languags
Government: the recently negotiated London conference on kenya’s constitutional future came to an agreement for a general election to be held in 1961 it is assumed that the African majority will hold most seats, but the conference attached itself to a compromising agreement for European and Asian minorities to secire a number of seats.
By 1961, Kenya will be a self governing territory with an African chief minister.
National Leader: jomo Kenyatta-Father of Nationalism.
Jomo Kenyatta, whose shadow is cast on kenya’s political Life was sentenced to seven years imprisonment on April
, for what was called to be “managing” the Man Mau society in Kenya, the British colony, is now living under a restriction order at Lodwar in a remote northern area. Known to his fellow kikuyu as “Burning spear” Kenyatta spent 13 years in England where he studied
Anthropology at London University, and married an English woman. He visited Moscow during the 1930s and was founder and president of the pan African Federation of which Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, the president and prime Minister of Ghana, was general xecretary. He became the leader of the then 100,000-strong Kenya African union.
Giving evidence curing his trial Kenyatta said the Kenya African union was a democratic body, striving to achieve its aims by constitional means. Defending Kenyatta and five others, Mr. D.N. pritt.
Queen’s counsel, acknowledged that mau mau undoubtediy existed on a substantial scale and in a terrifying form in Kenya, but said the prosecution had failed to prove that the accused had taken part in it.
Passing sentence. The Magistrate. Mr. Ransley thacker. a retird supreme court judge, said he was satisfied kenvatta was the “master mind” behind the plan to drive the Europeans out of kenva. “your Mau Mau” he added, “has slaughtered hundreds of men women and children in circumstances which re revolting”
Kenyatta replied “None of us would condone mutilation of human being. We have families of our own. If you think that by working for African rights we have turned Mau Mau, we are sorry you have been misled.
“we feel that this case has been so arranged as to bring Mau Mau on us as a scapegoat in order to strangle the Kenya African union-the only African political organization which fights for the rights of the African people”
Kenyatta, born in kamau, son of Ngengi. Chose his present name as a symbol of his country. He is over 60 year of age.
In September 1960, Mr. james Gichuru , present president of the Kenya African National union, returning to Nairobi from talks with the British Government in London, said he made it elear that Africans were determined to have Kenyatta back as their leader.
Officials of the rival organization- the Kenya African Democratic Union- have also pressed for the return of Kenyatta.
Political Leader: tom Mboya.
Tom Mboya is general secretary of the Kenya African National Union (K.A.N.U.) which represents “the overwhelming majority” of the British colony’s six million Africans.
A London constitutional conference on Kenya in January and February 1960 promised Africans a bigger share in the Governmet. Mr. Mboya, however, said the  proposals fell short of expectations and would be out of date before they were implemented.
It is K.ANU.’s policy to regard the legislative council elections in February 1961 as a refendum for immediate independence. If returned with a substantial majority they will ask for a definite date.
Mr Mboya has attacked unjust laws and unfair distribution of wealth in Kenya. He says he wants to see his country’s future closely linked with the European and Asian communities there, with rapid economic development to cncourage a rapid andconfident flow of capital and skill from Britain and other confident flow of capital and skill from Britain and other have chas than econcmic security, they would rather have chaos than economic security limited to the Europeans (who number 66,400) and the Asians (217,000).
An idol of the Africans today, and a rousing spiker in swali and English,Mr. Mboya was an unknown health inspector in Nairobi seven years ago. Born 30 years ago, he first came to notice when he founded a local  government workers union.
He was a member of the Kenya Legislative council and well knwn in the outside world as a campaigner for independence when he was chosen chairman of the All African people’s Conference in Ghana (December 1958) a notable stage in the African nationalist movement.
He is general secretary of the Kenya Federation of Labour, described as Socialist inclined but anti-communist. In March 1955 he stopped a strike of 4,000 docders at Mombasa, but negotiated a 33 per cent wage increase for them.
With a British Workers Travel Association scholarship he studied industrial relations politics at oxford University (1955-6).
When he returned to Kenya the Mau Mau rising had been crushed and Jomo Kenyatta had been jailed on charges of having managed the organization. There were no other Africa leaders on the scene and when the first direct elections of African members to the Legislative council were held, Mboya was able to weld into a solid bloc the seven Africans elected with him.
Economic Development : the colony is predominantly agricural: the highland Until recently was exclusiyly reserved for European Settlement.
Products are coffee tea sisal: mineralsInclude such as gold, sodium-carbonate silt.
Timber Is also produced. Most of these products are exported While the main imports are manufactured goods. Machinery. Transdort equipment and petroleum products.
Currency: East African paund.
Religion: Animist. Christian and Moslem
Defence: Under By East African command.
ZANZIBAR
Geographcal Situation: the East African island, off the shores of Tanganyika. Is a Br. Protectorate together with the isand of pemba.
Area: 1.020 sq. miles.
Population: 285,000.
Capital: Zanzibar.
Language: official is English. Swahili, Arabic and Hindi.
Government: the British resident administers the protectorate, but the sultan retains considerable authority
Ruler: seyyid sir Abdulla Bin Khalifa –sultan
Seyyid sir Abdulla Bin khalifa (Born 1910) ascended The throne of Zanaibar on October 17 1960,taking the oath of allegiance to
Queen Elizabeth of England.He sue ceded seyyid sir khalifa mbin Harub bin Thuwaini bin said, who had reigned for 49 years. In June 1960, sir Hilary Blood, reviewing the con-stituional position of Zanzibar,
Recommended safeguards to ensure the continuation of the assembly and the election of 21 legislative council members to replace the present official (governmet-appointed) members.
The report did not, however, recommend full seld government for Zanzibar. It said that the British Besident should remain president the Executive council with modified powers and that the leader of the majority party should become chief Minister.
Mr Blood said that his recommendations are not to form a ministerial system with a view to creating an internally self-governing state. Such an advance would be impossible.
If in the future Zanzibar wished to join any projected federation of East African territories, it could to so while still being responsible for its own internal affairs.
Economic Development: principal industry is the production of cloves-about 80% of world supply supply comes from Zanzibar. Rice and cassava are grown extensively for local consumption.
Religion: predominantly Moslem.
Defence : Under British protection.
UGANDA
Geographical Situation:   Entirely an inland territory the protectorate of Ugando Lies on the equator. It bounded in the east by Kenya In the north by sudan, in west by the congo (Leopoldville) and in the south by Ruanda Urundi and Tanganyika.
Area:    93,981 sq miles.
Population: 5,767,000.
Capital: Kampala and Entebe, other important towns are: Jinja  and Mbale.
Language: official is English, Swahili, Lugand and different natire tongues are widely spoken.
Government: The protectorate is under British administration in which In particular areas local powers are specifically reserved By treaty to local tribal government. As a result, all Monarchial in constition, these are Buganda, Ankole Toro and Bunyoro. The central government has an Excutive council consisting of the governor and twelve Members.
One of The Rulers:    Mutesa II. King of Baganda. The kabaka Mutesa II of Buganda (Edward William Fr Derrick David wagulembe Lawangula Mutebi) is King of The largest and richest of the four African Kingdoms that Make up the British East African protectorate of Uganda Born in 1924 he is the 34th of his line.
Both he and the lukiko, his African parliament, Want to secede from Uganda, fearing that traditional institutions and the status of the ruler would be jeopardized if their country formed part of a democratic selfgoverning Uganda, For this reason they hav boycotted  the preparation for the Uganda national electionin February 1961 (which are expected to result in a clear tive  Council have been vacant for two years. It was because he “failed to co-operate loyally” so say the British, in the affiairs of Ugaden as a whole that the British Government withdrew recognition of the young raler in November 1953, put him on an aeroplane and deported him to London. A basic issue was the kabaka’s demand thel Buganda should become independent with in a short and stipulated time.
The agreement (1955) allowing him to return after nearly two years of exile, took away some of his powers, redefind the relationship  between the Buganda Government  and the Uganda Government and reaffirmed Buganda’s status as a provice.
On October 4, 1960, the Lukiko called for Buganda to be declared independent  as a self-governing state by January 1,1961.
The British Government replied that “there can be no question of the secession of any part of the protectorate so long as Her Majesty’s Government is the protecting power.”
Buganda was also told that  agreements with Britain could be varied only by mutual consent and there could be no change in status until after a london constitutional conference planned for 1961.
It was further intimated that Buganda must take agreement, the breaking of which “would have the most serious consequences.
Economic Development: Agriculture including livestock is the basis of the economy.
Cotton is raised principally by natives: sugar,coffee,tea and rubber are grown on large plantations herds of caitle and sheep are raised by natives. Coffeetobacco, maiz and ground nuts are produced. Minerals are gold and tin.
Currency: East African pound.
Religion:  pagan, Christian and Moslem.
Defence: UInder British defence system.
SOUTH WEST AFRICA
GeographicalSituation: The country of south west Africa is situated as its name indicated. Its boundaries are in the north Angola, in the east and south  Bechuanaland and the Union of south Africa respectively, and in the west the Atlantic Ocean.
Area: 317,887 sq. miles
Population: 500,000,
Capital: Windhoek, ports are walvis Bay and Luderitz bay.
Language: English, German, and the native Bantu tongues.
Government: S.W. Africa is administered by the Union of south Africa There is a strong nationalist movement supported by other independent African states to place S.W. Africa under the U.N trusteeship and eventually to advance it for independence. Fanuel kozonguizi is president of m S.W. African union which is the largest African political body in the country
Leader: chief Hosea kutako-Tribal leader. Chief Hosea kutako is leader of the Hereros, one of the principal tribes of south-west Africa.
The territory was a German colony until the first World
The union Government has since been progressively integrating it, maintaining that the mandate died with the league.
In 1947 chief kutako asked that four representatives of his tribe should be allowed to appear before the united Nations. The south African Government refused them permission on the grounds that they had no government of their own.
In 1949 another application by chief kutako was refused, and the Rev. Michael scott, a church of Englandclergyman who had long been the voice to the outside world of the Herero people, went in their place and adderessed the united nations general assembly.
The sourth African government has repeatedly declined to place the territory under an international trusteeship system or submit a report on the the administration of the territory. Early in November 1960, Ethiopia and Liberia jointly filed south west african’s case against the union of south Africa, at the international court of justice in hague.
Of about 500,000 people living in the territory about 33,000 are hereros. In 1893 the tribe numbered 100,000. In 1903-4 they were decimated by the german in a military action following a rising. In the official census of 1911 they numbered only 15,000.
Economic Development: the chief occupation of the people is cattle breeding. Agricultural products include hides and skins, butter, cornAnd wheat. There are also minerals such as diamonds, Vanadium, concentrates, tungsten, lead, iron and copper.Its import-export system is attached to that of the union’s trade.
Currency:south African pound.
Christian and pagan.
Defence: south African defence system.
SOUTHERN RHODESIA
GeographicalSituation: situated in southern part of central Africa. S. Rhodesia is Bounded in the north by Northern Rhodesia and  Mozambique, in the east by Mozambique, in the south by south Africa and Bechuanaland, and in the west by Bechuanaland.
Area: 150,330 sq. miles.
Population: 2641,500.
Capital: Salisbury, principal towns: Bualawayo Umtali, Gwelo Fort Victoria, Que Que and Gatomma.
Language; Offical is English, native tongue are Bantu dialects.
Government; The self-governing territory of Southern Rhodesia has got its own local governmet with a governor at its   head. The European dominated government has a legislative Assembly,and there is a cabinet of minsters headed by a premier. African political movemetes are not represented in the governmentnoor any important post is given to a native citizen.
There is a stong agitation from African political parties which favour African majority government. The European. Domination seems unlikely to surrender j’self. The National Democration party of Southern Rhodesia is the main African Political Body.
Politi. Leader; Joshua Nkomo.
Joshua Nkomo an exild leader of the National Democra-tic party of Southern Rhodesia, (he calls himself “directcr of external and international affairs”) is opposed to any plan to fedrate his country with Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland “against the will of the Africans.”
He was president of the Southern Rhodesia African Nationl Congress when it was banned on February 26,1959.
Nkomo had been a social and was general sectary of the Rhodesian Railway Workeres’Union at Bulawayo when he became chairman fo the Bulawayo branch of the African Nationan Congress. Sir Godfrey Huggins, the prime minster (now Lord Malvern) asked him (April 1952) to go with the Southern Rhodesian delegation to London fer talks on the eonstitutional fature of the territory.
Early in 1953 Nkomo in landon eritieised any proposeal to force Africans into the Fedratin. In 1958 he wanted the abolition of the Government’s colonial-stye African Affairs Board (administered by a European )contending that frem the point of view of Africans it had raisd falsd false hopes and served no purpose.
In successive months he called for the dissolution of the Federation shortly after one such appeal (in February 1959, to an Afro-Asian Youth Congress ) his party was decred illegal in Rhodesia.
In August 1960 Mr. Nkomo, now based in London, said his party was determined to bring to the noticeof the united Nations Assmbly the case for the Afrecans of Southern Rhodesia (they number 2,590,000 against 211,000 Europeans.)In October he said he wanted the United Nations to intervene, theough they did not wish to became a Untited Nations trusteeship territory. Later he left for New York.
Economic Development; Southern Rhodesia as  an  Agricultural pastoral country is also relatively industrialized with mineral works. It has good f acilities for communications. Its products are to bacco, coen ,peanuts, meat, hides and skins. Minerals are asbestos, gold, coal and chrome ore. Manufacturing in dustry has gained an inecresing importance.
Religion; The majority of the Africans adhere to their traditional faith, but many are christioans with a few Moslems. Curreney; centeral African Fedeal pound .
Defence; the Fedration of Rhodesias and Nyasaland has its own army and Air Force. A new central African command was set up in December 1953. The total strength of the army is 6000.
GAMBIA
Geographical situation: the British west African colony and protocterate of Gambia is bordered in the west by the Atlantic, the remaining part by the Senegal.
Area: 4,003 sq. miles.
Population: 285.000.
Capital: Bathurst. Other towns are Georgetown and Bintag
Language: English and native tongues.
Government: British protectorate and colony administered by a governor.
Sovereign: Queen Elizabeth II.
Economic: Development:  Mainly an agricultural country ,Gambia’s chief export is ground nut (90%). Other products include palm kenels, hides and skins, beeswax, millet, rice cotton and maiz.
Monetary unit: west African pound.
Religion: Moslem with Christian minority.
Defence: British defence system.
BRITISH CAMROON
Geographical Situation: the  west African territory of British Cameroons is  Bounded in the north and west by Nigeria, in the east and south by the Cameroon Republic and the Atlantic respectively.
Area: 34,081 sq. miles.
Population: 1,440,00.
Capital: BUEA, other important towns are Victoria and Tiko.
Language: English is official, other native tongues and Arabic are spoken.
Government : U.N. trust territory administered by Britain, integrated for the time being with Nigeria. It is decided to hold a plebiscite in the future to integrate the territory either with Nigeria or with the Republic of Cameroon
Leader: John Ngu Foncha- prime Minister. John Ngu Foncha has been premier of the southern Cameroons since January 1959, when his party, the kameroun  National Democratic party, was victorious in the general election. He has addressed the united Nations Trusteeship council on the future of the territory.
Born in 1916, he has been headmaster of to Roman catholic schools. He was a leading spirit in the formation of the Bamenda Teachers’ union and formed a branch of the Nigerian union of Teachers.
In the early days of Dr. Endeley’s kameroun National Federation, now the kameroun National congress, he was An active supporter.He was one of the original members of the Eastern House of Assembly when, between 1951and 1954, the southern Cameroons sent members there.
In 1954 he formed the kameroun National Democratic party with the aid of Mr. k.N. Jua, now his Minister of social services. In the House of Assembly of the southern Cameroons. For the following period, until winning the 1959 Election, he was leader of the opposition.
Economic Development: cattle breeding and guinea-corn production are the main industry. It also exports bananas, rubber, cocoa, palm oil and kernels, coffee and timber. Imports are textiles, petroleum, consumer goods and iron made materials.
Currency: Nigerian pound.
Religion: Moslem and pagan.
Defence: British defence system.
Special Report
While bringing happiness, prosperity and hope for the whole continent of Africa, the year 1960 has witnessed also a great concern and worry for Africa as well as for the rest of the world:and this is the congo situation.
The Republic of Congo (Leopldville) which attained independence on June 30, 1960, became a trouble-torn state during the first days of its independence
The “Force publique” (now the Congolese National Army) mutinied and the government was unable to control the situation. Belgium intervened by sending her troops. Massive exodus of Europeans was taking place.
Thereafter, the whole nation was plunged into a complete disorder and terror. The following is a diary of the main events, developed out of Congo’s situation, which put the rest of African countries and the United Nations in such a dilemma to solve the crisis.
July 7. United Nations security council unanimously endorsed Congo application united Nations membership
July 8. Agreement reached between Force publique and congoLese Government that command be handed over to Congolese   Government that command be handed over to Congo lese officers.Belgians fly out troops from Germany to congo. Alleged attempt on life of prime Minister Lumumba mdiscovered.
July 9. European and American refugees continued to cross River Congo to Brazzaville, others crossed into Ugands. Six Europeans killed in Elisabethville.
July 10. Belgian troops in action in Elisabethville and luluabourg; 2,00 refugees reported in Copperbelt towns of Northern Rhodesia. Others reported in Tanganyika.
July. M. Mois Tshombe deelaered Katanga independent. M.Lumumba appealedto United Nations for aid; 20,000 Europeans reported to have left. More Belgian toops sent by air.
July2. In New  York Mr. Hammarsljold of nine African delegations to UInited Nations. Congo government asked U.S.A. to supply 3,00 troops to restore order. Belgian troops evacuated part of Matadi. M. Lumumba and at Elisabethville (Katanga) aiport
July 13. M. Lumumba and president kasavubu demanded immediate withdrawal of Belgian troops, U.S.S.R.  called on united Nations to take action to end aggression in congo by Belgian troops,  with support U. S. A.Britain. West Germany and France. Belgian paratroopers sized Leopoldville airport. To Congo. Ghana Government refused to recognize independence to Congo.
July 14. Congo broke off diplomatic relations with Belgium.
United Nations security council called on Belgium towithdarw and authorized sending of United Nations troops: (resolution Carried eight to nil with three abstentions (Britiain,Frace and china). Fighting beween Begians and Congolese in leopoldiville reported. Majpr General Carl von Horn of Sweden (chief of staff of united Nations Truce supervision organization in Palestine) appointed commander of United Natios force for congo, made up in first place of troops from GhanaGuinea, Mali and Tunisia. M. Tshombe said he would refuse united Nations troops permission to land in Katanga Further incidents reported from Leopoldville: Belgians attacked M. Lamumba at airport.
July 15. M. Lumumba demanded that all Belgian troops leave the congo within twelve hours. General H.T. Alexander, British officer in charge of Ghanaian army, announced that the Force publique had laid doen its army, announced that the Force publique had laid down its arms. M. Tshombeaccused M. Lumumba of being a communist.
July 16. First United Nations troops arrived U.A.R. refused to recognize latanga: Belgium noted Ktanga’s declaration of independence and [romised co-opration there and “in other regions of the congo where security order reign.”
July 17. 5,000 united Nations troops in congo from Ghana, TunisiaMorocco and Ethiopia. Belgian officer took over force publique in Katanga. General victor Lundula recently appointed Commander-in-chief of Congolese Army, arrested in Elisabethville by Katanga Government M. Joseph yava, Minister of Economic Affairs, and member of conakat party . resigned from M. Lumumba’s Government.
July 18. M. Lumumba reported to have said he would call in soviet forces unless United Nations made Belgians withdraw: but Congolese senate rejected killed near thysville. Sir Roy welensky said it was not easy to turn of Katanga. Sir Roy welensk said it was not easy to turn down M. Tshombe’s request for Federal troops, but the matter had to be dealt with constitutionally.
July 19. Eiro decided to send to send contingent to congo under United Natiors command. Belgium agreed to withraw troops from Leopoldville at request of United Nations. Congolese National Assembly refused to ratify breaking off of diplomatic relations with Belgium.
July 20. The secretary-General reported to security council on the united Nations ferces in congo: Swedish troops from Gaza would be added to existing contingents. The Belgian and Congolese representatives accused each other’s counties of “atrocities.”
July 21. Security council called on Belgium to withdraw its troops “speedily” and empowered secretary-General to “take all necessary action to this effect.” United states secretary of state Herter said Russia was bluffing about sending troops to congo. King Baudouin of the Belgians said his troops had “a sacred duty” to intervene to save lives.
July 22. M. Lumumba left by air to attend united in new York. Sixteen Congolese and two Belgianas killed in fighting. Reported agreement signed for economic development of congo by congo international Management corporation led by Mr. L. E. Detwiler, an American financier.
July 24. Belgian Army evacuated Leopoldville: 1,000 Tunisian troops under United Nations Command occupied Luluabour.
July 25 General Horn claimed he had been misquoted in saying that United Nations troops wpuld take over Katanga and evict Belgian troops. M. Tshombe said United nmations troops would have  to fight their way into Katanga. Four conservative M.P.s called on british Government to uphold the independence of Katanga. The United states Ambassador to the congo presented his credentials to president Kasavubu.
July 26. Mr. Ian scott presented his credentials as first British Ambassador to the Congolese Republic. General Lundula released in Katanga.
July 27. Over 9,000 united Nations troops reported deployed over the congo, outside Katanga.
July 28. M. Lumumba said the congo would accept Ameriacan aid.
July 29. Belgian Government decided to withraw 1.500 of its 10,00 troops.
July 30. Mr. Hammarskjold and the Congolese Government announced the formation of a six-member Congolese Commission under the chairmanship of M. Lumumba to super vise the implementation  of the Security Council resolutions. The sending of a Canadian contingent to the United Nations force was announced.
July 31. M.A. Gizenga, Congolese Vice- Premier, said United Nations was not fulfilling its task of entering Katanga.
August 1. Pay disputes reported in some factories and offices in Leopoldville, where there was failure to pay the new, higher rates of pay promised to all Workers.
August 2. Mr. Hammarskjold said United Nations troops would enter Katanga on August 6. M. Lumumba visited London.
August 3. After a visit by Dr. Ralph Bunche, United Nations  representative, to M. Tshombe, the decision for United Nations troops to enter Katanga was cancelled. M. Lumumba left Morocco for Guinea. The Belgian Foreign Minister said that  for Guinea. The Belgian Foreign Minister said that for the united nations  to send troops into Katanga was an interfere in the internal affairs of another country. Soviet Government said all steps should be takento secure total evacuation of Belgian troops and to stop the present “occupant” of Katanga. United kingdom Governmen refused to recall parliament for a debate on the Katanga situation.
august 7. Central committee of Abake (the party led by president kasavubu) reported to have passed vote of no confidence in M.  Lumumba. M. sekeu Teure said that if United Nations troops did rot enter Katanga, he would put Guinea contingent at the direct disposal of Congolese Government for this purpose. Colonial office in Londo denied probability of rumoured link-up between Katanga. Planning secession. Mr. Hammarkjolj urged complete Belgian withdrawal. President Nkrumah of Ghana and M. Lumumba met in Accra. Mr. Julius Nyere denied existence of any agreement between Tanganyika and Katanga. Delegation in London failed to secure recognition.
August 9. M. isnombe agreed to allow entry of United Nations troops on certain conoitions.: M. Lumumba declared satate of emergency in congo: he described those members of the Abako rariy  who demanded contederation as “Fascists pioptting with the Abbe Fulbert youlou” (president of the former French Conge). Security troops from Katanga and said entry of united Nations troops must not be used to intervene or inlluence outcome of any internal conflict. M. Eyskens, Belgian prime Minister, said Belgium would have to reviw military position within N.A.T.O.
August 10. In rioting in Leopoldville, M. Lumumba was struck by Abako supporters. M. kalonji reported to be forming an autonomous minig state among the Baluba tribesmen in kasai.
August 11. The Ghana parliament authorized Dr. Nkrumah to commit Ghanaian troops to direct action in the congo, if the united Nations failed to solve the Katanga problem.
August 12. Mr. Hammarskjold arrived in Elisabethville, capital of Katanga, together with 250 (Swedish) United Nations troops.
August 14. Katanga military police used tear gas to break up antiTshombe demonstration in Elisabethville. M. Lumumba called for the withedrawal of all White troops.
August 15. M. Lumumba said his  Government had lost confidence in Mr. Hammarskjoeld because he favoured Belgians.
August 17. Congolese troops reported to be interfering with United Nations forces. M. Wigny, Belgian Foreign Minister, said Belgium had a “debt of honour’’ to Katanga.
August 19. Sible. M.  Eyskens won vote of confidence in Belgian Parliament by 115 votes to eighty-two.
August 20. Presidant Tubman of Liberia and president Bourguiba criticized M. Lumumba’s attitude to the United Nations Secretary- General. Reportes from Kasai province were of continued tribal fighting between Lulua and Baluba.
August 21. United Nations Securiy Council strongly supported Mr. Hammarskjoeld’s action in the Congo. M. Lumumba reported between various sections of the united Nations force and Congoles Army. Units of Fore Publique were flown to kasai Province to stop tribal fighting. Mr. Tshombe appealed for Congo Federation.
August 22. Congolese troops flew to Luluabourg to put down tribal fighting in Kasai. United Nations forsed in Congo  reached a total of 15,000 with arrival of 700 parachutists from Abako Party (kasavubu),the puna party and the Kalonji wing of the National Congolese Movement (M.N.C.).
August 23. Distrubaces in Albertville, northern Katanga, involving Mail troops of United Natins.
August 24. M kalongi announced that airfield at Bakwanga, capital of “Mining state,” was out of action, to prevent Congolese troops landig.
August 25. Leopoldville polise fired on anti-Lumuba demonstrators outside the African Foreighn Ministers Conference in preparation for African “summit” conference. M. kalaonji appealed to M. Tshombe for military aid.
August 26. Soviet cultural delegation arrived in Leopoldville. M. Lumumba said Belgians were using Brazzaville in (ex-french) Congo Republic as  centre of spy net and plots.
August 27. Congoles troops occupied Bakwanga in kasai and approached Katanga border. Canadians, Americans and a Swede engaged in transporting equipment were attacked by crown at Stanleyville airport. A group of Ethiopians intervened to save the victims.
August 29. Ten Congolese soliers reported wounded in fighting with Kalonji’s forces in kasai. M. Lumumba called for cooperation with Europeans. United states protested about beating up of eight servicemen.
August 30. Last of Belgian combat troops reported to have left. M. kaloji appealed for troops to Dr. Bunche and Generalde Gaulle.
August 31. Mr. Hammarkskjoeld compilaind that all Belgian troops. had not been withdrawn. Thirteen African states at leopeldville conference endorsed the United Nations’ work in the Congo and called on Mr. Lumumba’s Government to co-operate with United Nations
September 1. M.Eyskens, Belgian Prime Minister, said he would not resign. Continued fighting reported from Bakwanga.
September 2. Russing transport aircraft arrived for M. Lumumba. There British journalists arrested by Congolese troops in Bakwanga. M.J. Bolikango, leader of the puna party in Equateur, arrested.
September 4. Brittish journalists released. More fighting and casualties reported from kasai.
September 5. Presidant Kasavubu said he had dismissed M. Lumumba as prime Minister and appointed M. Joseph heo in his place. M Lumumba broadcast an appeal to Army to continue to support him.
September 6. Police fired on anti-Lumumba demonstrators, killing two. M.Lumumba again appealed for support and said Cabinet would take over M. Kasavubu’s functions. M. Tshombe associated himself with president Kasavubu and called for a conference to work out a confederation.
September 7. Congo Parliament by sixty to nineteen voted to cancel the dismissal of Lumumba appealed to independent African state for military aid. M. Bolikango was set free by troops siding with Abako.
September 8. United states protested against Russia supplying Congo with planes and other material for military purposes.
September 9. Mr. Lumumba called for immediate withdrawal of United Nations troops. In the senate he won vote of confidence by forty-one to two. United Nations closed Elisabethville  airport after Belgiam arms hade been delivered. Security council met again. Guinea announced intention to withdraw its troops from United Nations command.
September 11. United Nations troops guarding Leopoldville radio station refused to allow Mr. Lumumba to enter. Both Mr. Lumumba and Mr. Heo announced that they were sending  delegations to United Nation. Increasing uncertainty in Katanga; evacuation of Belgians reported; Mr. Tshombe said Katanga intended to remain completely independent.
September 12. Majority of Congolese Army reported in support of Colonel Mobutu, Chief of staff appointed by Presidant Kasavubu. M. Lumumba claimed Army support. U.A.R. announced intention to withdraw troops from united Nations command and attacked united Nations action in closing airports and radio stations. Security Council adjorned because of confusing reports on congo situation.
September 13. united Nations reopened congo airports and Leopoldville radio station. In New York acute problem  developed regarding recognition of rival congo delegations. Mr. zorin (U.S.S.R.) ATTACKED Mr. hammarskjoeld and said a western coalition was trying to colonize the congo.
September 14.colonel Mobutu announced that he was taking over supreme power in the country. He broadcast that he was suspending both Congolese prime ministers and also the head of state from their functions until the erisis was solved. The army would take control until the end of the year. The united Nations security council became involved in procedural argaments regarding, firstly, whether it should accord recognition to either, both or neither of the congo delegations, and whether the representative of Guinea, one of five non-members of the council admitted  to the meeting, should be allowed to speak on the point of representation. The council eventually decided against hearing Guinea, and failed to adopt a resolution that the Lumumba delegation, led by Mr. kanza, be heard. It then adjourned.
In Northern katange, Manono, a mining town, was reported ablaze and it was estimated seventy Africans had been killed. Refugees were flown into Elisabethville. Before intervening, the lrish commander of united nations troops disarmed the Katanga police “in the face of the ricters” Katanga Government protested against united nations decision not to allow reinforcements of gendarmerie to be flown to Manono.
September 15. M. Lumumba asked the day in the officers’ mess of the Ghanaian united Nations force.
Congolese soldiers made two successful attempts to break into the mess but Ghana troops pushed them to break into the mess but Ghana troops pushed them out. Many of the troops in the camp are Balubas. United nations representative maintained contact with president kasavubu. Colonel Mobutu ordered guards on all pro-communist embassies and gave staff forty-eight hours to leave.
He asked for continued united nations help. Mali troops united nations help.
The presence of about 300 “seemingly well organized.” Congolese troops inside the Northern Katanga border. In new York, the united states accused the soviet union of trying to make the congo a “soviet satellite state in the heart of Africa”.
Septembor 16. M Lumumba’s disappearance reported. President kasavubu received ambassadors  of all Afaican states exept Guinea. Nigeria agreed to send troops to join the United Nations force.
In New York, U.S.S.R. put forward a resolution asking the Secetary- General and the United Nations force “to put an end to all forms of interference in the internal affeirs of the Congo.” Mr. Hammarskjoeld pointed out that in viewof conflicting claims to exercise authority by local politicians, it was inevitable that his representatives should be obliged to take steps which might be interpreted as favouring one side or the other.
He cited the latest protest by Presidant kasavubu against the United Nations troops for preventing Mr. Lumumba from “being brought to justice.”
The Council also had before it the United states resolation urging the SECERATERY- General to “continue to give vigous effects to the resolutions to refain from sending aid to the Congo except through the United Nations.” His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ehiopia, sent a telegramme to the Security Council of the United Nations, in which He expressed His deep concern about the Congo situation. In view of reconciling the different Congolese rival leaders, the Emperor suggested the creation of a special committee, whose members should be drawn from U.N. representatives of African countries.
Sptember 17. A Tunisian- Ceylonese compromise resolution which had wide support from Afro-asian powers was vetoed in the Security Conuncil by Russina. United states therefore called foran emergency session of the General Assembly. Russian and Czech Embassy staffs left Congo.
September 18. In the General Assembly the U.S.S.R. reperesentative continued his attack on Mr. Hammarskjoeld saying that what was going on was an attempt to establish a “neo-colonial regime under the blue flag of the United Nations” and “in open-morcery” of the Security Council’s resolutions. Mr. Hammarskjoeld replied by saying: “The General Assembly knows me well enough to realize that Iwould not wish to serve one day beyond the point at which such continued service would be, and would be considered to be, in the best interests of the organization.” Sources close to Mr. Hammarskjoeld indicated that he had no intention of resigning but was looking to the assembly to vindicate him and his work in Congo.
Ghana table, on behalf of fourteen Afro-Asian States, a draft resolution reaffirming the Security Council’s actions to meet Congo emergency. This resolution appealed to all Congolese to seek a speed solution by peaceful means of all their internal conflicts, with the assistance as appropriate of Asian and African reperesentatives appointed by the advisory committee on the Congo, in consulution with the Secretary- General.Mr. Lumumba reappeared at the official Prime Minister’s residence saying that he had signed an agreement of reconciliation with President Kasavubu. This the president denied.
September 19. Mr. Lumumba said that he had asked the United Nations to provide him with a plane so that he would go to New York, at the head of the Congolese delegation. On the other hand, he affirmed that the coup  of colonel Mobuto was insignificant and that this question would be settled at the proper time. Mr. Lumumba added that the expolsion of the Soviet and Czech diplomats was “unfair.” Radio Moscow broad casts a different  version: “it is the soviets themselves who decided to leave the country in view of the hostile attitude of the new Congolese leaders.” News from Leopoldville affirmed that the aggressor Pakas, against Colonel Mobutu, was arrested with his accomplice, and was sent to the prison of Ruzungu. According to the news paper “L’Essor du Congo “ the number of Balubas, massacred in the Tshilenge region (Kasai), was estimated to be 2,500. U.N. spokesman in Elizabethville announced completed withdrawal of Congolese troops from Katanga.
September 21. The U.N. Secretary General addressed to the head of the Katanga Provincial government his deep concern over “the actions against the Balubas by the Katanga policemen.”
September 22. U.N. spokesman in Leopoldville announced that Ethiopians of the U.N. forces would replace the Katanga policemen, who were in charge of the safety of the trains between kamina and Luena lines.
September 23. Mr. Albert Kalondji announced that he agreed with the principle of a cease-fire in Southern kasai, and that of “No man’s Land” control by the U.N. would be created.
September 25. “Russia in Katanga, that would be death” declared Mr. Moise Tshombe at the stadium of “Prince Albert” in Elisabethville, to the Katanga soldiers returning from the “Front.” Colonel Mobutu released the former minister of youth and supposed to be transferred to the Katanga prison.
September 26. About 200 supportes of Mr. Lumumba in Leopoldville demonstrated in front of the administrative building, and prevented all access to the building. The demonstrators had poster with the iniscription: “Long live Lumumba,” “Long live the centeral government.”
Colonel Mobutu asked Mr. “H”s special representative, Mr. Dayal, for the withedrawal of Ghana and Guinea troops from Congo.
September 27. “It is not by shaking hands with Mr. Lumumba that Mr. kasavubu will solve the congo crisis. The problem of Katanga and South kasai remain as such, declared Mr. Heo,”The threat of civil war woud not be avoided. The present crisis will not be solved by reshafting the Lumumba government does not exist,” concluded Mr. Heo.
September 28. Ethiopia confirmed its support to the United Nations and to Mr. Hammarskjoeld. The spokesman of U.S. state Department in New York, declared that in the course of that half an hour talk that the Deputy prime Minister of Ethiopia, H.E. Mr. Aklilou Habte-Wold, had with president Eisenhower, Mr. Aklilou had reaffirmed the total support of his country to the cause of the United Nations and its Secretary General Mr. Hammarskjoeld. Both the Presidant and the Deputy prime Minister agreed that the aide to the Congo should be channeled through U.N.
September 29. The Balubas who attacked the Umpemba  parkin the centre of Katanga, withdrew after the intervention of the Katanga policemen, supported by the Moroccan units of U.N.
September 30. “We will not accept to participate in the round table conference, proposed by Colonel Mobutu, unless the conference takes place outside Leopoldville, in an African neutral territory” declared Mr. Albert Kalondji, self-styeld President of the “autonomus state of kasai,” while he was passing through Brazzaville.
With the arrival of an Indonesian contingent, the U.N. force in Congo will reach 18,000 men representing 28 nations, declared the spokesman of U.N. general headquarter in the Congo. Arrival of Nigerian and the Malayan contingents  bring to 30 nattions that will be reperesented.
October 4. Defining the positionof the government party, “Conacta,” its president, Mr. Ndala kambola declared the following measures for Katanga:
The evacuation of all the Belgians who woud not take Katanga nationality.
Nationalisation of the “Union miniere” of Upper Katanga and all Belgian compains.
Katanga administration’s preference of French, Canadian, German to Brlgian technicians.
Refusal of accepting new Belgian Contingents and capital. Mr. Nold Kambola then accused the U.N. of putting arms to elements opposing the Katanga government, so that to serve the interests of Mr. Lumumba.
October 5. Mr. Jean Finant, president of the government in the Eastern      province and  principal collaborator of Mr. Lumumba, and Louis Lumumba, younger brother of the prime Minister, and Minister of Interior in this province, have been arrested in their residence by the order of Colonel Mobutu.
October 6.Mr. kambola, who declared him self as president of the “Conakat”, stated that his threat to nationalise the Belgian enterprises was meant to make nthe Belgians revise their policy in regard to Katanga.
October 7. Reshuffiling of Lumumba government. Deputy General N.polo held a press conference.Colonel cobutu gava order at once to arrest Deputy General N. polo, but the Conglolese soldiers arrived late, the general had already left his residence. In his place, many of his collaborators were arrested.
October 8. The katanga government would envisage the break up of diplomatic relarions with Belgium, if the latter main tains its “unfriendly” attitude, declared Mr. Tashombe. Commenting the recent declaration, made by Mr. Gaston Eyston Eyskens, and concering the non-recognition of Katanga.
October 9. The situation gut worse in the noth-East Katanga the U.N. announced that a group of Ethiopian troops had been sent urgently to the spot: and that the Katanga police would recnforee its contingents.
Mr Lumumba escaped arrest during his weekly out in which he transformed it into succession of political meetings. Three minutes later, about 30 men in a truck arrived, after he had already left.
October 10. We have sent a legal notice for the arrest of Mr. Lumumba, but, the execution of his arrest had been prevented, declared Mr. Bomboko, president of the college of general commissioners of the congo.
We have alredy contacted the U.N. in view of the execution of this notice, cortinued Mr. Bomboko. We believe, he added, that the attitude of the united nations is insdired by the threat of certain African countries, who defend Lumumba. We have enough of this so called. African polities of eertain countries who would lige to establish bere their influed nations saving: “if the united nations is not willing to hand over. Patrice Lumumba the natioral Congolese army will take its responsabilities”
About a hurdred of Balubas were reported to have been killed in the last 72 baurs and this would bring the number of the vietims, since the beginning of the trouble. To about 380.
October 11. Awell informed couree reveald that the special representative of U.N. secretary General. Opposed the arrest of Mr. Patrice Lumumba.
The spokesman of the U.N. at Elisabethville announeed that eight hundred Ethuopan soldiers of the united nations force. Arrived at kabalo, in the north of Katanga. some more Ethiopian soldiers are expected there to replace gradually the senegalese and the Malian troops who are  going back to Dakar and Bamako respectively.
October 12. Mr. Joseph kasavubu, Mr. Justin Bomboko and colonel Mobutu, sent a joint telegramme to Mr Hammarskjoeld asking him implicitly to come back over the U.N. decision, in regard to Mr, Lummba’s arrest.
October 13. We don’t want war with the United Nations, the Congolese blood is too precious for us” declares colonel Mobutu, as he left the “royal residence.”  “It is not up to Mr. Bomboko or the General Commissioners to give orders to the  army for the arrest of Mr. Lumumba.” added the colonel. “ but it is up to me. to order the army.”
Colonel Mobubu’s soldiers decided to encircle and watch Mr. Lumumba’s residence.
October 16. Colonel Mobutu, Chief of the Congoles army, coming from Leopoldville by plane, arrived at Elisabethville. Immediatily, he went to see the Head of the katanga province, with whom he had a talk.
October 21. After having announced that he had sebt a message to Mr. Dag Hammarskiaeld asking him to call back Mr. Ian Berendson and the members of the chief of staff  in the U.N. general  head quarter  in Elisabethville, Mr. Tshombe declared to the press that his demand was made in view of the lack of confidence in the U.N. in the affairs of Kabale.
October 24. Some congolese soldiers. About one thcusand in number and well equipped with arms and munitions. Were heading towards Bakwang, eapital of southern kasa, announced a communiqué of the chief of staff of the police Force of the province. The communiqué added that U.N. force was informed ot this and is expeeted to intervene. If failed the southern kasai police force would take on offensive operation.
October 25. A group of Congolese national armv has been controlling the African seetion of Leopoldville, since three days, by asking and searching identification papers.
HAILE SELASSIE I
PRIZE TRUSET
-8
Ethiopia studies Award 10 October 1964 PROF, MARCEL COHEN A Frenchman and  scholar of renown , professor Mrcel Cohenhas extensively written on Ethiopia especially on our history, customers, ceremonies, and games. In addition to his scholarly commitments, professor Cohen has been awarded the Croix de Guerre in both world wars.
The Haile Selassie award for Ethiopia Studies of a value of Eth. $20,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to professor Marcel Cohen, doyen of Ethiopiacists world-renowned linguist and Semitic scholar, for his creation in paris of the school of Ethiopian Studies, and for the inspiration which, his orginginal research and brilliant writings have given to his contemporaries, his pupils and his pupils' pupils.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY PROF. MARCEL COHEN
C'est avec une grande fierte que jiai requ la distinction qui m'a ete accordee ici comme couronnement de ma carriere d'ethiopisant. Au bout de plus de quarante annees ouj'ai enseigne i'amharigna et le geez, j'ai eu le plaisir, le bonheur, je dois dire, de former , d'aider plutot a la formation d'un assez grand nombre de savants plus jeunes que moi, qui continuent mes travaux, aet dont vous connaisez plusieurs, parce qu'ills sont venus travailler ici dans le pays-meme. ii y en aqui sejournent encore parmi vous, d'autres qui sont venus et qui revidendront encore. je dois mentionner aussique pendant ces annees d'etntre vous pourront connatre.
C'est avec joie que je me suis retouve dans cette ville que jen'avais pas vue depuis 53 ans. je l'ai trouvee evidemment changee. j'ai vu la sous mes yeux ce que je capitale. Du temps ou j'y etais deja le grand Menelik ii avait introduit cet instrument de la vie moderne qu'est i'imprimerie, et il avait fovorise la creation de premieres ecoles. Aujourd ' hul ce sont des livres en grande quantite qui s'imriment ici. ii y a beaucopu de jenes auteurs, et sous le patronage de Sa majeste I' Empereur Haile Selassie les decoles se sont multipliees  et se multiplint et s'augmentent toujour. Et e plus il a founde cette nouvelle organisation dont nous beneficions aujourd;hui, et dnt je laremercie encore pour ma part.
His imperial Majesty awarding prof. Marcel Cohen, presented by H.E . Commodors Iskinder Desta.
Africa Research Award 10 October 1964
PROF WILLIAM LEO HANSBERRY
professor William leo Hansberry was born in Mississipi and educted in HArvard, Virginia State Collge, the Universities of Oxford and Cairo and has served Howard University over a long period of time. Beginning 40 years ago, he introduced the first course on early African civilisations, course eriched and documented with material obtained often at his ownd expense and presented always with his exemplary dedication to the truth revealed by research.
Prof William Leo Hansberry is an Adviser and Distinguished professor of the University of Nigeria;a Trustee of the African- American institute ; for eight years the was Chairman of the Governing council of Africa House in Washington, and also Adviser to the private organisation,, Operations Cross-roads Africa."
The Haile Selassie Award for AFrican Research of a value of Eth. $70,000, gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to professor William Leo Hansberry for his an thropological, archaeological and historical studies of Africa, for being the tourch bearer who opened the eyes of his fellow-Americans to see and appreciated the vast and still uncharted world of African history, and for the inspiration he gave to a whole generation of students - the present leaders of African and through them the people generation of students- the present leaders of Africa and through them the people generation of students- the present leaders of African and through them the people generation fo students- the present leaders of Africa and through them the people of Africa-to reafffirm their identity so that they can face the future with faith, confidence and courage.
Acceptance speech by Prof. William Leo Hansberry
For nearly 50 yyears, I have been endeavouring to search out and correelted and synthesize in a critical and humanized manner the relevant evidence relating to Africa's true position in world history and in world affairs. In the course of this effort, I have been profoundly impressed by the abudance of evidence relating to Africa's storied and unstoried past. But I have often been deeply distressed by the fact that the truie import of this evidence was so little known to the world at large.
I was therefore immensely pleased when I learned that your imperial Maesty had established a Trust which has as one of its primaerey objectives to recogize and encourage those who are devoting themselves to the task of making this vast body of evidence available in convenient from to the world at large. I was especially gratified of evidence available in convenient form to the world at large. I was especially gratified when I lerned that I had been chosen as a recipient of the first Haile Selassie I prize Trust Award for African Research in m y efforts towards this end.
I am confident, your imperial MAjesty, that many of my fellow-Americans and African brothers join me in expressing to you and the Trustees of the Haile Selassie I prize Trust my very deep gratitude for the great honour which you have bestowed upon me for my effort over deep gratitude for the grat honour which you have bestowed upon me for my efforts over the years to asssist in correcting longstanding misconceptions about Africa's proper place in world  history and in world affairs.
May God grant that your great work continue for many years to come.
His imperial Majesty awarding prof. W.L. Hansberry, presented by Ato Wondowesen Mengesha.
HE ATO KEBEDE MIKAEL
HE ATO KEBEDE MIKAEL has assured himself and honoured place among Ethiopia authors through his litary achievements and dedication to intellecual pursuits.
The Haile Selassie Award for Amharic Literature of a value of Eth.$7,000, gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to H.E. Ato Kebde Mikel, for his signifcant contribution to the enrichment of the Amharic language by providing rich and diversified literature to the learning and reading public, by adapting renowned literary national language is flexible, rich , adaptable, and capable to express not only the cultural heritage of Ethiopia but also the heritages of other nations.
HE Ato Kebede Mikael, laureate of Amharic Litrature.
ATO AFEWERK TEKLE
The Ethiopia artist of international repute was born in 1925 E.C in Ankober in teh province of Showa. His early training as an artist was mainly at the Slade Faculty of ARts in London, He has since studied in paris, Rome, Florence and Spain. The works of Afewerk Tekele are to be found in private and public collection in Europe, Russia, America and Africa.
Te Haile Selassie Award for fine Arts of a value of Eth. $7,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to Ato Afewerk Tekele, versatile and disciplined artis, for his outstanding paintings, drawings, landscapes, oils, and portraits which eloquently express his particular world environment, and for his contribution in being among the first to introduce contemporary techniques to Ethiopian subject matter and content.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY ATO AFEWERK TEKLE
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
On this solemn occasion of my extreme happines, I cannot help remembering that repeated affirmation by the many schoars and philosophers, who have contemplated at length on this life of ours "that a span of man's life is somposed of sorrow and happiness alternately".
In saying this, the span of my young life, particularly in my childhood, I do not recall any happiness, except times filled with suffering and sorrow. But now, thanks last few years the fruits of my hard work have brought me appreciation from the one who brought me up and educated me, my sovereign Emperir; admiration from the who brought me up and educated me, my Sovereign Emperor; admiration from the enlightened public at large, and great happiness to me as I have never experienced.
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY,
I humbly beg your gracious MAjesty to allow me to tell those in this assembly. in particular those who witnessed and gave me moral support in my diffcult and sometimes impossible struggles in teh creative field for the dignity and integrity of art. With your gracious permission I was to say to them "I aM INDEED HAPPY TODAY AND THEY SHOULD BE HAPPY TOO!"
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY, The patron and protector of Ethiopian, indeed of African Art,
In being the first artist to receive this prize which is highly esteemed and possessing the historic name of your Majesty, I feel  indeed most  honored. May God and history reward you.
Long live the Emperor
May Ethiopia live forever
HIM awarding Ato Afewerk Tekle, presented by Ato Abebe Kebede.
TEKA EGHANO AND COMPANY
During the past seven years the company of take Eghano has continually striven to produce coffee of ever-improved quality. At the same time, it has given priority to the human take of promoting the level of its employees and their training for better achievements.
ATO TEKA EGHANO
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY!
It is great joy to me to come before Your Majesty and express my throughts, For reasons that agriculture is belived to be Ethiopia's Source of economy, and for my being the award recipient of the Haile Selassie I Prize Trust, my joy is double fold.
Although plantation of coffee- the cause for our award- is a tiring task, we started growing coffee wigthout having enough capital, but with spirit and courage. Under Mr. Costa Alexandrakis, Mr. Guisseppe Galantina and my self collaborated to this venture and now we are granted this honour. Aside from this , the money we borrowed from teh Development Bank of Ethhiopia-established by Your Majesty's farsightedness is the rsult of this honour.
YOUR MAJESTY!
people from teh province I reside in say that , "cofffee kills her owner and rises herself", and I belive that they have good resons for saying this. Allthough it is difficult to use manual power of only few, as has been repeatedly stated by Your majesty, agriculture, and in particular coffee plantation is the step to development.
In any kind of work, there should be moral support. It is when there is such support that one's spirit is aroused. It is our hope-be it for coffee or any other  kind of agriculture- that there will  be many Ethiopian specialists, for their help and advise are needed.
For the privilege in cooperative farms, and in our day and night endevour, I managed to establish a company in my name, and for me to receive an award in the name of the company is a significant example to all private farm investors.
I believe that this award will arouse the urge of thousands of Ethiopias, and inspire them to work, and abolish the idea of saying. "We work, but out work is not recognized". The award is not limited only to the joy of the recipient, but will not b e denied that it is a base to development and prosperity of Ethiopia.
As people form any party of the world with prominent services recive awards from this Trust, I believe that we, Your people of Ethiopia, according to our ability would with spirit and wholeheartedness serive to be participants of international awards.
Long live Your Imperial Majesty!
Long live His imperial Highness!
Long live Ethiopia for every free.
HIM awarding Ato Teka Eghano, presented by Dr. G.E.W. Wolstenholme.
ETHIOPIAN TYRE ECONOMY PLANT
The Ethiopia Tyro Economy plant merits recognition for endeavors contributive to the growth of the national economy and the exemplary value of its activities during the seven years of its existence.
The Haile Selassie Award for industry of a value of Eth. $ 7,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to The Ethiopian Tyre Ecopnomy plant for its examplary management that  has manifested over a period of seven years daring, ingenuity, progressiveness, and energetic leadership. The management has insight and ability to explore and succeed in a venture that was initially uncertain but which later succeeded  not only in the limited objective of rethreading used tyres, but in the larger enterprise of producing rubber soles for the previously importing shoe industries in Ethiopia.
His Imperial Majesty awaring Ato Gebreyesus Oda, Presented by Mr. W.J. Pile.
In Addis Ababa Adwa, Asumera, Bhaer Dar, Dire Dawa and Hagere Hiwot, the influence of the young Men's Christian Asociation has made itself felt in tehe social educational and spiritual needs of thousands young men and women. It has given practical aid to the youth of Ethiopia and promoted their activities. It sets an example of service and ledership which is of incalculable value to this country.
The Haile Selassie Award for Humanitarian Activities of of a value of Eth. $7,000 gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to the young Men's Christian Association in Ethiopia for its significant role over a period of 17 years in instilling high ideals of enlightened citizenship and concern for the welfare of fellowmen in teh minds of over 150,000 Ethiopias infll walks of life through the provision of diversified social educational and sports program.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY H.E. COL. TAMRAT YIGEZU PRESIDENT OF THE YMCA
Your imperial Majesty
Members of the imperial Court Trustees of the Haile Selassie I prize Trust Fellow Award Winners Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlem. One behalf of the Young Men's Christian Association's Board of MAnagers, our total membership, contributors and staff we weould like to express our deep appreciation to your imperial MAjesty and teh Trustees of teh Haile Selassie i prize Trust for this honour bestowed upon us.
This honour is being shared with the YMCAs around the world. Telegrams have been received expressing their apprecitaion to your imperial majesty and congratulations to the Ethiopian YMCA. For our YMCA this honour brings into focus a long tradition of service to  youth through the YMCA. The YMCA movement had its beginning in London, England in 1844. There  have been many significant highlights in teh history of teh EThiopian YMCA starting with your majesty's reqest to the World Alliance of YMCAs in Generva, Switzerland in 1947 for a YMCA to be established in EThiopia. Then came the involvemetn of the international Committee of YMCAs of the United States and Canada in 1950, and following 11 years later in 1961 we were recognized as full members in teh World Alliance. Today this recognition amplifies our common concern for the welfare of youth.
Youth from all walks of life participate in teh multiphase program of the Ethiopian Association:- in literacy prgrams. bnoys' schools, recreation, sports,  boys' clubs, mass education, musical prgrams, lectures, debates, team sports, scraft classes, yyoung mens' clubs and numerous other activities which are created around teh need and interests of our youth.
We wish to express our appreciation for the untiring work and devotion of our YMCA Board of MAnagers, our many committees, and our staff.
We are deeply grateful to Your imperial MAjesty for your continued inspiration to and support of our YMCA. Be assured that the award money will be used for the extension of program services for youth and the medal will be displayed in teh young Men's Christian Association. Be assured that the award money will be used for the extension of program services for youth and the medal will be displayed in teh young Men's Christian Association.
This recognition and honor is not only a great joy for the YMCA but it is also a humbling experience and a challenge. It is humbling in that it makes us evaluate and see our many shortcomings, and humbling as we are made aware of the power of God and the way in which this power works among people in the positive ways in which god makes all things possible. This is a challenges as we see ways in which we might better serve God and as we look to the future. Once again, Your imperial Majesty and the Haile Selassie i prize Trust, thank you for this honour, the Haile Selassie i prize Trust Award for Humanitarian Activities.
His imperial Majesty awarding H.E. Colonel Tamrat Yigezu, presented by H.E. Ato seyoum Haregot
EMPRESS MENEN AWARD 10 OCTOBER 1964
THE NOBEL FOUNDATION
Throughout this century the Nobel foundation has translated the beneficence of Alfred Nobel into a great record of international awards, The foundation has won the respect and administration of the greater part of teh world for its integrity, courage impartiality, internationality and conscientious judgement.
The Empress Menen Award given once in four years on teh intiative of the Trustees- with a value of Eth. $35,000 , gold medal, and diploma will be awarded to The Nobel foundation, for services to humanity in the recognition and encouragement of high purpose wherever it may be found in teh world.
ACCEPTANCE SPEEC BY PROF. A. TISELUS
In deep respect, teh Nobel Foundation with to express their gratitude for the great distinction conferred upon us, the Empress Menen Award.
The Haile Selassie i prize Trust and the Nobel Foundation have similar aims- ro recognize and to encourage achievements to the benefit of mankind. The Haile Selassie i prize Trust Awards and teh Nobel prizes also have in common that they are to be given to the worthiest without regard to  nationality, race , religion of political creed.
Our experience has show to us that it is possible to fulfill this high purposes, The difficulties are obvious and shrtcomings cannot be avoided. However, we are under the impression that even in a world of conflicting opinions in many perhaps in most questions, it is possible to find a manifest international opinion for awarding those who have made particularly valuable contributions to human welfare, human welfare in its widest and deepest sense, as an expression of teh gratitude of mankind.
We have the greatest respect and admiration for the initiative taken  by your imperial Majesty in creating this prze Trust. We believe that it is significant that Ethiopia with its high clutural ambitions and its prominent position in the great continent of Africa will be the home of this Trust.
We have great confidence in its future and we shall follow its activities with great sympathy and great interest.
On behalf of the Nobel Foundation, may i express to your imperial Majesty our deepest gratitude.
Empress Menen Award: Prof.  Tiselius, on behalf of the Nobel Foundation, receives the prize.
Haile Selassie prize laureates.
PROFESSOR WOLF LESLAU
professor Leslau was born on November 14,1906 in Czeschowa, poland, at the University of Vienna, and in Paris at the Ecole National des Langues Orientales, and the Sorbonne, where he obtained his Licence-es-Lettres and Docteur-es-Lettres.
He has taught in several institutions among which are Brandeis Unviersity, New School for Social Research, Asia Institute, and the University College of Addis Ababa as a Visiting professor. He is presently [professor of Hebrew and Semitic Linguistics and Chairman of the Department of Near Eastern and Africa Languages at the University of California, Los Angeles. He was recently nominated FAculty Research Lecturer for 1965-66 by his colleagues in recongnition of his achievements in Semitic studies. Author, educator, orientalist, Prof, Leslau has written 17 books and over 200 articles.
Prof Leslau has conducted research in teh Eghiopic languages during the last thirty years and published extesnively, his most important contributions including a Tigrgana grammar, the obnly scientific grammar of Tigre, a description of the Gafat languge, a number of studies of teh history of Amharic, numerous studies on teh Gurage dialects, a Harari dictionary, and a series of articles on Arabic loanwords in the Ethiopian languages.
His intrest, however, its by no means limited to pure linguistics, but extends to culture and folklore He has made a scientinc study of the Falashas and their litrature, and has also done much to polularize Ethiopia folkore in other lancs. As a dedicated teacher, he has striven to encourage young Ethiopian scholar to take an interest in the scientific study of their own culture and linguistics, and their litrature, and has also done much to popularize Ethiopian studies in the New World.
Prof Leslau will  be awarded the 1965 Haile Selassie Award for Ethiopian studies of a value of Eth.
$, - gold medal, and diploma for his outstanding scholarship in particular for having spent a lifetime systematizing the knowledage of the Ethiopian languages and providing a scientinc classification of them.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY PROF. WOLF LESLAU
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY,
Members of the Board, Ladies and Gentlemen:-I wish to express my profound gratitude to the Haile Selassie I prize Trust for having aganted me the award for Ethiopian Studies. I am particularly happy for having received the award from a country that manifested its intellectual maturity as far back as the 4th century of our era.
Indeed. beginning with that time Ethiopia was able to record its culture, history and religion through inscriptions and literary documents. It is a further a sign of intellectual maturity that the present government of Ethiopia under the leadership of His imperial Majesty Haile Selassie i, Started to take stock of its cultural heritage through the creation of various institutions of research. I am referring to the archeological mission and teh institute of Ethiopian Studies, institutions that investigate the culture of the country in its broad aspects.
It is a sign of intellectual maturity to given recognition to the scientific contributions of those individuals who study the various aspects of Ethiopian culture.The Haile Selassie I prize Trust tiook this initiative.
I am particularly happy that the Haile Selassie I prize Trust by granting the Award for Ethiopian Studies to a linguist has recognized the importance that investigation of the country's various languages holds for our knowledage of Ethiopia's cultural and historical past.
His imperial MAjesty awarding prof. W. Leslau, presented by H.E. Lidj Kassa Wolde Mariam.It is a sign of intellectual maturity that the Award for Ethiopia Studies was given to a non-national for his contributions to Ethiopian Studies. Few nations have achieved this maturity. I hope, however, that the day will come wehen the recipien of this award will be an Ethiopian national, an Ethiopian who will devote his lifetime to the country, the attitude of today's intellectual who studies either at the University of this country or abroad, and the attitude of teh non- intellectual who was curious about my reasons for giving attention to languages such as Chaha, Adare, Selti and Argobba . And when I answered that i did it,, latarik". for history , for research, he understood this reason and gave me his full coopration.
It is this attitude of the intellectual and or the non-intellectual alike that makes us foresee the day when the recipient of the Award for Ethiopia Studies will be an Ethiopian. It is in the hope of having contributed towards the achievement of this goal that I grateful accept eh Haile Selassie Award foe Ethiopian Studies.
HE BALAMBARAS MAHTEME SELASSIE WOLDE MESKEL
HE Balambaras Mahteme Selassie Wolrd MEskel was born on October 29th , 1950 in Addis Ababa and is the father of ten Children. Educated at Menelik II Schools, Addis Ababa Frency ,, Lycee" in Cairo, and institute National Superieur c'Agriculture Colonial in paris, HE Balambaras Mahteme Selassie holds a diploma in general agriculture.
Decorated many times at home and abroad, His Excellency is distinguished public official with many years of dedicated service in various fields. His Excellency has served as Minister of Agriculture, Finance, Minister of State in teh Ministry of Education, and is presently the Minister of public workers and Communications.
The stuggle of Amharic to evolve its own identify and develop as a language was made more difficult than ever before by teh introducation of the compeitive European languages and culture. Tehsis problem can be overcome when the Ethiopian heritage is written and recorded for transmission to future generations. At a period when and Amharic is passing through such a transitional and critical stage, His Excellency has made available works outstanding in their literary beauty of the Ethioppian legacy.
His excellency Balambaras Mahiteme Selassie has admirably and largely fulfilled these obligations to conserve and preserve the Ethiopian heritage through his numerous volumes. His writings, especially,, Yamarigna Kine", ,, Yabatoch kirse" and ,, Zikrae Neger" are examples of teh contributions that have assured His Excellency of a respected and high place among scholars in Amharic.
His Excellency has selectfully and meaningfull compiled poems and sayings and recorded church and court procedures which heretofore have been orally transmittd from generation to generation. The Haile Selassie Award for Amharic Literature of a value of Eth, $7,000 , gold medal, and diploma will be given to His Excellency Balamdaras Mahteme Selassie Wolde Meskel for his outstanding and lasting contributions which ensure a firm cultural foudnationa nd setting for Amharic.
Speech By Balambaras Mahteme Selassie Wolde MEskel
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
I am greatly honoured to find myself amongst the prize winners of the Haile Selassie I prize Trust and to receive from your Majesty the Award for Literature.
I was delighted when m y name was announced with those of other winners; my pleasure was even greater when i learnt that the works upon which i had laboured to immortalise the culture and tradition of our country were selected  by teh Committee as my most important contributions towards Ethiopic learning.
The Haile Selassie I prize Trust  has clearly expressed in its publication teh need for and teh value of compiling traditional works, appropriately documented and classifled, and of passing these on teh successive generations, it is indeed very gratifying to find that I have contributed towards this objective.
While it was extremely terrifying to witness the ruthless and barbarous massacre of people and teh destruction of property by teh enemy during the occupation of our country, it was equally distressing to think that tradition and culture might also vanish due to the breaking of the chain in the otherwish smooth continuity of our culture. Furthermore, it was alarming to anticipate that the new generation, readily adopting itself to foreign civilisation, would not k now of our tradition and culture if these were not handed down in writing, and would remain solely under the influence of foreign culture.
It was, threfore, because of this fear that I endeavoured to set aside my personal sentiments, as an author or historian, and sought our elders who had survived teh oppression in order to collect existing writings and subsequently to compile and coordinate all these fragments, often mutilated, so that at last some party of our culture could  be preserved for future generations. The results of my efforts include the books entitled,, Zikre Neger" (Recollections of Bygone Times).,, Yabatoch Kirs" (Heritage from our Forefathers), ,,Amarigna ine" (Amharic Poetry) and,, inkilf Lemine" (Why sleep),. giving a clear picture of our society.
Each of these four books is characteristic: the first shows us that "Our way of life not only reflects our natural abilities but also our tendencies and inclinations", the second that "Most of our proverbs are based on holy writings", the third that "Our poetry is extremely beautiful", and lastly, the fourth that, Our fables illustrate good principles and there is always a moral to be drawn from them".
I feel that I must mention here that I was given sound moral support by the decision of the Ministry of Education and Fine Arts to include the above books in its school curriculum, for which I am deeply grateful, and also for the encouragement and support that I received from friends, teachers and scholars abroad.
In general, our language is rich and beautiful if studied deeply. One word may have several meanings each conveying different ideas.
I believe that the foregoing books, if followed by many other similar works, will give a clear picture of Ethiopian culture.
It is well known that seeking culture from without can make knowledge complete only when it complements the knowledge of one's own. And regarding the knowledge of our own culture, Ethiopia offers a field as rich as it is vast on which to draw. Once our ancestral heritage is reconstructed, nothing would hinder us from making it known to the rest of the world. Thus, it would be expedient for the youth of our country to adopt the motto "We also have it and we are making it known to you". I say this because I know it is the desire of every Ethiopian to see our language and culture propagated.
His imperial Majesty awarding, H.E, Blatten Guesta Mehteme Selassie W.Meskel.
YOUR MAJESTY.
Among the innumerable institutions established by Your Majesty for the development and prestige of Ethiopia, the Haile Selassie I prize Trust is that which offers moral encouragement and a greater cultural life. And, well knowing that the deliberations of the Trustees and their committee of experts are not only of great importance but also very difficult, -- in that the assessment of workers is carried out not through peronal contact with candidates considered, but purely by appraisal of various works through painstaking investigation and review -- I beg Your Majesty's permission to thank, in your presence, The Trustees and all those assisting them in their aduous task.
Long Live His Imperial Majesty
Long Live His Imperial Highness the Crown prince
Long Live Ethiopia in independence.
ATO GEBRE KRISTOS DESTA
Born on the 15th October, 1932 in Harrar, Ato Gebre Kristos Desta was educated in Germany where he obtained diplomas in his academic endeavors and in his professional field of fine arts. In addition to his artistic achievements for which he is being honored, Ato Gebre Kristos writes poems and short stories and he is teaching at the Menelik II Fine Arts School.
A gifted artist with outstanding creative and interpretative abilities, he is largely responsible for introducing non-figurative art in this country. He successfully represents the modern trend among Ethiopian painters and his works constitute a brilliant contribution to the recent development of the world of art at large.
His paintings, which always maintain relationship with reality, manifest a distinct technique full of vitality, discipline, and expressionism.
HIM awarding Ato Gebre Kristos Desta. Fine Arts Prize, 1965.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY ATO GEBRE KRISTOS DESTA
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
The prize Trust which has been established through your Majesty's goodwill and foresight will, undoubtedly, encourage many people and open new avenues to wards different kinds of knowledge.
The main aim of human-being is to make his dreams come true on one hand, and to reap the fruits of his toil on the other. Since civilization itself is history it is difficult to see its result within the span of time of generation or two. But to open new roads of civilization is to encourage the present generation and to pave the way in advance for the coming one. Whenever there is a new kind of civilization, it is possible that the voice of criticism is likely to be heard loud. Any new kind of civilization, if not started at the present time, will become strong and difficult to grasp even when it comes after ten years.
These difficulties have been also felt in the field of Fine Arts -- many artists of the past have been neglected and forgotten during their lifetime, but their works have been praised by the second or the third generation. Although the painter reflects the image of his time and expresses things surrounding him, history has represent ones express the beauty of man and his growth and civilization in general. Although as long as he exists on this planet man is the measure of all things, modern man considers himself as the key to a certain kind of knowledge. But he doesn't boast of his perfection and wisdom.
Modern art also follows the same thought -- the artist tries to see the world subjectively; he tries to express nature around him. On the whole, he endeavors to create new ways and means to explain the universe in general. Nowadays, painting is not limited, and is not led into a narrow channel -- instead, it has become a knowledge which moves fast in many different directions. It is this knowledge of research that makes modern art somewhat confusing.
In life as in the creative process confusion has its own laws and symmetry which definer its mere existence -- likewise, abstract or modern art has its own rules and its own language. Until this language is mastered many people might find abstract art confusing. In art, the greatest happiness is work and the result of creation. Modern art, as the classical paintings, doesn't tell stories and show realistic things like the camera does. In the language of modern art the painting itself is an idea; it is the feeling, the thought, and the expression of something. In this twentieth century, when man delves into space and tries to find the meaning of the universe, in painting too, instead of concentrating on himself alone, man sees the world from many different aspects and tries to express the eternal and the universal by creating music in color, line and form.
YOUR MAJESTY,
Like agriculture, industry and economy, which are the backbones of a country, the Fine Arts are gaining importance in Ethiopia -- and the recognition of Modern Art today by this Prize Trust is highly plausible. This prize is for me, until now, the greatest and I honor it. I have submitted to your Majesty my future plan which will be very useful for the development of art in our country -- and I am sure your Majesty will help me.
I thank from the depth of my heart your Imperial Majesty who is the Founder and the Patron of this foundation. I also thank the Trustees and the judges and wish them success in their future endeavor.
DUMCO DUM COMPANY LTD. (MANIFATTURA SACCHI ASMARA) 	Long live your Imperial Majesty
DUMCO Dum company Ltd. Share Company and its subsidiary, Manifattura Sacchi Asmara, were established in 1950 and in 1960 respectively. DUMCO Dum Company is especially engaged in the extraction of textile fibers from the Doum Palm leaves while Manifattura Sacchi Asmara specializes in the conversion of the Doum fibers into sacks, twines, and cloth. 		Long live members of the Imperial Family
Technical experts have over half a century attempted to extract fiber from Doum Palm leaves but failed to attain tangible results. DUMCO Dum Co. Ltd. succeed admirably in both perfecting the extraction process as well as in conceiving,  designing, and building a prototype of the machine for processing, it developed this technique after ten years of sacrifice, hard work, and perseverance. 		Long live Ethiopia.
The fiber obtained through this process has proved to be fine substitute four jute on which the world's sacking industry primarily depended. With the latest improvements in techniques and machinery, the Doum Palm fiber price compares favorably ably with the price of jute.
The achievement of the Company, which presently employees 650 people, has proved to be more than a local industrial success and one of self-sufficiency. Other countries such as the Sudan and buying sacks from Ethiopia and many others are considering the establishment of similar undertakings.
Manifattura Sacchi Dum Company Ltd. Asmara will be recognized for the uniqueness in its achievement, its contribution to the national economy, and exemplary importance at the international level. Manifattura Sacchi Dum Company will receive the 1965 Haile Selassie Award for industry of a value of Eth. $ 7,000, gold medal, and a diploma.
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH BY MR. TULLIO CAMERINO
YOUR IMPERIAL MAJESTY
The great honor that has been bestowed by the Haile Selassie I Prize Trust upon the group if industrial activities I have the privilege of launching and realizing gives me today the coveted opportunity of expressing to your Imperial Majesty my most heartfelt thanks together with my sincerest respect.
I believe that your Majesty would like to hear from the living, sincere and deeply moved voice of a foreigner working in the freedom of your Empire the expression of gratitude that I feel my duty to extend to all the Ethiopian labor working in my factories. To them, besides to the gracious kindness of your Imperial Majesty and the benevolent consideration of the Prize Committee, I owe the high recognition granted on this unforgettable moment.
From the world of your Imperial Majesty at the time of establishing the Prize Trust, it is obvious that the progress of the Empire of Ethiopia is of primary but not the sole concern of the Ethiopian. He is also concerned with the welfare of the continent of Africa and the whole world as well. It is because of the farsighted and universal concern that your Imperial Majesty has desired that the contribution of Ethiopian citizens as well as foreign nationals living and working permanently in Ethiopia be officially recognized.
The highest summit of world peace, the welfare mankind, mutual understanding between peoples will be reached in the future -- a desirable future -- through work alone. It is work which brings men closer, unit them, and makes them seek together for peace, welfare, and dignity.
It is in work, guided but free, intelligent and qualified , aware and respectful of the human rights that God granted, in work designed to realize the general welfare and unforgetful of the superior aim of the improvements of the individual, that men can hope with good reason to find a peaceful, prosperous and better tomorrow.
Your Imperial Majesty, I most respectfully ask Imperial Majesty to allow me to express here the hope and the wish that not only the prize awarded to me but also the constant benevolence, the high protection and the continuous effort for an ordered progress of this country will make work, loved and respected in the Empire of Ethiopia. May Ethiopia maintain, under the enlightened guidance of your Imperial Majesty, the prominent rank in spiritual and material progress it has attained in these difficult times.
May God protect and bless this country where the work and the initiative of men from every land are respected and helped and may it never fail to have the peace promised on earth to all men of good will.
Chapter 21
The Last Epoch of Menelik- The Conclusion of the chronicle
In Ethiopia the first years of the 19th century were times when many new things were seen and started.
Moreover, Emperor Menilik all of a sudden became ill and started to become weak although he deserves appreciation for bringing civilization.
With regards to education his attempts so as to make his country's people assiduous, and to enable them understand the value of education and start learning could be seen form the strict proclamation he issued.
"Conquering Lion of the tribe of Judah Menelik II Emperor of Ethiopia" up to now anyone with a skillful hands to do thins used to be called names, therefore, nobody used to work hard to learn and train.
If we line with such harmful situation, churches would be closed, above all, Christianity wouldn't e found.
In other countries not only would they learn each thing, but they also do new things.
Therefore, let all boys and girls enter school offer their six years of age.
Families who are not attentive to teach their children, when the parents die their properties would the transferred to the government, instead of to their children.
It's my government which prepares students and teachers.
, Emperor Menelik".
The issuance of this strict proclamation of confiscation of ownership of land and property is one doesn't comply with education legislative decree showed his great intention with regards to education.
So, for the first time, to start European education, he brought teachers form Egypt an opened a school which is called up to now in his name the Menelik II school in 1908.
He did this thinking that it is the first road for a nation's civilization.
During that time, unless one wanted to use it for clerical services in the church or to be a writer, no one took the skills of reading and writing seriously.
Indeed there were many important things that used to be improved and established.
However, he didn't get enough time for other things and improve greatly the administration apart from developing a nation at a time of war, protecting the enemy that came and establishing peace to his people.
Out of what we callas Menelik's peaceful era, the years after the Adowa war, 6 years were the time when emperor Menelik was obliged to stay at home due to illness, and as a result, his natural diligence and strength became weakened and hindered most of the work.
The first feeling of weariness and illness seemed to have started around 1905.
At a time of consultation meeting, a feeling of boredom was seen on him rather than the usual alertness and motivation for work and understanding with patience.
His strong body seemed to have become wearied.
His main intention was to transfer in a strong base to his grandson whom he fostered, the one Ethiopian government which was a stable territory of state which he toiled for years and established.
Hence, in 1909 he gathered his main governors, army officials and lords before Bishop Mathewos and have them vowed that his grandson Honorable son Iyasu was to be the heir so that they wouldn't betray him.
After that the 6 years up to his death were emperor Menelik's time of illness.
When he was caught by illness he was 67 years old.
During this time of illness, impress Taitu tried her best to seize power.
Nevertheless, the emperor, army officials like Tesema and Habte Ghiorgis who were obedient servants an other lords of the house were seriously opposed the idea of her taking power and so the empress' wish wasn't fulfilled.
Prince Mekonnen whom Menelik likes and trusts as his own son and who expands the Harar Province and whose name is mentioned as a hero during the Adowa war died earlier in 1906.
Army official Tesema, too died at a time when emperor Menelik was seriously ill in 1911 just before the emperor's death.
Emperor Menelik who had done all great things in history and unforgettable, the skills of which he brought about were worthy an glittering like a diamond, was forced to patiently hear in his illness unto death in 1914 things that were being done in his government, which may probably be against his will.
In his 35 years of power, he over came very difficult situations with luck patience and wisdom.
His time of power had a lot of struggle and needed great sacrifice and de void of repose.
In this struggle, he was able to receive the prestigious crown of history through his accomplishment, in being able to combine the wishes of the two heroic kings, Emperor Tewdros, who wished to make Ethiopia one, and Emperor Yohannes, who displayed a great love for his country, and in doing so, Menelik could make Ethiopia wide and strong.
After this what remained was through following his steps holding fast and preserve what he struggled and toiled for.
Emperor Menelik also was a fair judge, that was expected from a king above any other work, who loves straight and truthful things, and who properly punished the wrong doer, and for the one who was done wrong, he kept it rights.
He was also popular for his generosity to the poor and being compassionate supporter.
He was a king who used to say in Ethiopian land, after the right land measurement had been make with a long leather or rope, "If during my reign, anyone doesn't take hold of land and those who preferred to get in to your province of birth, you'll remain without land as well as remain staying where you are."
So, due to his generosity and mercifulness, he used to be called by the name a compassionate mother is called and an unforgettable title among his people "motherly Menelik".
The priests, merchants and farmers whom Menelik used to give mantle, soft palate-horse, mule, silver, and oxen and cows, though officially his death, was obscured after December 11, 1914, his people knew from hearsay that he had passed away , and so they used to compose averse at every work place.
The Empress' Time of Banishment
On April 11, 1911 Tesema the Duke died of a sudden illness.
Since the Honorable son Iyasu was only fifteen then, he was the heir of King Menelik, he started ruling Ethiopia independently.
Nevertheless, being aware of his lack and maturity of administration he chose some of the royal family members to help him, but with regards to sharing counsel it was told that they didn't have the skill and the strength.
(Based on the conventional generation live Taye Gulelat, next to Abeto Iyasu, was by far capable than any other members.
Look at the Honorable child Mahtemeselassie woldemeskel Hulke, Generation of the Royal Family of Sahleselassie, table (2nd line).
Abetu Iyasu, after ruling as being a plenipotentiary, in order to avoid the prophecy that "a queen would arise after king Menelik", he reminded queen Taitu to altogether get out of the Palace and stay at Intoto in banishment, (After seeing the political clash that was going on in Addis Ababa, especially the activities of General Ayalew, who was observed by Lord Michael as being opposition to his son's authority, he was expecting serious measures to be taken against him; in contrast, he was not only released from his arrest but also given promotion at Kembata town, which left him an aching void.
Instead of this, when it is looked at from the matter that led them to have strong desire to oppose the ‘empress' relatives, it is possible to estimate the reason as to why the long-standing conflict with Lord Wole was tight with regards to the matter mentioned above).
Because Abeto Iyasu had not entered the palace queen Taitu spent few months there and on the fifth day of July according to the command was decided to make her move to Entoto.
(At the time Lord Wole consulted his followers to go to Addis Ababa the army leader General Yimer explained his readiness to war for the he said how could we keep silent while the Queen is deposed from her authority.
Lord wole was quoted saying along with the criticism and explained that war was wrong "How could I dismantle the government I built with menelik".
Honorable son Desta Aleme, Zini Kemahu).
Before she started her journey on Thursday, she entered the drawing room where her husband's corpse laid to rest next to St. Mary church, at 4 o'clock in the morning.
The death of Emperor Menelik was not disclosed to the public because General Habte Giorgis consulted them not to.
Unable to control her tears, the Empress said, "I have already put aside my harvest, what do I have here, my lord! I will also follow you in my time," and cried.
The people who were around her were touched by her sorrow.
And started crying.
The sorrow over the death of menelik has not yet been forgotten form the side of the people, and the additional eviction of empress Taitu from the palace was thought to induce the mourning, so the nobility, the lords and the honorable ladies wiped their tears and sympathized with each other so as to keep the secrets that has been kept as yet and not letting it out to the public at this coincidence.
Just at five o'clock the candle that was moistened by bees wax was flickered by the butlers like torch sparkling on the area, surrounding the empress making her ready for the journey.
The commander of cavalry brought the empress' mule.
The mules of the nobility, the lords, the honorable ladies and the thirty-nine ladies of the bed-chamber, were outside the premise of the palace waiting for the arrival of the empress.
As the empress started her journey accompanied by her butlers and servants, all followed her with their mules.
When ever she feels tired the journey would break, she would ride off the mule and would sit on a chair that is given to her for taking some rest, and after a while continue the journey.
After traveling seven chapters and reached Intoto area, and a field named Usher Tezazu, a carpet was laid for her honor and on it was a sofa where she laid for a while.
The men welcomed her with cheering while the women with cries of jubilation.
The priests with their ordination out fits and choirs rhythmically danced with the church song.
As soon as the welcoming ceremony was completed the honorable journey continued in high spirits the music that came out of the large wind instrument like a fife, a single-string violin and the harp loudly played accompanying it.
The parade was large.
However, the death of king Menelik which was kept secret was feared to bring about chaos due to the excessive number of the army.
Yet, the people who realized the empress' journey to Intoto expressed its heartfelt sorrow and has no other idea, the Empress appreciated and said, "we really have people" which revealed the love of the people.
As soon as she reached the Intoto palace, she invited the nobilities, lords, honorable ladies and all those army who were gathered there with a feast for the time coincided with the end of June which was also the end of "the apostle's fasting".
During the time of her banishment, for a year and six months and twenty-two days, her loyal servants and all the army didn't rob her from princlliness.
The nobility, the lords, the honorable ladies too were dropping by her day after day giving the appropriate prestige and honor.
Even Abeto Iyasu used to go and see her taking various gifts.
(In Ethiopian government administration it's known that kings used to chose and empower their consultants and for this there was an old proverb that says "A king without consultant would never reign for more than a year".
After the few dates of reminding, the uncle of Mr. Zewditu, governor Weldegiougis' land was seized by they order of honorable son Iyasu, and come to Empress Taitu asking her for being a go-between.
The empress sent the honorable kebede Adenew to honorable son Iyasu who by then used to live in his father, Duke Michael's premise, and the lather bowed his head and gave her message, and promised that he would make the release of his land effectual.
Afterwards, "Does she ever mention me?"
What did she say about me?
He asked and the messenger replied "yes she mentioned your name" and when he asked "how does she mention my name?" and the messenger replied, "he's my son, and I'm his mother and you're his sister and why didn't he visit us? What did we do to him?" and feeling regret, the honorable son Iyasu told her that he would come "Tomorrow afternoon" and she went off with this message.
On the morrow Empress Taitu was waiting him with Mrs. Zewditu, and honorable son Iyasu came as he said, and at first, the food-table was ready before the empress and Zewditu so honorable son Iyasu asked as to where his food-table was; the empress showed him hers and since he was not so happy to eat with one food-table with the empress, the empress quickly reminded him that we were to feel unhappy to eat with you in one food-table for, not you for you are not the king or queen, so they ate with one food-table and he received thank son the release of the land, and honorable left out.
After wards, the empress who was impressed by her messenger's skill apart from properly delivering the message sent by the empress his deeds to tactic fully bring them closer, asked "where on earth, for Christ's sake, did you get such a diligence" to which he replied "God pointed out for me" he said.
(Honorable Kebede Adenew, Zini Kemahu, July 5, 1980)
If we mention, for instance, the minister of defense, General Habte Ghiorgis bringing gifts of as many oxen, honey and butter, bowing and showing his obedience to her.
Since the empress knew the role he played in the conspiracy against her he came to visit her for the first time since she was banished here less than month ago and she asked him "Habte Giorgis When did you start liking me?"
"You have me placed under an interdiction not to get in to my original dwelling place" and added other wards of criticism.
The General in his very witty and wise nature.
I made consultation with the lords so that you should not go to your region.
It's to protect us from being blind.
If you go what kind of eyes, and what light do we have, I thought about Ethiopia.
And as to you, what other, who made things stable? It's you! He replied.
Interview of Priest Mekonnen and the Wiseman Abebe Worede and all who were these on September 29, 1972)
After listening patiently and attentively to him, and reflecting on it for some time, realizing that with the participation of authority others would gain political experience that help the country, she said, "Habte Ghiorgis, you convinced me! Thank you very much!" and order her servant to receive his gift.
Since on the occasion of the General's visit a feast was ready to invite the people, the lords gather together and came to the hall where the empress was located, and enjoyed the banquet.
At this juncture the empress gave farewell to general HabtetGhiorgis saying "Don't leave me, visit me".
Nevertheless, the Empress Taitu's yoke of banishment was lifted with less than three months' time.
The reason for this was Honorable son Iyasu's government could stay long and in September 1917 the cabinet of ministers Mrs. Zewditu Menelik coronated Empress Zewditu and was made to substitute and lead the government.
However, the mother Empress thought of honorably returning to the former palace would make her standard low and so preferred to stay at her palace in Intoto.
(What's termed as the fasting of the apostles and be broken on July 13 commonly called the fasting of June.)
After Empress Zewditu came to power, she loved and respected her more than any other time, historians told.
After she became Empress, she had to stay in the palace inviting and talking to guests for a month.
But after a month, she went to Intoto Palace to pay a visit to Empress Taitu.
After reaching there and met the mother empress, as she tried to bow and salute her, Empress Taitu reminded her that the crown of Ethiopia Empress Zewditu had on her head was more respected and at that time this kid of salutation would rather be done by her for it was her turn to do so, and there fore, mother the empress stood up and kissed her, it was told.
While Empress Taitu were at Intoto, she used to pray day and night wishing Ethiopia not to fall at some fault.
She used to offer her advice for the occasional request of government affairs.
For this it would be exemplary to mention what she contributed in October 1917 when the king of Wollo, Michael, opposing his son's Honorable Iyasu's deposition from his power and eviction, called for his army fro war against the new regime; as soon as this was heard the nobilities and lords of Shoa region said let's fight region going to Wollo, but General Habte Ghiourgis preferred to go to the Empress to Intoto an consult her before that.
You didn't take a wise decision for the land of Wollo is by nature barricade, so you'll have killed so many people.
Armies from Wadla Delanta area would attack you so by hook or crook bring them to Shoa, Michael is a hero, he's hasty and he'll come," she gave her wise advice.
Honorable Iyasu in his short-term office went to different regions.
The main causes for his downfall were (1) frequenting strict control, warning demotion and even punishment of death on higher officials (2) doing things that are not expected of his standard, and committing injustice, (3) not only didn't have close relation ships with officials and lords, but also didn't give due respect to elders, (4) participations which made him be suspected to have changed his religion to Islam, etc...
The several officials who were displeased by Honorable son Iyasu's administration raised these points and exaggerated, it by saying that, according to the international situation before world war I, the honorable son Iyasu has an agreement of ammunition purchase with Austria, who was an ally of Nazi, Germany, and had discussions with embassies of Germany, Turkey governments, while the British and French governments were following the matters attentively.
And later using photographic techniques, put honorable Iyasu under Muslim cultural outfits, disseminated these photos which contributed for his down fall.
In addition, an Armenian, father Mussie Leon and the owner of Cinema Empire was said to go to Egypt and brought 20,000 copies of the photograph.
Mussie Kachik Zeni Kemahu, april 1980.
The nobilities and the lords being guided by the war strategy given by the empress, were waiting for King Michael, and as she said he came to Shoa traveling day and night, where General Habte Ghiorgis fought him at a place called Segelle Meda with his army of Shoa in a few days and became victorious, taking captive of the king, history remind us.
On the other hand, as has been mentioned above, Empress Taitu apart from sharing ideas and practically supporting Emperor Menelik, after the Emperor's death she didn't stop offering advice to Empress Zewditu from her banished area, Intoto, so as to guard her commands from going out of balance and sustain her authority.
It was known that Emperor Menelik was sick and even after his assign away, the time became a transition and numerous power rival cries put Ethiopia in great controversy and this would make her a weak country, and since this was a great opportunity for a foreign enemy who would like to split up the country, she was very worried.
Because of this, time and again through the messages she used to send by her confidantes, she was advising ways of Empress Zewditu to strengthen her power, her special secretary who is still alive, Honorable son Desta Aleme, speaks.
(Honorable Son Desta: repeated 5 July, 1980)
Now the famine was severe in the land.
So when they had finished eating the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them: “Return and buy a little food for us.”
Then Judah said to him: “The man clearly warned us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’
If you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you.
But if you do not send him, we will not go down, for the man said to us, ‘You must not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’”
And Israel asked: “Why did you have to bring this trouble on me by telling the man that you had another brother?”
They replied: “The man directly inquired concerning us and our relatives, saying, ‘Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?’ and we told him these facts. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother down’?”
Judah then urged Israel his father: “Send the boy with me, and let us go on our way so that we may live and not die—we and you and our children.
I will be a guarantee for his safety. You may hold me responsible. If I fail to return him to you and present him to you, I will have sinned against you for all time.
But if we had not delayed, we could have been there and back twice by now.”
So Israel their father said to them: “If it must be so, then do this: Take the finest products of the land in your bags and carry them down to the man as a gift: a little balsam, a little honey, labdanum, resinous bark, pistachio nuts, and almonds.
Take double the money with you; and also take back the money that was returned in the mouth of your bags. Maybe it was a mistake.
Take your brother and go, return to the man.
May God Almighty grant you pity from the man, so that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. But as for me, if I must be bereaved, I will be bereaved!”
So the men took this gift, and they took double the money in their hand and Benjamin. Then they rose and went on their way down to Egypt and again stood before Joseph.
When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he at once said to the man who was over his house: “Take the men to the house and slaughter animals and prepare the meal, for the men are to eat with me at noon.”
Immediately the man did just as Joseph had said, and he took them to Joseph’s house.
But the men became afraid when they were taken to Joseph’s house, and they began to say: “It is because of the money that was returned in our bags the last time that we are being brought here. Now they will attack us and make us slaves and take our donkeys!”
So they approached the man who was over Joseph’s house and spoke to him at the entrance of the house.
They said: “Pardon us, my lord! We did come down the first time to buy food.
But when we arrived at our lodging place and began opening our bags, why, here was the money of each one in the mouth of his bag, our money in full weight. So we would like to return it personally.
And we have brought more money to buy food. We do not know who placed our money in our bags.”
Then he said: “It is all right. Do not be afraid. Your God and the God of your father put treasure in your bags. Your money came first to me.” After that he brought out Simʹe·on to them.
Then the man brought them into Joseph’s house and gave them water for washing their feet, and he gave fodder for their donkeys.
And they prepared the gift for Joseph’s coming at noon, for they had heard that they were going to eat a meal there.
When Joseph went into the house, they brought their gift to him into the house and prostrated themselves to him to the ground.
After this he inquired about their welfare and said: “How is your aged father of whom you have spoken? Is he still alive?”
To this they said: “Your servant our father is well. He is still alive.” Then they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
When he looked up and saw Benjamin his brother, the son of his mother, he said: “Is this your brother, the youngest one of whom you have spoken to me?” He added: “May God show you his favor, my son.”
Joseph then hurried out, because he was overcome with emotion for his brother, and he looked for a place to weep. So he went into a private room and gave way to tears there.
After that he washed his face and went out, now in control of himself, and he said: “Serve the meal.”
They served him by himself and them by themselves, and the Egyptians with him ate by themselves, for the Egyptians could not eat a meal with the Hebrews, because that is a detestable thing to the Egyptians.
The brothers were seated before him, the firstborn according to his right as firstborn and the youngest according to his youth, and they kept looking at one another in amazement.
He kept sending portions of food from his table to theirs, but he increased Benjamin’s portion five times the size of the portions of all the others. So they continued banqueting and drinking with him to the full.
When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons: “Why do you just keep looking at one another?”
He added: “I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us, so that we may stay alive and not die.”
So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, with his other brothers, for he said: “Perhaps a fatal accident may befall him.”
So Israel’s sons came along with the others who were coming to buy, because the famine had extended to the land of Caʹnaan.
Joseph was the man in authority over the land, and he was the one who sold grain to all the people of the earth. So Joseph’s brothers came and bowed low to him with their faces to the ground.
When Joseph saw his brothers, he immediately recognized them, but he concealed his identity from them. So he spoke harshly with them and said: “Where have you come from?” to which they said: “From the land of Caʹnaan to buy food.”
Thus Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him.
Joseph immediately remembered the dreams that he had dreamed about them, and he said to them: “You are spies! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!”
Then they said to him: “No, my lord, but your servants have come to buy food.
We are all sons of but one man. We are upright men. Your servants do not act as spies.”
But he said to them: “Not so! You have come to see the vulnerable areas of the land!”
At this they said: “Your servants are 12 brothers. We are the sons of but one man in the land of Caʹnaan, and the youngest is now with our father, whereas the other one is no more.”
However, Joseph said to them: “It is just as I said to you—‘You are spies!’
By this you will be tested: As surely as Pharʹaoh lives, you will not leave this place until your youngest brother comes here.
Send one of you to bring your brother while you remain in bondage. In this way, your words may be tested out to see if you are telling the truth. And if not, then, as surely as Pharʹaoh lives, you are spies.”
With that he put them together in custody for three days.
Joseph said to them on the third day: “Do this and live, for I fear God.
If you are upright, let one of your brothers remain in bondage in your house of custody, but the rest of you may go and take grain to alleviate the famine in your households.
Then bring your youngest brother to me, so that your words will be found trustworthy and you will not die.” And they did so.
And they said to one another: “We are surely being punished on account of our brother, because we saw his distress when he begged us to show compassion, but we did not listen. That is why this distress has come upon us.”
Then Reuʹben answered them: “Did I not say to you, ‘Do not sin against the child,’ but you would not listen? Now his blood is certainly being asked back.”
But they did not know that Joseph understood, for there was an interpreter between them.
So he turned away from them and began to weep. When he returned and spoke to them again, he took Simʹe·on from them and bound him before their eyes.
Joseph then gave the command to fill up their bags with grain and to return each man’s money to his own sack and to give them provisions for the journey. This was done for them.
So they loaded their grain on their donkeys and left from there.
When one of them opened his sack to give fodder to his donkey at the lodging place, he saw his money there in the mouth of his bag.
At that he said to his brothers: “My money has been returned, and now here it is in my bag!” Then their hearts sank, and trembling, they turned to one another and said: “What is this that God has done to us?”
When they came to Jacob their father in the land of Caʹnaan, they told him all the things that had befallen them, saying:
“The man who is the lord of the country spoke harshly with us and accused us of spying on the country.
But we said to him, ‘We are upright men. We are not spies.
We are 12 brothers, the sons of our father. One is no more, and the youngest is now with our father in the land of Caʹnaan.’
But the man who is the lord of the country said to us, ‘By this I will know that you are upright: Leave one of your brothers with me. Then take something to alleviate the famine in your households and go.
And bring your youngest brother to me, so that I may know that you are not spies but upright men. I will then give your brother back to you, and you may carry on trade in the land.’”
As they were emptying their sacks, here was each one’s bag of money in his sack. When they and their father saw their bags of money, they became afraid.
Jacob their father exclaimed to them: “It is I you have bereaved! Joseph is no more, and Simʹe·on is no more, and you are going to take Benjamin! It is upon me that all these things have come!”
But Reuʹben said to his father: “You may put to death my own two sons if I do not bring him back to you. Give him over to my care, and I will return him to you.”
However, he said: “My son will not go down with you, because his brother is dead and he alone is left. If a fatal accident should befall him on the journey you would make, then you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave in grief.”
At the end of two full years, Pharʹaoh dreamed that he was standing by the Nile River.
And there, coming up from the river, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they were feeding on the Nile grass.
There were seven other cows that looked ugly and thin coming up after them from the Nile, and they stood alongside the fat cows by the bank of the Nile.
Then the ugly, thin cows began to eat up the seven fine-looking, fat cows. At this Pharʹaoh woke up.
Then he went back to sleep and had a second dream. There were seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice.
And growing up after them were seven ears of grain that were thin and scorched by the east wind.
And the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven full and choice ears of grain. At this Pharʹaoh woke up and realized that it was a dream.
But in the morning, his spirit became agitated. So he sent for all the magic-practicing priests of Egypt and all her wise men. Pharʹaoh related his dreams to them, but there was no one who could interpret them for Pharʹaoh.
At that the chief cupbearer spoke with Pharʹaoh, saying: “I am confessing my sins today.
Pharʹaoh was indignant at his servants. So he committed me to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, both me and the chief baker.
After that we each had a dream on the same night. He and I each had a dream with its own interpretation.
And there with us was a young Hebrew man, a servant of the chief of the guard. When we related them to him, he interpreted for us the meaning of each dream.
It happened exactly as he had interpreted to us. I was restored to my office, but the other man was hanged.”
So Pharʹaoh sent for Joseph, and they brought him quickly from the prison. He shaved and changed his clothes and went in to Pharʹaoh.
Then Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “I had a dream, but there is no one to interpret it. Now I have heard it said about you that you can hear a dream and interpret it.”
At this Joseph answered Pharʹaoh: “I need not be considered! God will speak concerning Pharʹaoh’s welfare.”
Pharʹaoh went on to say to Joseph: “In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile River.
And there, coming up from the Nile, were seven fine-looking, fat cows, and they began to feed on the Nile grass.
And there were seven other cows coming up after them, poor and very bad-looking and thin. I have never seen such bad-looking cows in all the land of Egypt.
And the skinny, bad cows began to eat up the first seven fat cows.
But when they had consumed them, no one could have known that they had done so, since their appearance was just as bad as at the start. At that I woke up.
“After that I saw in my dream seven ears of grain coming up on one stalk, full and choice.
Growing up after them were seven ears of shriveled grain, thin and scorched by the east wind.
Then the thin ears of grain began to swallow up the seven choice ears of grain. So I told it to the magic-practicing priests, but there was no one who could explain it to me.”
Then Joseph said to Pharʹaoh: “The dreams of Pharʹaoh are one and the same. The true God has told to Pharʹaoh what He will do.
The seven good cows are seven years. Likewise, the seven good ears of grain are seven years. The dreams are one and the same.
The seven skinny and bad cows that came up after them are seven years, and the seven empty ears of grain, scorched by the east wind, will prove to be seven years of famine.
This is just as I told to Pharʹaoh: The true God has caused Pharʹaoh to see what He will do.
“There are to be seven years of great abundance in all the land of Egypt.
But seven years of famine will certainly arise after them, and all the abundance in the land of Egypt will certainly be forgotten, and the famine will exhaust the land.
And the previous abundance in the land will not be remembered because of the famine afterward, for it will be very severe.
The dream was given twice to Pharʹaoh because the matter has been firmly established by the true God, and the true God will soon carry it out.
“So now let Pharʹaoh look for a man who is discreet and wise and place him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharʹaoh take action and appoint overseers in the land, and he should collect one fifth of the produce of Egypt during the seven years of abundance.
And let them collect all the food during these coming good years, and let them stockpile grain under Pharʹaoh’s authority as food to be stored in the cities and safeguarded there.
The food should serve as a supply for the land for the seven years of famine that will occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land may not perish in the famine.”
This proposal seemed good to Pharʹaoh and all his servants.
So Pharʹaoh said to his servants: “Can another man be found like this one in whom there is the spirit of God?”
Pharʹaoh then said to Joseph: “Since God has caused you to know all of this, there is no one as discreet and wise as you.
You will personally be over my house, and all my people will obey you implicitly. Only in my role as king will I be greater than you.”
And Pharʹaoh added to Joseph: “See, I am putting you over all the land of Egypt.”
Then Pharʹaoh removed his signet ring from his own hand and put it on Joseph’s hand and clothed him with garments of fine linen and placed a necklace of gold around his neck.
Moreover, he had him ride in the second chariot of honor that he had, and they would call out ahead of him, “A·vrékh!” Thus he put him over all the land of Egypt.
Pharʹaoh further said to Joseph: “I am Pharʹaoh, but without your authorization, no man may do a single thing in all the land of Egypt.”
After that Pharʹaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphʹe·nath-pa·neʹah and gave him Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On as a wife. And Joseph began to oversee the land of Egypt.
Joseph was 30 years old when he stood before Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. Then Joseph went out from before Pharʹaoh and traveled throughout all the land of Egypt.
And during the seven years of abundance, the land went on producing plentifully.
And he kept collecting all the food of the seven years from the land of Egypt, and he would stockpile the food in the cities. In each city he would store the food from the fields around it.
Joseph continued stockpiling grain in very great quantity, like the sand of the sea, until finally they gave up measuring it because it could not be measured.
Before the year of the famine arrived, two sons were born to Joseph, whom Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On bore to him.
Joseph named the firstborn Ma·nasʹseh, for he said, “God has made me forget all my trouble and all the house of my father.”
And he named the second one Eʹphra·im, for he said, “God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.”
Then the seven years of abundance in the land of Egypt ended,
and the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had said. The famine developed in all the lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
Eventually, all the land of Egypt suffered from the famine, and the people began to cry to Pharʹaoh for bread. Then Pharʹaoh said to all the Egyptians: “Go to Joseph, and do whatever he tells you.”
The famine continued over all the surface of the earth. Then Joseph began to open up all the granaries that were among them and to sell to the Egyptians, as the famine had a strong grip on the land of Egypt.
Moreover, people of all the earth came to Egypt to buy from Joseph, because the famine had a strong grip on all the earth.
When Aʹbram was 99 years old, Jehovah appeared to Aʹbram and said to him: “I am God Almighty. Walk before me and prove yourself faultless.
I will establish my covenant between me and you, and I will multiply you very, very much.”
At this Aʹbram fell facedown, and God continued to speak with him, saying:
“As for me, look! my covenant is with you, and you will certainly become a father of many nations.
Your name will no longer be Aʹbram; your name will become Abraham, for I will make you a father of many nations.
I will make you very, very fruitful and will make you become nations, and kings will come from you.
“And I will keep my covenant between me and you and your offspring after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your offspring after you.
And I will give to you and to your offspring after you the land in which you lived as a foreigner—the entire land of Caʹnaan—for a lasting possession, and I will be their God.”
God said further to Abraham: “As for you, you are to keep my covenant, you and your offspring after you throughout their generations.
This is my covenant between me and you, that you and your offspring after you will keep: Every male among you must get circumcised.
You must circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and you.
Throughout your generations, every male among you eight days old must be circumcised, anyone who is born in the house and anyone who is not one of your offspring and who was purchased with money from a foreigner.
Every man born in your house and every man purchased with your money must be circumcised, and my covenant in your flesh must serve as a lasting covenant.
If any uncircumcised male will not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that person must be cut off from his people. He has broken my covenant.”
Then God said to Abraham: “As for your wife Sarʹai, you must not call her Sarʹai, because Sarah will become her name.
I will bless her and also give you a son by her; I will bless her and she will become nations; kings of peoples will come from her.”
At this Abraham fell facedown and began to laugh and to say in his heart: “Will a man 100 years old have a child born to him, and will Sarah, a woman 90 years old, give birth?”
So Abraham said to the true God: “O that Ishʹma·el might live before you!”
To this God said: “Your wife Sarah will definitely bear you a son, and you must name him Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant to his offspring after him.
But as regards Ishʹma·el, I have heard you. Look! I will bless him and will make him fruitful and will multiply him very, very much. He will produce 12 chieftains, and I will make him become a great nation.
However, I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this appointed time next year.”
When God finished speaking with him, he went up from Abraham.
Abraham then took Ishʹma·el his son and all the men born in his house and everyone he had purchased with money, every male in the household of Abraham, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins on that very day, just as God had spoken with him.
Abraham was 99 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised.
And Ishʹma·el his son was 13 years old when he had the flesh of his foreskin circumcised.
On that very day, Abraham was circumcised and also his son Ishʹma·el.
All the men of his household, anyone born in the house and anyone purchased with money from a foreigner, were also circumcised with him.
In time he heard what the sons of Laʹban were saying: “Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father, and from what belonged to our father, he has amassed all this wealth.”
When Jacob would look at the face of Laʹban, he saw that his attitude toward him was not what it used to be.
Finally Jehovah said to Jacob: “Return to the land of your fathers and to your relatives, and I will continue with you.”
Then Jacob sent a message to Rachel and Leʹah to come out to the field to his flock,
and he said to them: “I have seen that your father’s attitude toward me has changed, but the God of my father has been with me.
You yourselves certainly know that I have served your father with all my power.
And your father has tried to cheat me and has changed my wages ten times; but God has not allowed him to do me harm.
If on the one hand he would say, ‘The speckled ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced speckled ones; but if on the other hand he would say, ‘The striped ones will be your wages,’ then the whole flock produced striped ones.
So God kept taking your father’s livestock away from him and giving it to me.
Once when the flock got into heat, I raised my eyes and saw in a dream that the he-goats mating with the flock were striped, speckled, and spotty.
Then the angel of the true God said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob!’ to which I said, ‘Here I am.’
And he continued, ‘Raise your eyes, please, and see that all the he-goats mating with the flock are striped, speckled, and spotty, for I have seen all that Laʹban is doing to you.
I am the true God of Bethʹel, where you anointed a pillar and where you made a vow to me. Now get up, go out of this land, and return to the land of your birth.’”
At this Rachel and Leʹah answered him: “Is there any share left for us to inherit in our father’s house?
Does he not consider us as foreigners, since he has sold us and has been using up the money given for us?
All the riches that God has taken away from our father are ours and our children’s. So, then, do everything that God has told you to do.”
Then Jacob got up and lifted his children and his wives on the camels,
and he began driving all his herd and all the goods that he had accumulated, the livestock in his possession that he had accumulated in Padʹdan-aʹram, to go to Isaac his father in the land of Caʹnaan.
Now Laʹban had gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the teraphim statues that belonged to her father.
Moreover, Jacob outwitted Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan, for he had not told him that he was running away.
And he ran away and crossed the River, he and all he had. Then he headed toward the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
On the third day, Laʹban was told that Jacob had run away.
So he took his brothers with him and pursued him for a journey of seven days and caught up with him in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
Then God came to Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan in a dream by night and said to him: “Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.”
So Laʹban approached Jacob, as Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain and Laʹban had encamped with his brothers in the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad.
Then Laʹban said to Jacob: “What have you done? Why have you resorted to outwitting me and carrying my daughters off like captives taken by the sword?
Why did you run away secretly and outwit me and not tell me? If you had told me, I could have sent you away with rejoicing and with songs, with tambourine and with harp.
But you did not give me a chance to kiss my grandchildren and my daughters. You have acted foolishly.
It is in my power to do harm to you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, ‘Be careful about what you say to Jacob, either good or bad.’
Now you have gone because you have been longing to return to the house of your father, but why have you stolen my gods?”
Jacob answered Laʹban: “It was because I was afraid, for I said to myself, ‘You might take your daughters away from me by force.’
Anyone with whom you find your gods will not live. Before our brothers, examine what I have, and take what is yours.” But Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.
So Laʹban went into the tent of Jacob and into the tent of Leʹah and into the tent of the two slave girls, but did not find them. Then he came out of Leʹah’s tent and went into Rachel’s tent.
Meanwhile, Rachel had taken the teraphim statues and put them in the woman’s saddle basket of the camel, and she was sitting on them. So Laʹban searched through the whole tent but did not find them.
Then she said to her father: “Do not be angry, my lord, because I am not able to get up before you, for the customary thing with women is upon me.” So he searched on carefully but did not find the teraphim statues.
At that Jacob became angry and began to criticize Laʹban. Jacob then said to Laʹban: “What is my offense, and for what sin are you hotly pursuing me?
Now that you have searched through all my goods, what have you found that belongs to your house? Put it here in front of my brothers and your brothers, and let them decide between the two of us.
During these 20 years that I have been with you, your sheep and your goats never miscarried, and I never ate the rams of your flock.
I did not bring you any animal torn by wild beasts. I would stand the loss of it myself. Whether the animal was stolen by day or was stolen by night, you would demand compensation from me.
By day the heat consumed me, and the cold by night, and sleep would flee from my eyes.
This makes 20 years for me in your house. I have served you 14 years for your two daughters and 6 years for your flock, and you kept changing my wages ten times.
If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the One whom Isaac fears, had not been on my side, you would now have sent me away empty-handed. God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands, and that is why he reproved you last night.”
Then Laʹban answered Jacob: “The daughters are my daughters and the children my children and the flock my flock, and everything you are looking at is mine and my daughters’. What can I do today against these or against their children whom they have borne?
Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I, and it will serve as a witness between us.”
So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar.
Then Jacob said to his brothers: “Pick up stones!” And they took stones and made a pile. After that they ate there on the pile of stones.
And Laʹban began calling it Jeʹgar-sa·ha·duʹtha, but Jacob called it Galʹe·ed.
Laʹban then said: “This pile of stones is a witness between me and you today.” That is why he named it Galʹe·ed,
and the Watchtower, for he said: “Let Jehovah keep watch between you and me when we are out of each other’s sight.
If you mistreat my daughters and if you start taking wives in addition to my daughters, though there is no man with us, remember that God will be a witness between you and me.”
Laʹban went on to say to Jacob: “Here is this pile of stones, and here is the pillar that I have erected between you and me.
This pile of stones is a witness, and the pillar is something that bears witness, that I will not pass beyond this pile of stones to bring harm to you and you will not pass beyond this pile of stones and this pillar to bring harm to me.
Let the God of Abraham and the God of Naʹhor, the God of their father, judge between us.” And Jacob swore by the One whom his father Isaac fears.
After that Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain and invited his brothers to eat bread. So they ate and spent the night in the mountain.
However, Laʹban got up early in the morning and kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them. Then Laʹban departed and returned home.
At this Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants. So he cried out: “Have everyone leave me!” No one else stayed with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
Then he began to weep so loudly that the Egyptians heard it and Pharʹaoh’s house heard it.
Finally Joseph said to his brothers: “I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?” But his brothers were unable to answer him at all, because they were astonished on account of him.
So Joseph said to his brothers: “Come close to me, please.” With that they came close to him. Then he said: “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt.
But now do not be upset and do not reproach one another because you sold me here; because God has sent me ahead of you for the preservation of life.
This is the second year of the famine in the land, and there are yet five years in which there will be no plowing or harvest.
But God sent me ahead of you in order to preserve for you a remnant on the earth and to keep you alive by a great deliverance.
So, then, it was not you who sent me here, but it was the true God, in order to appoint me as chief adviser to Pharʹaoh and lord for all his house and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
“Return quickly to my father, and you must say to him, ‘This is what your son Joseph has said: “God has appointed me lord over all Egypt. Come down to me. Do not delay.
You must dwell in the land of Goʹshen, where you will be near me—you, your sons, your grandsons, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have.
I will supply you with food there, for there are yet five years of famine. Otherwise, you and your house and everything you have will come to poverty.”’
You and my brother Benjamin can now see with your own eyes that I am really the one speaking to you.
So you must tell my father about all my glory in Egypt and everything you have seen. Now hurry and bring my father down here.”
Then he embraced his brother Benjamin and gave way to weeping, and Benjamin wept with his arms around his neck.
And he kissed all his brothers and wept over them, and after that his brothers spoke with him.
The news reached the house of Pharʹaoh: “Joseph’s brothers have come!” It was good in the eyes of Pharʹaoh and his servants.
So Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “Tell your brothers, ‘Do this: Load your beasts of burden and go to the land of Caʹnaan,
and take your father and your households and come here to me. I will give you the good things of the land of Egypt, and you will eat the richest part of the land.’
And you are commanded to tell them: ‘Do this: Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your children and your wives, and you must bring your father on one of them and come here.
Do not worry about your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.’”
And the sons of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them wagons according to Pharʹaoh’s orders, and he gave them provisions for the journey.
To each of them he gave individual changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave 300 silver pieces and five changes of clothing.
And to his father he sent the following: ten donkeys carrying good things of Egypt and ten female donkeys carrying grain and bread and sustenance for his father for the journey.
So he sent his brothers off, and as they departed, he said to them: “Do not become upset with one another on the way.”
Then they went up from Egypt and came into the land of Caʹnaan to their father Jacob.
Then they reported to him: “Joseph is still alive, and he is the ruler over all the land of Egypt!” But his heart grew numb because he did not believe them.
When they went on telling him all the words that Joseph had spoken to them and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob began to revive.
Israel exclaimed: “It is enough! My son Joseph is still alive! I must go and see him before I die!”
The two angels arrived at Sodʹom by evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodʹom. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the earth.
And he said: “Please, my lords, turn aside, please, into the house of your servant and stay overnight and have your feet washed. Then you may get up early and travel on your way.” To this they said: “No, we will stay overnight in the public square.”
But he was so insistent with them that they went with him to his house. Then he made a feast for them, and he baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
Before they could lie down to sleep, the men of the city—the men of Sodʹom from boy to old man, all of them—surrounded the house in one mob.
And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: “Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may have sex with them.”
Then Lot went out to them to the doorway, and he shut the door behind him.
He said: “Please, my brothers, do not act wickedly.
Please, here I have two daughters who have never had sexual relations with a man. Please, let me bring them out to you for you to do to them whatever seems good to you. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the shelter of my roof.”
At this they said: “Stand back!” And they added: “This lone foreigner came to live here, and yet he dares to judge us! Now we are going to do worse to you than to them.” And they crowded in on Lot and moved forward to break down the door.
So the men reached out their hands and brought Lot into the house with them, and they shut the door.
But they struck the men who were at the entrance of the house with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they wore themselves out trying to find the doorway.
Then the men said to Lot: “Do you have anyone else here? Sons-in-law, your sons, your daughters, and all your people in the city, bring out of this place!
For we are going to destroy this place, because the outcry against them has indeed grown great before Jehovah, so that Jehovah sent us to destroy the city.”
So Lot went out and began to speak to his sons-in-law who were to marry his daughters, and he kept saying: “Get up! Get out of this place, because Jehovah will destroy the city!” But to his sons-in-law, he seemed to be joking.
As dawn was breaking, the angels became urgent with Lot, saying: “Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here with you, so that you will not be swept away in the error of the city!”
When he kept lingering, then because of Jehovah’s compassion for him, the men seized hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, and they brought him out and stationed him outside the city.
As soon as they had brought them to the outskirts, he said: “Escape for your life! Do not look behind you and do not stand still in any part of the district! Escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away!”
Then Lot said to them: “Not there, please, Jehovah!
Please, now, your servant has found favor in your eyes and you are showing great kindness to me by preserving me alive, but I am not able to flee to the mountainous region because I am afraid that disaster may overtake me and I will die.
Please, now, this town is nearby and I can flee there; it is only a small place. May I, please, escape there? It is only a small place. Then I will survive.”
So he said to him: “Very well, I will also show you consideration by not overthrowing the town you speak of.
Hurry! Escape there, because I cannot do anything until you arrive there!” That is why he named the town Zoʹar.
The sun had risen over the land when Lot arrived at Zoʹar.
Then Jehovah made it rain sulfur and fire on Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah—it came from Jehovah, from the heavens.
So he overthrew these cities, yes, the entire district, including all the inhabitants of the cities and the plants of the ground.
But Lot’s wife, who was behind him, began to look back, and she became a pillar of salt.
Now Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had stood before Jehovah.
When he looked down toward Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all the land of the district, he saw quite a sight. There was dense smoke rising from the land like the dense smoke of a kiln!
So when God destroyed the cities of the district, God kept Abraham in mind by sending Lot out from the cities he overthrew, the cities where Lot had been dwelling.
Later Lot went up from Zoʹar with his two daughters and began living in the mountainous region, because he was afraid to live in Zoʹar. So he began living in a cave with his two daughters.
And the firstborn said to the younger: “Our father is old, and there is not a man in the land to have relations with us according to the custom of the whole earth.
Come, let us give our father wine to drink, and let us lie down with him and preserve offspring from our father.”
So that night they kept giving their father wine to drink; then the firstborn went in and lay down with her father, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
Then on the next day, the firstborn said to the younger: “Here I lay down with my father last night. Let us give him wine to drink tonight also. Then you go in and lie down with him, and let us preserve offspring from our father.”
So that night also, they repeatedly gave their father wine to drink; then the younger went and lay down with him, but he did not know when she lay down and when she got up.
So both daughters of Lot became pregnant by their father.
The firstborn gave birth to a son and named him Moʹab. He is the father of the Moʹab·ites of today.
The younger also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-amʹmi. He is the father of the Amʹmon·ites of today.
Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Eʹsau coming, and 400 men were with him. So he divided the children among Leʹah, Rachel, and the two female servants.
He put the female servants and their children in front, Leʹah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them.
Then he himself went ahead of them and bowed down to the earth seven times as he came near to his brother.
But Eʹsau ran to meet him, and he embraced him and kissed him, and they burst into tears.
When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, he said: “Who are these with you?” to which he said: “The children with whom God has favored your servant.”
At that the female servants came forward with their children and bowed down,
and Leʹah too came forward with her children, and they bowed down. Then Joseph came forward with Rachel, and they bowed down.
Eʹsau said: “What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?” He replied: “In order to find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
Then Eʹsau said: “I have a great many possessions, my brother. Keep what is yours.”
However, Jacob said: “No, please. If I have found favor in your eyes, you must take my gift from my hand, because I brought it so that I could see your face. And I have seen your face as though seeing God’s face, in that you received me with pleasure.
Take, please, the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you, for God has favored me and I have everything I need.” And he continued to urge him, so that he took it.
Later Eʹsau said: “Let us move out and go, and let me go in advance of you.”
But he said to him: “My lord is aware that the children are delicate and that in my care are sheep and cattle nursing their young. If they are driven too quickly for one day, then the whole flock will die.
Let my lord, please, go on ahead of his servant, but I will continue the journey more slowly at the pace of my livestock and of the children until I come to my lord at Seʹir.”
Then Eʹsau said: “Please, let me leave some of my people with you.” To this he said: “Why do this? Just let me find favor in the eyes of my lord.”
So that day Eʹsau went on his way back to Seʹir.
And Jacob journeyed to Sucʹcoth, and he built a house for himself and he made shelters for his herd. That was why he named the place Sucʹcoth.
After journeying from Padʹdan-aʹram, Jacob arrived safely at the city of Sheʹchem in the land of Caʹnaan, and he set up his camp near the city.
Then he acquired a portion of the field where he pitched his tent from the sons of Haʹmor, the father of Sheʹchem, for 100 pieces of money.
There he set up an altar and called it God, the God of Israel.
Now all the earth continued to be of one language and of one set of words.
As they traveled eastward, they discovered a valley plain in the land of Shiʹnar, and they began dwelling there.
Then they said to one another: “Come! Let us make bricks and bake them with fire.” So they used bricks instead of stone, and bitumen as mortar.
They now said: “Come! Let us build a city for ourselves and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a celebrated name for ourselves, so that we will not be scattered over the entire face of the earth.”
Then Jehovah went down to see the city and the tower that the sons of men had built.
Jehovah then said: “Look! They are one people with one language, and this is what they have started to do. Now there is nothing that they may have in mind to do that will be impossible for them.
Come! Let us go down there and confuse their language in order that they may not understand one another’s language.”
So Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth, and they gradually left off building the city.
That is why it was named Baʹbel, because there Jehovah confused the language of all the earth, and Jehovah scattered them from there over the entire face of the earth.
This is the history of Shem. Shem was 100 years old when he became father to Ar·pachʹshad two years after the Flood.
After becoming father to Ar·pachʹshad, Shem continued to live 500 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Ar·pachʹshad lived for 35 years and then became father to Sheʹlah.
After becoming father to Sheʹlah, Ar·pachʹshad continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Sheʹlah lived for 30 years and then became father to Eʹber.
After becoming father to Eʹber, Sheʹlah continued to live 403 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Eʹber lived for 34 years and then became father to Peʹleg.
After becoming father to Peʹleg, Eʹber continued to live 430 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Peʹleg lived for 30 years and then became father to Reʹu.
After becoming father to Reʹu, Peʹleg continued to live 209 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Reʹu lived for 32 years and then became father to Seʹrug.
After becoming father to Seʹrug, Reʹu continued to live 207 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Seʹrug lived for 30 years and then became father to Naʹhor.
After becoming father to Naʹhor, Seʹrug continued to live 200 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Naʹhor lived for 29 years and then became father to Teʹrah.
After becoming father to Teʹrah, Naʹhor continued to live 119 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
Teʹrah lived for 70 years, after which he became father to Aʹbram, Naʹhor, and Haʹran.
This is the history of Teʹrah. Teʹrah became father to Aʹbram, Naʹhor, and Haʹran; and Haʹran became father to Lot.
While his father Teʹrah was still alive, Haʹran died in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chal·deʹans.
Aʹbram and Naʹhor took wives for themselves. The name of Aʹbram’s wife was Sarʹai, and the name of Naʹhor’s wife was Milʹcah, the daughter of Haʹran, the father of Milʹcah and Isʹcah.
Now Sarʹai was barren; she had no child.
Teʹrah then took Aʹbram his son and Lot his grandson, the son of Haʹran, and Sarʹai his daughter-in-law, the wife of Aʹbram his son, and they went with him out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to go to the land of Caʹnaan. In time they came to Haʹran and began dwelling there.
The days of Teʹrah were 205 years. Then Teʹrah died in Haʹran.
Jacob continued to dwell in the land of Caʹnaan, where his father had lived as a foreigner.
This is the history of Jacob. When Joseph was 17 years old, the young man was tending the flock with the sons of Bilʹhah and the sons of Zilʹpah, the wives of his father. And Joseph brought a bad report about them to their father.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his other sons because he was the son of his old age, and he had a special robe made for him.
When his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they began to hate him, and they could not speak peaceably to him.
Later Joseph had a dream and told it to his brothers, and they found further reason to hate him.
He said to them: “Please listen to this dream that I had.
There we were binding sheaves in the middle of the field when my sheaf got up and stood erect and your sheaves encircled and bowed down to my sheaf.”
His brothers said to him: “Are you really going to make yourself king over us and dominate us?” So they found another reason to hate him, because of his dreams and what he said.
After that he had still another dream, and he related it to his brothers: “I have had another dream. This time the sun and the moon and 11 stars were bowing down to me.”
Then he related it to his father as well as his brothers, and his father rebuked him and said to him: “What is the meaning of this dream of yours? Am I as well as your mother and your brothers really going to come and bow down to the earth to you?”
And his brothers grew jealous of him, but his father kept the saying in mind.
His brothers now went to pasture their father’s flock near Sheʹchem.
Israel later said to Joseph: “Your brothers are tending flocks near Sheʹchem, are they not? Come, and let me send you to them.” At this he said to him: “I am ready!”
So he said to him: “Go, please, and see whether your brothers are well. See how the flock is, and bring word back to me.” With that he sent him away from the valley of Hebʹron, and he went on toward Sheʹchem.
Later a man found him as he was wandering in a field. The man asked him: “What are you looking for?”
To this he said: “I am looking for my brothers. Please tell me, where are they tending flocks?”
The man continued: “They have pulled away from here, for I heard them saying, ‘Let us go to Doʹthan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Doʹthan.
Now they caught sight of him from a distance, and before he reached them, they began plotting against him to put him to death.
So they said to one another: “Look! Here comes that dreamer.
Come, now, let us kill him and pitch him into one of the waterpits, and we will say that a vicious wild animal devoured him. Then let us see what will become of his dreams.”
When Reuʹben heard this, he tried to rescue him from them. So he said: “Let us not take his life.”
Reuʹben said to them: “Do not shed blood. Throw him into this waterpit in the wilderness, but do not harm him.” His purpose was to rescue him from them in order to return him to his father.
So as soon as Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped Joseph of his robe, the special robe that he wore,
and they took him and threw him into the waterpit. At the time the pit was empty; there was no water in it.
Then they sat down to eat. When they looked up, there was a caravan of Ishʹma·el·ites coming from Gilʹe·ad. Their camels were carrying labdanum gum, balsam, and resinous bark, and they were on their way down to Egypt.
At this Judah said to his brothers: “What profit would there be if we killed our brother and covered over his blood?
Come, now, let us sell him to the Ishʹma·el·ites, and do not let our hand be upon him. After all, he is our brother, our flesh.” So they listened to their brother.
And when the Midʹi·an·ite merchants were passing by, they lifted Joseph up out of the waterpit and sold him to the Ishʹma·el·ites for 20 pieces of silver. These men took Joseph into Egypt.
Later when Reuʹben returned to the waterpit and saw that Joseph was not in the waterpit, he ripped his garments apart.
When he returned to his brothers, he exclaimed: “The child is gone! And I—what am I going to do?”
So they took Joseph’s robe and slaughtered a male goat and dipped the robe in the blood.
After that they sent the special robe to their father and said: “This is what we found. Please examine whether this is your son’s robe or not.”
Then he examined it and exclaimed: “It is my son’s robe! A vicious wild animal must have devoured him! Joseph is surely torn to pieces!”
With that Jacob ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth around his waist and mourned his son for many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters kept trying to comfort him, but he kept refusing to take comfort, saying: “I will go down into the Grave mourning my son!” And his father continued weeping for him.
Now the Midʹi·an·ites sold him in Egypt to Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and the chief of the guard.
Now there was a famine in the land, in addition to the first famine that occurred in the days of Abraham, so that Isaac went to A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines, in Geʹrar.
Then Jehovah appeared to him and said: “Do not go down to Egypt. Dwell in the land that I designate to you.
Reside as a foreigner in this land, and I will continue with you and bless you because to you and to your offspring I will give all these lands, and I will carry out the oath that I swore to your father Abraham:
‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens; and I will give to your offspring all these lands; and by means of your offspring, all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves,’
on account of the fact that Abraham listened to my voice and continued to keep my requirements, my commands, my statutes, and my laws.”
So Isaac continued to dwell in Geʹrar.
When the men of the place kept asking about his wife, he would say: “She is my sister.” He was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” for he said, “The men of the place might kill me because of Re·bekʹah,” for she was beautiful in appearance.
After some time had passed, A·bimʹe·lech king of the Phi·lisʹtines was looking out of the window, and he saw Isaac displaying affection for Re·bekʹah his wife.
At once A·bimʹe·lech called Isaac and said: “She is actually your wife! Why did you say, ‘She is my sister’?” At this Isaac said to him: “I said it for fear I should die because of her.”
But A·bimʹe·lech continued: “What have you done to us? One of the people could easily have lain down with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us!”
Then A·bimʹe·lech commanded all the people, saying: “Anybody touching this man and his wife will surely be put to death!”
And Isaac began to sow seed in that land, and in that year he reaped 100 times what he sowed, for Jehovah was blessing him.
The man became wealthy, and he continued to prosper until he became very wealthy.
He acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and a large body of servants, and the Phi·lisʹtines began to envy him.
So the Phi·lisʹtines took soil and stopped up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug in the days of Abraham.
A·bimʹe·lech then said to Isaac: “Move from our neighborhood, for you have grown far stronger than we are.”
So Isaac moved from there and encamped in the valley of Geʹrar and began dwelling there.
And Isaac again dug the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham but that the Phi·lisʹtines had stopped up after Abraham’s death, and he called them by the names that his father had given them.
When the servants of Isaac were digging in the valley, they found a well of fresh water.
And the shepherds of Geʹrar began quarreling with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: “The water is ours!” So he named the well Eʹsek, because they had quarreled with him.
And they started digging another well, and they began quarreling over it also. So he named it Sitʹnah.
Later he moved away from there and dug another well, but they did not quarrel over it. So he named it Re·hoʹboth and said: “It is because now Jehovah has given us ample room and has made us fruitful in the land.”
Then he went up from there to Beʹer-sheʹba.
That night Jehovah appeared to him and said: “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you, and I will bless you and multiply your offspring on account of Abraham my servant.”
So he built an altar there and called on the name of Jehovah. And Isaac pitched his tent there, and his servants dug a well there.
Later A·bimʹe·lech came to him from Geʹrar with A·huzʹzath his personal adviser and Phiʹcol the chief of his army.
At this Isaac said to them: “Why have you come to me, seeing that you hated me and sent me away from your neighborhood?”
To this they said: “We have clearly seen that Jehovah has been with you. So we said, ‘Let there, please, be an oath of obligation between us and you, and let us make a covenant with you
that you will do nothing bad to us just as we have not harmed you, seeing that we have done only good to you in that we sent you away in peace. You now are the blessed of Jehovah.’”
Then he made a feast for them, and they ate and drank.
In the morning they got up early and swore an oath to each other. After that Isaac sent them away, and they went from him in peace.
On that day the servants of Isaac came and reported to him about the well that they had dug, and they told him: “We have found water!”
So he named it Shiʹbah. That is why the name of the city is Beʹer-sheʹba to this day.
When Eʹsau was 40 years old, he took as wife Juʹdith the daughter of Be·eʹri the Hitʹtite and also Basʹe·math the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite.
They were a source of great grief to Isaac and Re·bekʹah.
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Now the earth was formless and desolate, and there was darkness upon the surface of the watery deep, and God’s active force was moving about over the surface of the waters.
And God said: “Let there be light.” Then there was light.
After that God saw that the light was good, and God began to divide the light from the darkness.
God called the light Day, but the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, a first day.
Then God said: “Let there be an expanse between the waters, and let there be a division between the waters and the waters.”
Then God went on to make the expanse and divided the waters beneath the expanse from the waters above the expanse. And it was so.
God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
Then God said: “Let the waters under the heavens be collected together into one place, and let the dry land appear.” And it was so.
God called the dry land Earth, but the collecting of the waters, he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.
Then God said: “Let the earth cause grass to sprout, seed-bearing plants and fruit trees according to their kinds, yielding fruit along with seed on the earth.” And it was so.
And the earth began to produce grass, seed-bearing plants and trees yielding fruit along with seed, according to their kinds. Then God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
Then God said: “Let there be luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to make a division between the day and the night, and they will serve as signs for seasons and for days and years.
They will serve as luminaries in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth.” And it was so.
And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars.
Thus God put them in the expanse of the heavens to shine upon the earth
and to dominate by day and by night and to make a division between the light and the darkness. Then God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
Then God said: “Let the waters swarm with living creatures, and let flying creatures fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.”
And God created the great sea creatures and all living creatures that move and swarm in the waters according to their kinds and every winged flying creature according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
With that God blessed them, saying: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the waters of the sea, and let the flying creatures become many in the earth.”
And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
Then God said: “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds, domestic animals and creeping animals and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so.
And God went on to make the wild animals of the earth according to their kinds and the domestic animals according to their kinds and all the creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
Then God said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.”
And God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.
Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”
Then God said: “Here I have given to you every seed-bearing plant that is on the entire earth and every tree with seed-bearing fruit. Let them serve as food for you.
And to every wild animal of the earth and to every flying creature of the heavens and to everything moving on the earth in which there is life, I have given all green vegetation for food.” And it was so.
After that God saw everything he had made, and look! it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.
This is the history of Eʹsau, that is, Eʹdom.
Eʹsau took his wives from the daughters of Caʹnaan: Aʹdah the daughter of Eʹlon the Hitʹtite; and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on the Hiʹvite;
and Basʹe·math, Ishʹma·el’s daughter, the sister of Ne·baʹioth.
And Aʹdah bore Elʹi·phaz to Eʹsau, and Basʹe·math bore Reuʹel,
and O·hol·i·baʹmah bore Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah. These are the sons of Eʹsau, who were born to him in the land of Caʹnaan.
After that Eʹsau took his wives, his sons, his daughters, all the members of his household, his herd and all his other beasts, and all the wealth he had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan and he went to another land some distance away from Jacob his brother.
For their goods had become too many for them to dwell together, and the land where they were residing was not able to sustain them because of their herds.
So Eʹsau took up dwelling in the mountainous region of Seʹir. Eʹsau is Eʹdom.
And this is the history of Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom in the mountainous region of Seʹir.
These are the names of the sons of Eʹsau: Elʹi·phaz the son of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife; Reuʹel the son of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, and Keʹnaz.
Timʹna became the concubine of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s son. In time she bore to Elʹi·phaz, Amʹa·lek. These are the sons of Aʹdah, Eʹsau’s wife.
These are the sons of Reuʹel: Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah. These were the sons of Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
These were the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, the granddaughter of Zibʹe·on, Eʹsau’s wife, whom she bore to Eʹsau: Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
These are the sheikhs of the sons of Eʹsau: The sons of Elʹi·phaz, Eʹsau’s firstborn: Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Oʹmar, Sheikh Zeʹpho, Sheikh Keʹnaz,
Sheikh Korʹah, Sheikh Gaʹtam, and Sheikh Amʹa·lek. These are the sheikhs of Elʹi·phaz in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Aʹdah.
These are the sons of Reuʹel, Eʹsau’s son: Sheikh Naʹhath, Sheikh Zeʹrah, Sheikh Shamʹmah, and Sheikh Mizʹzah. These are the sheikhs of Reuʹel in the land of Eʹdom. These are the sons by Basʹe·math, Eʹsau’s wife.
Finally these are the sons of O·hol·i·baʹmah, Eʹsau’s wife: Sheikh Jeʹush, Sheikh Jaʹlam, and Sheikh Korʹah. These are the sheikhs of O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah, Eʹsau’s wife.
These are the sons of Eʹsau, and these are their sheikhs. He is Eʹdom.
These are the sons of Seʹir the Horʹite, the inhabitants of the land: Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah,
Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites, the sons of Seʹir, in the land of Eʹdom.
The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Heʹmam, and Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.
These are the sons of Shoʹbal: Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam.
These are the sons of Zibʹe·on: Aʹiah and Aʹnah. This is the Aʹnah who found the hot springs in the wilderness while he was tending the donkeys for Zibʹe·on his father.
These are the children of Aʹnah: Diʹshon and O·hol·i·baʹmah the daughter of Aʹnah.
These are the sons of Diʹshon: Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.
These are the sons of Eʹzer: Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan.
These are the sons of Diʹshan: Uz and Aʹran.
These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites: Sheikh Loʹtan, Sheikh Shoʹbal, Sheikh Zibʹe·on, Sheikh Aʹnah,
Sheikh Diʹshon, Sheikh Eʹzer, and Sheikh Diʹshan. These are the sheikhs of the Horʹites according to their sheikhs in the land of Seʹir.
Now these are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites.
Beʹla son of Beʹor reigned in Eʹdom, and the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah.
When Beʹla died, Joʹbab son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place.
When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place.
When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad son of Beʹdad, who defeated the Midʹi·an·ites in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place, and the name of his city was Aʹvith.
When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place.
When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place.
When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place.
When Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor died, Haʹdar began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred the daughter of Meʹza·hab.
So these are the names of the sheikhs of Eʹsau according to their families, according to their places, by their names: Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth,
Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon,
Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar,
Sheikh Magʹdi·el, and Sheikh Iʹram. These are the sheikhs of Eʹdom according to their settlements in the land of their possession. This is Eʹsau the father of Eʹdom.
After that Jehovah said to Noah: “Go into the ark, you and all your household, because you are the one I have found to be righteous before me among this generation.
You must take with you every kind of clean animal by sevens, the male and its mate; and of every animal that is not clean just two, the male and its mate;
also of the flying creatures of the sky by sevens, male and female, to preserve their offspring alive over all the earth.
For in just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights, and I will wipe from the surface of the ground every living thing that I have made.”
Then Noah did everything that Jehovah had commanded him.
Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth.
So Noah, along with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters.
Of every clean animal and of every animal that is not clean and of the flying creatures and of everything that moves on the ground,
they went inside the ark to Noah by twos, male and female, just as God had commanded Noah.
And seven days later the floodwaters came upon the earth.
In the 600th year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the 17th day of the month, on that day all the springs of the vast watery deep burst open and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
And the rain poured down on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights.
On that very day, Noah went into the ark along with his sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth, and his wife and the three wives of his sons.
They went in with every wild animal according to its kind, and every domestic animal according to its kind, and every creeping animal of the earth according to its kind, and every flying creature according to its kind, every bird, every winged creature.
They kept going to Noah inside the ark, two by two, of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life.
So they went in, male and female of every sort of flesh, just as God had commanded him. After that Jehovah shut the door behind him.
The flooding continued for 40 days on the earth, and the waters kept increasing and began carrying the ark, and it was floating high above the earth.
The waters became overwhelming and kept increasing greatly upon the earth, but the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly that all the tall mountains under the whole heavens were covered.
The waters rose up to 15 cubits above the mountains.
So all living creatures that were moving on the earth perished—the flying creatures, the domestic animals, the wild animals, the swarming creatures, and all mankind.
Everything on dry land that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
So He wiped every living thing from the surface of the earth, including man, animals, creeping animals, and the flying creatures of the sky. They were all wiped off the earth; only Noah and those with him in the ark survived.
And the waters continued overwhelming the earth for 150 days.
Now Abraham again took a wife, and her name was Ke·tuʹrah.
In time she bore him Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah.
Jokʹshan became father to Sheʹba and Deʹdan. The sons of Deʹdan were As·shuʹrim, Le·tuʹshim, and Le·umʹmim.
The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah. All of these were the sons of Ke·tuʹrah.
Later on Abraham gave everything he had to Isaac,
but Abraham gave gifts to his sons by his concubines. Then while he was still alive, he sent them eastward, away from Isaac his son, to the land of the East.
The years of Abraham’s life were 175 years.
Then Abraham breathed his last and died at a good old age, old and satisfied, and was gathered to his people.
His sons Isaac and Ishʹma·el buried him in the cave of Mach·peʹlah in the field of Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar the Hitʹtite that is in front of Mamʹre,
the field that Abraham had purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried, with his wife Sarah.
After Abraham’s death, God continued to bless his son Isaac, and Isaac was dwelling near Beʹer-laʹhai-roi.
This is the history of Ishʹma·el the son of Abraham whom Haʹgar the Egyptian, the servant of Sarah, bore to Abraham.
Now these are the names of the sons of Ishʹma·el, by their names according to their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam,
Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa,
Haʹdad, Teʹma, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah.
These are the sons of Ishʹma·el, and these are their names by their settlements and by their encampments, 12 chieftains according to their clans.
And Ishʹma·el lived for 137 years. Then he breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people.
And they took up dwelling from Havʹi·lah near Shur, which is close to Egypt, as far as As·syrʹi·a. He settled near all his brothers.
And this is the history of Isaac the son of Abraham. Abraham became father to Isaac.
Isaac was 40 years old when he married Re·bekʹah, the daughter of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan of Padʹdan-aʹram, the sister of Laʹban the A·ra·maeʹan.
And Isaac kept pleading with Jehovah regarding his wife, because she was barren; so Jehovah responded to his plea, and his wife Re·bekʹah became pregnant.
And the sons within her began to struggle with each other, so that she said: “If this is the way it is, why should I go on living?” So she inquired of Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to her: “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be separated from within you; and the one nation will be stronger than the other nation, and the older will serve the younger.”
When the time came for her to give birth, look! twins were in her womb.
Then the first came out red all over and was like a garment of hair, so they named him Eʹsau.
After that his brother came out and his hand was holding onto the heel of Eʹsau, so he named him Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when she gave birth to them.
As the boys got bigger, Eʹsau became a skilled hunter, a man of the field, but Jacob was a blameless man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Eʹsau because it meant game in his mouth, whereas Re·bekʹah loved Jacob.
On one occasion Jacob was boiling some stew when Eʹsau returned from the field exhausted.
So Eʹsau said to Jacob: “Quick, please, give me some of the red stew that you have there, for I am exhausted!” That is why his name was Eʹdom.
To this Jacob said: “First sell me your right as firstborn!”
And Eʹsau continued: “Here I am about to die! What use is a birthright to me?”
And Jacob added: “Swear to me first!” So he swore to him and sold his right as firstborn to Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Eʹsau bread and lentil stew, and he ate and drank, and he got up and went away. Thus Eʹsau despised the birthright.
Aʹbram then went up out of Egypt to the Negʹeb, he and his wife and all that he had, together with Lot.
Aʹbram was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold.
He camped in one place after another as he traveled from the Negʹeb to Bethʹel, until he arrived at the place where his tent had been between Bethʹel and Aʹi,
to the place where he had previously built an altar. There Aʹbram called on the name of Jehovah.
Now Lot, who was traveling with Aʹbram, also owned sheep, cattle, and tents.
So the land did not allow for all of them to stay in the same place; their goods had become so many that they could no longer dwell together.
As a result, a quarrel arose between the herders of Aʹbram’s livestock and the herders of Lot’s livestock. (At that time the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites were dwelling in the land.)
So Aʹbram said to Lot: “Please, there should be no quarreling between me and you and between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we are brothers.
Is not the whole land available to you? Please, separate from me. If you go to the left, then I will go to the right; but if you go to the right, then I will go to the left.”
So Lot raised his eyes and saw that the whole district of the Jordan was a well-watered region (before Jehovah destroyed Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah), like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as far as Zoʹar.
Then Lot chose for himself the whole district of the Jordan, and Lot moved his camp to the east. So they separated from each other.
Aʹbram lived in the land of Caʹnaan, but Lot lived among the cities of the district. Finally he set up his tent near Sodʹom.
Now the men of Sodʹom were wicked, gross sinners against Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Aʹbram, after Lot had separated from him: “Raise your eyes, please, and look from the place where you are, to the north and south, east and west,
because all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring as a lasting possession.
And I will make your offspring like the dust particles of the earth, so that if anyone could count the dust particles of the earth, then your offspring could be counted.
Get up, travel through the length and breadth of the land, for to you I am going to give it.”
So Aʹbram continued to live in tents. Later he came and dwelled among the big trees of Mamʹre, which are in Hebʹron, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.
Jehovah turned his attention to Sarah just as he had said, and Jehovah did for Sarah what he had promised.
So Sarah became pregnant and then bore a son to Abraham in his old age at the appointed time God had promised him.
Abraham named his newborn son, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, just as God had commanded him.
Abraham was 100 years old when his son Isaac was born to him.
Then Sarah said: “God has brought me laughter; everybody hearing of it will laugh with me.”
And she added: “Who would have said to Abraham, ‘Sarah will certainly nurse children’? Yet, I have given birth to a son for him in his old age.”
Now the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham prepared a big feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.
But Sarah kept noticing that the son of Haʹgar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, was mocking Isaac.
So she said to Abraham: “Drive out this slave girl and her son, for the son of this slave girl is not going to be an heir along with my son, with Isaac!”
But what she said about his son was very displeasing to Abraham.
Then God said to Abraham: “Do not be displeased by what Sarah is saying to you about the boy and about your slave girl. Listen to her, for what will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.
As for the son of the slave girl, I will also make a nation out of him, because he is your offspring.”
So Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin bottle of water and gave it to Haʹgar. He set these on her shoulder and then sent her away along with the boy. So she departed and wandered about in the wilderness of Beʹer-sheʹba.
Finally the water in the skin bottle was used up, and she pushed the boy under one of the bushes.
Then she went on and sat down by herself, about the distance of a bowshot away, because she said: “I do not want to watch the boy die.” So she sat down at a distance and began to cry aloud and to weep.
At that God heard the voice of the boy, and God’s angel called to Haʹgar from the heavens and said to her: “What is the matter with you, Haʹgar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy there where he is.
Get up, lift the boy and take hold of him with your hand, for I will make him a great nation.”
Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water, and she went and filled the skin bottle with water and gave the boy a drink.
And God was with the boy as he grew up. He lived in the wilderness and became an archer.
He took up dwelling in the wilderness of Paʹran, and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
At that time A·bimʹe·lech together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army said to Abraham: “God is with you in everything you are doing.
So now swear to me here by God that you will not deal falsely with me and with my offspring and with my descendants, and that you will deal with me and with the land where you have been residing with the same loyal love that I have shown you.”
So Abraham said: “I swear to this.”
However, Abraham complained to A·bimʹe·lech about the well of water that the servants of A·bimʹe·lech had violently seized.
A·bimʹe·lech replied: “I do not know who did this; you did not tell me about it, and I heard nothing about it until today.”
At that Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to A·bimʹe·lech, and the two of them made a covenant.
When Abraham set seven female lambs apart from the flock by themselves,
A·bimʹe·lech said to Abraham: “Why have you set these seven female lambs here by themselves?”
Then he said: “You are to accept the seven female lambs from my hand as a witness that I dug this well.”
That is why he called that place Beʹer-sheʹba, because there both of them had taken an oath.
So they made a covenant at Beʹer-sheʹba, after which A·bimʹe·lech got up together with Phiʹcol the chief of his army, and they returned to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines.
After that he planted a tamarisk tree at Beʹer-sheʹba, and there he called on the name of Jehovah, the everlasting God.
And Abraham stayed in the land of the Phi·lisʹtines for a long time.
Now the serpent was the most cautious of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?”
At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden.
But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’”
At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die.
For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”
Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it.
Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized that they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made loin coverings for themselves.
Later they heard the voice of Jehovah God as he was walking in the garden about the breezy part of the day, and the man and his wife hid from the face of Jehovah God among the trees of the garden.
And Jehovah God kept calling to the man and saying to him: “Where are you?”
Finally he said: “I heard your voice in the garden, but I was afraid because I was naked, so I hid myself.”
At that he said: “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?”
The man said: “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate.”
Jehovah God then said to the woman: “What is this you have done?” The woman replied: “The serpent deceived me, so I ate.”
Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life.
And I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.”
To the woman he said: “I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.”
And to Adam he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life.
It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field.
In the sweat of your face you will eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”
After this Adam named his wife Eve, because she was to become the mother of everyone living.
And Jehovah God made long garments from skins for Adam and for his wife, to clothe them.
Jehovah God then said: “Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad. Now in order that he may not put his hand out and take fruit also from the tree of life and eat and live forever,—”
With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eʹden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken.
So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eʹden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.
When Rachel saw that she had borne no children to Jacob, she became jealous of her sister and began to say to Jacob: “Give me children or else I will die.”
At this Jacob’s anger flared up against Rachel, and he said: “Am I in the place of God, who has prevented you from having children?”
So she said: “Here is my slave girl Bilʹhah. Have relations with her in order that she may bear children for me and that through her, I too may have children.”
With that she gave him her servant Bilʹhah as a wife, and Jacob had relations with her.
Bilʹhah became pregnant and in time bore Jacob a son.
Then Rachel said: “God has acted as my judge and has also listened to my voice, so that he gave me a son.” That is why she named him Dan.
Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, became pregnant once more and in time bore Jacob a second son.
Then Rachel said: “With strenuous wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister. I have also come off the winner!” So she named him Naphʹta·li.
When Leʹah saw that she had stopped having children, she took her servant Zilʹpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife.
And Leʹah’s servant Zilʹpah bore a son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “With good fortune!” So she named him Gad.
After that Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, bore a second son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “With my happiness! For the daughters will certainly pronounce me happy.” So she named him Ashʹer.
Now Reuʹben was walking in the days of the wheat harvest, and he found mandrakes in the field. So he brought them to his mother Leʹah. Then Rachel said to Leʹah: “Give me, please, some of your son’s mandrakes.”
At this she said to her: “Is it a small matter that you took my husband? Would you now take my son’s mandrakes also?” So Rachel said: “Very well. He will lie down with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”
When Jacob was coming from the field in the evening, Leʹah went out to meet him and said: “It is with me you are going to have relations, because I have hired you outright with my son’s mandrakes.” So he lay down with her that night.
And God heard and answered Leʹah, and she became pregnant and in time bore to Jacob a fifth son.
Then Leʹah said: “God has given me my wages because I have given my servant to my husband.” So she named him Isʹsa·char.
And Leʹah became pregnant once more and in time bore a sixth son to Jacob.
Then Leʹah said: “God has endowed me, yes, me, with a good endowment. At last, my husband will tolerate me, for I have borne him six sons.” So she named him Zebʹu·lun.
Afterward she bore a daughter and named her Diʹnah.
Finally God remembered Rachel, and God heard and answered her by enabling her to become pregnant.
And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. Then she said: “God has taken away my reproach!”
So she named him Joseph, saying: “Jehovah is adding another son to me.”
After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob immediately said to Laʹban: “Send me away so that I may go to my place and to my land.
Give over my wives and my children, for whom I have served with you, that I may go, for you well know how I have served you.”
Then Laʹban said to him: “If I have found favor in your eyes,—I have understood by the omens that Jehovah is blessing me because of you.”
And he added: “Stipulate your wages to me, and I will give them.”
So Jacob said to him: “You know how I have served you and how your herd has fared with me;
you had little before my coming, but your herd has increased and multiplied, and Jehovah has blessed you since I arrived. So when will I do something for my own house?”
Then he said: “What should I give you?” And Jacob said: “You will give me nothing whatsoever! If you will do this one thing for me, I will resume shepherding your flock and guarding it.
I will pass through your whole flock today. You set aside from there every sheep speckled and with color patches and every dark-brown sheep among the young rams and any color-patched and speckled one among the she-goats. From now on, these must become my wages.
And my righteousness must speak for me on a future day when you come to look over my wages; every one that is not speckled and color-patched among the she-goats and dark brown among the young rams will be considered stolen if it is with me.”
To this Laʹban said: “That is fine! Let it be according to your word.”
Then on that day, he set aside the he-goats striped and color-patched and all the she-goats speckled and color-patched, every one in which there was any white and every one dark brown among the young rams, and gave them into the care of his sons.
After that he set a distance of three days’ journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was shepherding the flocks of Laʹban that remained over.
Jacob then took freshly cut staffs of the storax, almond, and plane trees, and he peeled white spots in them by exposing the white wood of the staffs.
Then he placed the staffs that he had peeled in front of the flock, in the gutters, in the drinking troughs, where the flocks would come to drink, that they might get into heat in front of them when they came to drink.
So the flocks would get into heat in front of the staffs, and the flocks would produce striped, speckled, and color-patched offspring.
Then Jacob separated the young rams and turned the flocks to face the striped ones and all the dark-brown ones among the flocks of Laʹban. Then he separated his own flocks and did not mix them with Laʹban’s flocks.
And whenever the robust animals would get into heat, Jacob would place the staffs in the gutters before the eyes of the flocks, that they might get into heat by the staffs.
But when the animals were weak, he would not place the staffs there. So the weak ones always came to be Laʹban’s, but the robust ones became Jacob’s.
And the man grew very prosperous, and he acquired great flocks and male and female servants and camels and donkeys.
God went on to bless Noah and his sons and to say to them: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth.
A fear of you and a terror of you will continue upon every living creature of the earth and upon every flying creature of the heavens, upon everything that moves on the ground and upon all the fish of the sea. They are now given into your hand.
Every moving animal that is alive may serve as food for you. Just as I gave you the green vegetation, I give them all to you.
Only flesh with its life—its blood—you must not eat.
Besides that, I will demand an accounting for your lifeblood. I will demand an accounting from every living creature; and from each man I will demand an accounting for the life of his brother.
Anyone shedding man’s blood, by man will his own blood be shed, for in God’s image He made man.
As for you, be fruitful and become many, and increase abundantly on the earth and multiply.”
Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him:
“I am now establishing my covenant with you and with your offspring after you,
and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the animals, and all the living creatures of the earth with you, all those that came out of the ark—every living creature of the earth.
Yes, I establish my covenant with you: Never again will all flesh be destroyed by the waters of a flood, and never again will a flood bring the earth to ruin.”
And God added: “This is the sign of the covenant that I am making between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations.
I put my rainbow in the cloud, and it will serve as a sign of the covenant between me and the earth.
Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth, then the rainbow will certainly appear in the cloud.
And I will certainly remember my covenant that I made between me and you and every living creature of every kind; and never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the rainbow will occur in the cloud, and I will certainly see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind on the earth.”
God repeated to Noah: “This is the sign of the covenant that I establish between me and all flesh that is on the earth.”
Noah’s sons who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. Ham later became the father of Caʹnaan.
These three were Noah’s sons, and all the earth’s population came from them and spread abroad.
Now Noah started off as a farmer, and he planted a vineyard.
When he drank of the wine, he became intoxicated, and he uncovered himself inside his tent.
Ham, the father of Caʹnaan, saw his father’s nakedness, and he told his two brothers outside.
So Shem and Jaʹpheth took a garment and put it upon both their shoulders and walked in backward. Thus they covered their father’s nakedness while their faces were turned away, and they did not see their father’s nakedness.
When Noah woke up from his wine and learned what his youngest son had done to him,
he said: “Cursed be Caʹnaan. Let him become the lowest slave to his brothers.”
And he added: “Praised be Jehovah, the God of Shem,And let Caʹnaan become a slave to him.
Let God grant ample space to Jaʹpheth,And let him reside in the tents of Shem. Let Caʹnaan become a slave to him also.”
Noah continued to live for 350 years after the Flood.
So all the days of Noah amounted to 950 years, and he died.
About that time Judah left his brothers and pitched his tent near an A·dulʹlam·ite man named Hiʹrah.
There Judah saw the daughter of a certain Caʹnaan·ite named Shuʹa. So he took her and had relations with her,
and she became pregnant. Later she bore a son, and he named him Er.
Again she became pregnant and bore a son and named him Oʹnan.
Yet again she bore a son and named him Sheʹlah. He was in Achʹzib when she bore him.
In time Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Taʹmar.
But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah; so Jehovah put him to death.
In view of that, Judah said to Oʹnan: “Have relations with your brother’s wife and perform brother-in-law marriage with her and raise up offspring for your brother.”
But Oʹnan knew that the offspring would not be considered his. So when he did have relations with his brother’s wife, he wasted his semen on the ground so as not to give offspring to his brother.
What he did was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so he also put him to death.
Judah said to Taʹmar his daughter-in-law: “Dwell as a widow in the house of your father until my son Sheʹlah grows up,” for he said to himself: ‘He too may die like his brothers.’ So Taʹmar went and stayed in her own father’s house.
Some time passed, and Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shuʹa, died. Judah kept the mourning period, and then he went to his sheepshearers in Timʹnah with his companion Hiʹrah the A·dulʹlam·ite.
Taʹmar was told: “Here your father-in-law is going up to Timʹnah to shear his sheep.”
With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife.
When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face.
So he turned aside to her by the road and said: “Allow me, please, to have relations with you,” for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. However, she said: “What will you give me that you may have relations with me?”
To this he said: “I will send a young goat from my herd.” But she said: “Will you give a security until you send it?”
He continued: “What security should I give you?” to which she said: “Your seal ring and your cord and your rod that is in your hand.” Then he gave them to her and had relations with her, and she became pregnant by him.
After that she got up and went away and removed her shawl and clothed herself with her widow’s clothing.
And Judah sent the young goat by the hand of his companion the A·dulʹlam·ite, to get back the security from the hand of the woman, but he never found her.
He inquired of the men of her place, saying: “Where is that temple prostitute in E·naʹim along the road?” But they said: “No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.”
Finally he returned to Judah and said: “I never found her, and besides, the men of the place said, ‘No temple prostitute has ever been in this place.’”
So Judah said: “Let her take them for herself, in order that we may not fall into contempt. At any rate, I have sent this young goat, but you never found her.”
However, about three months later, Judah was told: “Taʹmar your daughter-in-law has acted as a prostitute, and she is also pregnant by her prostitution.” At that Judah said: “Bring her out and let her be burned.”
As she was being brought out, she sent word to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong.” Then she added: “Please examine to whom these belong, the seal ring and the cord and the rod.”
Then Judah examined them and said: “She is more righteous than I am, because I did not give her to Sheʹlah my son.” And he had no further sexual relations with her after that.
When the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
As she was giving birth, one put out his hand, and the midwife immediately took a scarlet thread and tied it around his hand, saying: “This one came out first.”
But as soon as he drew back his hand, his brother came out, and she exclaimed: “What a breach you have made for yourself!” So he was named Peʹrez.
Afterward his brother came out, around whose hand the scarlet thread was tied, and he was named Zeʹrah.
Joseph then threw himself on his father and wept over him and kissed him.
After that Joseph commanded his servants, the physicians, to embalm his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel,
and they took the full 40 days for him, for this is the full period for the embalming, and the Egyptians continued to shed tears for him 70 days.
When the days of mourning for him passed, Joseph spoke to Pharʹaoh’s court, saying: “If I have found favor in your eyes, give this message to Pharʹaoh:
‘My father made me swear, saying: “Look! I am dying. You are to bury me in my burial place, which I have excavated in the land of Caʹnaan.” Please, let me go up and bury my father, after which I will return.’”
Pharʹaoh replied: “Go and bury your father just as he made you swear.”
So Joseph went up to bury his father, and all of Pharʹaoh’s servants went with him, the elders of his court and all the elders of the land of Egypt
and all of Joseph’s household and his brothers and the household of his father. Only their little children and their flocks and their herds they left in the land of Goʹshen.
Chariots and horsemen also went up with him, and the camp was very numerous.
Then they came to the threshing floor of Aʹtad, which is in the region of the Jordan, and there they carried on a very great and bitter mourning, and he kept mourning for his father seven days.
The inhabitants of the land, the Caʹnaan·ites, saw them mourning at the threshing floor of Aʹtad, and they exclaimed: “This is a great mourning for the Egyptians!” That is why it was named Aʹbel-mizʹra·im, which is in the region of the Jordan.
So his sons did for him exactly as he had instructed them.
His sons carried him into the land of Caʹnaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Mach·peʹlah, the field in front of Mamʹre that Abraham had purchased from Eʹphron the Hitʹtite as property for a burial place.
After he buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt with his brothers and all those who had gone with him to bury his father.
When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said: “It may be that Joseph is harboring animosity against us and that he will repay us for all the evil that we did to him.”
So they sent a message to Joseph in these words: “Your father gave this command before his death:
‘This is what you are to say to Joseph: “I beg you, please pardon the transgression of your brothers and the sin they committed in bringing such harm to you.”’ Now, please, pardon the transgression of the servants of your father’s God.” And Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
Then his brothers also came and fell down before him and said: “Here we are as slaves to you!”
Joseph said to them: “Do not be afraid. Am I in the place of God?
Although you meant to harm me, God intended it to turn out well and to preserve many people alive, as he is doing today.
So now do not be afraid. I will keep supplying you and your little children with food.” Thus he comforted them and spoke reassuringly to them.
And Joseph continued to dwell in Egypt, he and the household of his father, and Joseph lived for 110 years.
Joseph saw the third generation of Eʹphra·im’s sons, also the sons of Maʹchir, Ma·nasʹseh’s son. They were born upon Joseph’s knees.
At length Joseph said to his brothers: “I am dying, but God will without fail turn his attention to you, and he will certainly bring you up out of this land to the land about which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.”
So Joseph made the sons of Israel swear, saying: “God will without fail turn his attention to you. You must take my bones up out of here.”
And Joseph died at the age of 110, and they had him embalmed, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
Abraham was now old, advanced in years, and Jehovah had blessed Abraham in everything.
Abraham said to his servant, the oldest one of his household, who was managing all he had: “Please put your hand under my thigh,
and I will make you swear by Jehovah, the God of the heavens and the God of the earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, among whom I am dwelling.
You must go instead to my country and to my relatives and take a wife for my son, for Isaac.”
However, the servant said to him: “What if the woman is not willing to come with me to this land? Must I then return your son to the land from which you came?”
At this Abraham said to him: “See that you do not take my son there.
Jehovah the God of the heavens, who took me from my father’s house and from the land of my relatives and who spoke with me and swore to me: ‘To your offspring I am going to give this land,’ he will send his angel ahead of you, and you will certainly take a wife for my son from there.
But if the woman is unwilling to come with you, you will be free from this oath. But you must not take my son there.”
With that the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him concerning this matter.
So the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed, taking along all sorts of good things from his master. Then he went on his way to Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, to the city of Naʹhor.
He had the camels kneel down at a well of water outside the city. It was about evening, the time when the women would go out to draw water.
Then he said: “Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, please grant me success this day, and show your loyal love to my master Abraham.
Here I am standing at a spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
May it happen that the young woman to whom I say, ‘Please let down your water jar so that I may take a drink,’ and who replies, ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels,’ let this be the one you choose for your servant Isaac; and by this let me know that you have shown your loyal love to my master.”
Even before he finished speaking, Re·bekʹah, who was the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah the wife of Naʹhor, Abraham’s brother, came out with her water jar on her shoulder.
Now the young woman was very beautiful, a virgin; no man had had sexual relations with her. She went down to the spring, filled her water jar, and then came back up.
At once the servant ran to meet her and said: “Please give me a little sip of water from your jar.”
In turn she said: “Drink, my lord.” With that she quickly lowered her jar upon her hand and gave him a drink.
When she finished giving him a drink, she said: “I will also draw water for your camels until they are done drinking.”
So she quickly emptied her jar into the drinking trough and ran again and again to the well to draw water, and she kept drawing water for all his camels.
The whole time the man silently stared at her in amazement, wondering whether Jehovah had made his trip successful or not.
When the camels had finished drinking, the man took out for her a gold nose ring weighing a half shekel and two bracelets of gold weighing ten shekels,
and he said: “Please tell me, whose daughter are you? Is there any room at your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
At that she said to him: “I am the daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Milʹcah, whom she bore to Naʹhor.”
And she added: “We have both straw and much fodder and also a place to spend the night.”
Then the man bowed down and prostrated himself before Jehovah
and said: “May Jehovah be praised, the God of my master Abraham, for he has not abandoned his loyal love and his faithfulness toward my master. Jehovah has guided me to the house of the brothers of my master.”
And the young woman ran to tell her mother’s household about these things.
Now Re·bekʹah had a brother whose name was Laʹban. So Laʹban ran to the man who was outside at the spring.
When he saw the nose ring and the bracelets on the hands of his sister and heard the words of his sister Re·bekʹah, who was saying, “This is the way the man spoke to me,” he came to meet the man, who was still there standing by the camels at the spring.
At once he said: “Come, you who are blessed by Jehovah. Why do you keep standing out here? I have made the house ready and a place for the camels.”
With that the man came into the house, and he unharnessed the camels and gave straw and fodder to the camels and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
However, when something to eat was set before him, he said: “I will not eat until I have told you what I have to say.” So Laʹban said: “Speak!”
Then he said: “I am Abraham’s servant.
And Jehovah has blessed my master very much, and he has made him very wealthy by giving him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, male and female servants, and camels and donkeys.
Further, Sarah the wife of my master bore a son to my master after she grew old, and he will give him everything he has.
So my master made me swear, saying: ‘You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Caʹnaan·ites, in whose land I am dwelling.
No, but you will go to the house of my father and to my family, and you must take a wife for my son.’
But I said to my master: ‘What if the woman is unwilling to come with me?’
He said to me: ‘Jehovah, before whom I have walked, will send his angel with you and will certainly give success to your journey, and you must take a wife for my son from my family and from the house of my father.
You will be released from your oath to me if you go to my family and they will not give her to you. This will release you from your oath.’
“When I got to the spring today, I said: ‘Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, if you will make my journey successful,
here I am standing at a spring. What must take place is that when a young woman comes out to draw water, I will say, “Please, let me drink a little water from your jar,”
and she will say to me, “You take a drink, and I will also draw water for your camels.” Let that woman be the one whom Jehovah has chosen for the son of my master.’
“Before I was finished speaking in my heart, there was Re·bekʹah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she made her way down to the spring and began to draw water. Then I said to her: ‘Give me a drink, please.’
So she quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said: ‘Take a drink, and I will also water your camels.’ Then I took a drink, and she also watered the camels.
After that I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ to which she replied, ‘The daughter of Be·thuʹel the son of Naʹhor, whom Milʹcah bore to him.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her hands.
And I bowed down and prostrated myself before Jehovah and praised Jehovah the God of my master Abraham, who had led me on the right path to take the daughter of the brother of my master for his son.
And now tell me if you wish to show loyal love and faithfulness toward my master; but if not, tell me, so that I may proceed one way or the other.”
Then Laʹban and Be·thuʹel answered: “This is from Jehovah. We are not able to say yes or no to you.
Here is Re·bekʹah before you. Take her and go, and let her become a wife to the son of your master, just as Jehovah has spoken.”
When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he at once bowed down on the ground before Jehovah.
And the servant began to bring out articles of silver and of gold and garments and to give them to Re·bekʹah, and he gave valuable things to her brother and to her mother.
After that he and the men with him ate and drank, and they spent the night there. When he got up in the morning, he said: “Send me off to my master.”
To this her brother and her mother said: “Let the young woman stay with us at least ten days. Then she can go.”
But he said to them: “Do not detain me, seeing that Jehovah has made my journey successful. Send me off, in order that I may go to my master.”
So they said: “Let us call the young woman and inquire of her.”
They called Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Will you go with this man?” She replied: “I am willing to go.”
So they sent off their sister Re·bekʹah and her nurse and Abraham’s servant and his men.
And they blessed Re·bekʹah and said to her: “Our sister, may you become thousands times ten thousand, and let your offspring take possession of the gate of those who hate them.”
Then Re·bekʹah and her female attendants rose, got on the camels, and followed the man. So the servant took Re·bekʹah and went on his way.
Now Isaac had come from the direction of Beʹer-laʹhai-roi, for he was dwelling in the land of the Negʹeb.
And Isaac was out walking in the field about nightfall to meditate. When he looked up, why, he saw that camels were coming!
When Re·bekʹah looked up, she caught sight of Isaac, and she quickly got down from the camel.
Then she asked the servant: “Who is that man there walking in the field to meet us?” And the servant said: “It is my master.” So she took her veil to cover herself.
And the servant told Isaac all the things he had done.
After that Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother. Thus he took Re·bekʹah as his wife; and he fell in love with her, and Isaac found comfort after the loss of his mother.
So Joseph went and reported to Pharʹaoh: “My father and my brothers and their flocks and their herds and all that they possess have come from the land of Caʹnaan, and they are in the land of Goʹshen.”
He took five of his brothers and presented them to Pharʹaoh.
Pharʹaoh said to his brothers: “What is your occupation?” They replied to Pharʹaoh: “Your servants are herders of sheep, both we and our forefathers.”
Then they said to Pharʹaoh: “We have come to reside as foreigners in the land because there are no pastures for the flock of your servants, for the famine is severe in the land of Caʹnaan. So please let your servants dwell in the land of Goʹshen.”
At that Pharʹaoh said to Joseph: “Your father and your brothers have come here to you.
The land of Egypt is at your disposal. Have your father and your brothers dwell in the very best part of the land. Let them dwell in the land of Goʹshen, and if you know of any capable men among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”
Then Joseph brought in Jacob his father and presented him to Pharʹaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharʹaoh.
Pharʹaoh asked Jacob: “How old are you?”
Jacob said to Pharʹaoh: “The years of my wanderings are 130. Few and distressing the years of my life have been, and they are not as long as the years of the lives of my forefathers during their wanderings.”
After that Jacob blessed Pharʹaoh and went out from before him.
So Joseph settled his father and his brothers, and he gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the very best part of the land, in the land of Ramʹe·ses, just as Pharʹaoh had commanded.
And Joseph kept supplying his father and his brothers and the entire household of his father with food according to the number of their children.
Now there was no food in all the land, because the famine was very severe, and the land of Egypt and the land of Caʹnaan became exhausted as a result of the famine.
Joseph was collecting all the money that was to be found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Caʹnaan for the grain that people were buying, and Joseph kept bringing the money into Pharʹaoh’s house.
In time the money from the land of Egypt and the land of Caʹnaan was spent, and all the Egyptians began coming to Joseph, saying: “Give us food! Why should we die before your very eyes because our money has run out?”
Then Joseph said: “If your money has run out, hand over your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for your livestock.”
So they began bringing their livestock to Joseph, and Joseph kept giving them food in exchange for their horses, the livestock of the flock and of the herd, and the donkeys, and he kept providing them with food in exchange for all their livestock during that year.
When that year came to its close, they began coming to him the next year and saying: “We will not hide from my lord that the money and the stock of domestic animals have already been given to my lord. We have nothing left for my lord but our bodies and our land.
Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food, and we together with our land will become slaves to Pharʹaoh. Give us seed so that we may live and not die and that our land may not become desolate.”
Joseph then bought all the land of the Egyptians for Pharʹaoh because every Egyptian sold his field, for the famine was very severe; and the land became Pharʹaoh’s.
Then he moved the people into cities, from one end of the territory of Egypt to its other end.
Only the land of the priests he did not buy, because the rations for the priests were from Pharʹaoh and they lived on their rations that Pharʹaoh gave them. That is why they did not sell their land.
Then Joseph said to the people: “See, I have today bought you and your land for Pharʹaoh. Here is seed for you, and you must sow the land with it.
When it produces, give a fifth to Pharʹaoh, but four parts will be yours as seed for the field and as food for you and for those in your houses and for your children to eat.”
So they said: “You have preserved our lives. Let us find favor in the eyes of my lord, and we will become slaves to Pharʹaoh.”
Then Joseph made it a decree, which is valid until today over the land of Egypt, that a fifth belongs to Pharʹaoh. It was only the land of the priests that did not become Pharʹaoh’s.
Israel continued to dwell in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goʹshen, and they settled in it and were fruitful and increased greatly.
And Jacob lived on in the land of Egypt for 17 years, so that the days of Jacob’s life came to be 147 years.
The time was approaching for Israel to die, so he called his son Joseph and said: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, place your hand, please, under my thigh, and show loyal love and faithfulness to me. Please, do not bury me in Egypt.
When I die, you must carry me out of Egypt and bury me in the grave of my forefathers.” Accordingly, he said: “I will do just as you say.”
Then he said: “Swear to me.” So he swore to him. At that Israel bowed down at the head of his bed.
Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too weak to see, he called Eʹsau his older son to him and said: “My son!” He replied: “Here I am!”
And he went on to say: “I have now grown old. I do not know the day of my death.
So at this time take, please, your weapons, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field and hunt some wild game for me.
Then make the kind of tasty dish that I am fond of and bring it to me. Then I will eat it so that I may bless you before I die.”
However, Re·bekʹah was listening while Isaac spoke to Eʹsau his son. And Eʹsau went out into the field to hunt game and to bring it in.
And Re·bekʹah said to Jacob her son: “I just heard your father speaking to your brother Eʹsau, saying,
‘Bring me some game and make me a tasty dish. Then let me eat so that I may bless you before Jehovah before my death.’
And now, my son, listen carefully and do what I am instructing you.
Go, please, to the herd and get me two of the best young goats from there so that I may prepare from them a tasty dish for your father, just the way he likes it.
Then take it to your father to eat, in order that he may bless you before his death.”
Jacob said to his mother Re·bekʹah: “But Eʹsau my brother is a hairy man, and my skin is smooth.
What if my father feels me? Then I will certainly appear to be mocking him, and I will bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.”
At this his mother said to him: “Upon me be the curse meant for you, my son. Just do as I say and go, get them for me.”
So he went and got them and brought them to his mother, and his mother made a tasty dish, just the way his father liked it.
After that Re·bekʹah took her older son Eʹsau’s finest garments, which she had in the house, and put them on her younger son Jacob.
She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the hairless part of his neck.
Then she handed the tasty dish and the bread that she had made to her son Jacob.
So he went in to his father and said: “My father!” to which he said: “Here I am! Who are you, my son?”
Jacob said to his father: “I am Eʹsau your firstborn. I have done just as you told me. Sit up, please, and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.”
At that Isaac said to his son: “How were you so quick in finding it, my son?” He replied: “Because Jehovah your God brought it to me.”
Then Isaac said to Jacob: “Come near, please, that I may feel you, my son, to know whether you are really my son Eʹsau or not.”
So Jacob came near to his father Isaac, and he felt him, after which he said: “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Eʹsau.”
He did not recognize him because his hands were hairy like the hands of his brother Eʹsau. So he blessed him.
After that he asked: “Are you really my son Eʹsau?” to which he replied: “I am.”
Then he said: “Bring me some of the wild game for me to eat, my son, then I will bless you.” With that he brought it to him and he ate, and he brought him wine and he drank.
Then Isaac his father said to him: “Come near, please, and kiss me, my son.”
So he came near and kissed him, and he could smell the scent of his garments. Then he blessed him and said: “See, the scent of my son is like the scent of the field that Jehovah has blessed.
May the true God give you the dews of the heavens and the fertile soils of the earth and an abundance of grain and new wine.
Let peoples serve you, and let nations bow low to you. Be master over your brothers, and let the sons of your mother bow low to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be everyone who blesses you.”
Now Isaac had just finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had barely left the presence of his father Isaac when his brother Eʹsau came back from his hunting.
He too prepared a tasty dish and brought it to his father, and he said to his father: “Let my father get up and eat some of his son’s game, in order that you may bless me.”
At this his father Isaac said to him: “Who are you?” to which he said: “I am your son, your firstborn, Eʹsau.”
And Isaac began to tremble violently, so he said: “Who was it, then, who hunted for game and brought it to me? I already ate it before you arrived, and I blessed him—and he will surely be blessed!”
On hearing his father’s words, Eʹsau began to cry out in an extremely loud and bitter manner and to say to his father: “Bless me, yes, me too, my father!”
But he said: “Your brother came deceitfully so that he might get the blessing meant for you.”
At this he said: “Is he not rightly named Jacob, that he might supplant me these two times? My birthright he has already taken, and now he has taken my blessing!” Then he added: “Have you not reserved a blessing for me?”
But Isaac answered Eʹsau: “Here I have appointed him master over you, and I have given him all his brothers as servants, and I have bestowed grain and new wine for his support. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”
Eʹsau said to his father: “Is there just one blessing that you have, my father? Bless me, yes, me too, my father!” With that Eʹsau cried loudly and burst into tears.
So his father Isaac answered him: “See, away from the fertile soils of the earth your dwelling will be, and away from the dew of the heavens above.
And by your sword you will live, and you will serve your brother. But when you grow restless, you will indeed break his yoke off your neck.”
However, Eʹsau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him, and Eʹsau kept saying in his heart: “The days of mourning for my father are getting closer. After that I am going to kill Jacob my brother.”
When the words of her older son Eʹsau were told to Re·bekʹah, she at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him: “Look! Your brother Eʹsau is planning to take revenge by killing you.
Now, my son, do as I say. Get up and run away to my brother Laʹban at Haʹran.
Dwell with him for a while until your brother’s rage calms down,
until your brother’s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
After that Re·bekʹah kept saying to Isaac: “I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good is my life?”
Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.
And by the seventh day, God had completed the work that he had been doing, and he began to rest on the seventh day from all his work that he had been doing.
And God went on to bless the seventh day and to declare it sacred, for on it God has been resting from all the work that he has created, all that he purposed to make.
This is a history of the heavens and the earth in the time they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.
No bush of the field was yet on the earth and no vegetation of the field had begun sprouting, because Jehovah God had not made it rain on the earth and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
But a mist would go up from the earth, and it watered the entire surface of the ground.
And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.
Further, Jehovah God planted a garden in Eʹden, toward the east; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
Thus Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree that was pleasing to look at and good for food and also the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and bad.
Now there was a river flowing out of Eʹden to water the garden, and from there it divided into four rivers.
The name of the first is Piʹshon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Havʹi·lah, where there is gold.
The gold of that land is good. Bdellium gum and onyx stone are also there.
The name of the second river is Giʹhon; it is the one encircling the entire land of Cush.
The name of the third river is Hidʹde·kel; it is the one going to the east of As·syrʹi·a. And the fourth river is the Eu·phraʹtes.
Jehovah God took the man and settled him in the garden of Eʹden to cultivate it and to take care of it.
Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction.
But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”
Then Jehovah God said: “It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.”
Now Jehovah God had been forming from the ground every wild animal of the field and every flying creature of the heavens, and he began bringing them to the man to see what he would call each one; and whatever the man would call each living creature, that became its name.
So the man named all the domestic animals and the flying creatures of the heavens and every wild animal of the field, but for man there was no helper as a complement of him.
So Jehovah God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place.
And Jehovah God built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman, and he brought her to the man.
Then the man said: “This is at last bone of my bonesAnd flesh of my flesh. This one will be called Woman,Because from man she was taken.”
That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
And both of them continued to be naked, the man and his wife; yet they were not ashamed.
Later he commanded the man who was over his house: “Fill the bags of the men with as much food as they can carry, and place the money of each one in the mouth of his bag.
But you must place my cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the bag of the youngest, along with the money for his grain.” So he did as Joseph had instructed.
In the morning when it had become light, the men were sent away with their donkeys.
They had not gone far from the city when Joseph said to the man who was over his house: “Get up! Chase after the men! When you overtake them, say to them, ‘Why have you repaid bad for good?
Is not this what my master drinks from and uses to read omens expertly? It is a wicked thing you have done.’”
So he overtook them and spoke these words to them.
But they said to him: “Why does my lord say such a thing? It is unthinkable that your servants would do anything like this.
Why, the money that we found in the mouth of our bags we brought back to you from the land of Caʹnaan. How, then, could we steal silver or gold from the house of your master?
If it is found with one of your slaves, let him die, and the rest of us will also become slaves to my master.”
So he said: “Let it be as you say: The one with whom it is found will become my slave, but the rest of you will be innocent.”
With that each one quickly lowered his bag to the ground and opened it.
He searched carefully, starting with the oldest and finishing with the youngest. Finally the cup was found in Benjamin’s bag.
Then they ripped their garments apart, and each of them lifted his load back onto his donkey and returned to the city.
When Judah and his brothers went into Joseph’s house, he was still there; and they fell to the ground before him.
Joseph said to them: “What is this deed that you have done? Did you not know that a man like me can expertly read omens?”
At this Judah replied: “What can we say to my master? What can we speak? And how can we prove ourselves righteous? The true God has found out the error of your slaves. We are now slaves to my master, both we and the one in whose hand the cup was found!”
However, he said: “It is unthinkable for me to do this! The man in whose hand the cup was found is the one who will become a slave to me. As for the rest of you, go up in peace to your father.”
Judah now approached him and said: “I beg you, my master, please let your slave speak a word in my master’s ears, and do not become angry with your slave, for you are like Pharʹaoh himself.
My master asked his slaves, ‘Do you have a father or a brother?’
So we said to my master, ‘We do have an aged father and a child of his old age, the youngest. But his brother is dead, so he is the only remaining son of his mother, and his father loves him.’
After that you said to your slaves, ‘Bring him down to me so that I may see him.’
But we said to my master, ‘The boy is not able to leave his father. If he did leave him, his father would certainly die.’
Then you said to your slaves, ‘Unless your youngest brother comes down with you, you may not see my face anymore.’
“So we went up to your slave my father and told him the words of my master.
Later our father said, ‘Return and buy a little food for us.’
But we said, ‘We are not able to go down. If our youngest brother is with us we will go down, for we cannot see the man’s face unless our youngest brother is with us.’
Then your slave my father said to us, ‘You well know that my wife bore but two sons to me.
But one of them left me and I said: “He must surely have been torn to pieces!” and I have not seen him until now.
If you were to take this one also out of my sight and a fatal accident were to befall him, you would certainly bring down my gray hairs to the Grave with calamity.’
“And now if I return to your slave my father without the boy along with us, since his own life is bound up with this one’s life,
then as soon as he sees that the boy is not there, he will die, and your slaves will indeed bring down the gray hairs of your slave our father to the Grave in grief.
Your slave gave a guarantee to my father for the boy, saying, ‘If I fail to bring him back to you, then I will have sinned against my father forever.’
So now, please, let your slave stay instead of the boy as my master’s slave, in order that the boy may return with his brothers.
How can I return to my father without the boy along with me? I could not bear looking on when this calamity befalls my father!”
This is the history of Noah’s sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth. Sons were born to them after the Flood.
The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.
The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.
The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Doʹda·nim.
From these the inhabitants of the islands spread into their lands, according to their languages and their families and by their nations.
The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.
The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca. The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.
He became a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah. That is why there is a saying: “Just like Nimʹrod, a mighty hunter in opposition to Jehovah.”
The beginning of his kingdom was Baʹbel, Eʹrech, Acʹcad, and Calʹneh, in the land of Shiʹnar.
From that land he went into As·syrʹi·a and built Ninʹe·veh, Re·hoʹboth-Ir, Caʹlah,
and Reʹsen, between Ninʹe·veh and Caʹlah: This is the great city.
Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim,
Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.
Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth,
as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite,
the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite,
the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite. Afterward, the families of the Caʹnaan·ites were scattered.
So the boundary of the Caʹnaan·ites was from Siʹdon as far as Geʹrar, near Gazʹa, as far as Sodʹom, Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah, and Ze·boiʹim, near Laʹsha.
These were the sons of Ham according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
Children were also born to Shem, the forefather of all the sons of Eʹber and the brother of Jaʹpheth the oldest.
The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram.
The sons of Aʹram were Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.
Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.
Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.
Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah,
Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah,
Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba,
Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.
Their place of dwelling extended from Meʹsha as far as Seʹphar, the mountainous region of the East.
These were the sons of Shem according to their families and their languages, by their lands and their nations.
These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their family lines and by their nations. From these the nations were spread abroad in the earth after the Flood.
Now Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian servant whose name was Haʹgar.
So Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “Please now! Jehovah has prevented me from bearing children. Please, have relations with my servant. Perhaps I can have children by means of her.” So Aʹbram listened to what Sarʹai said.
After Aʹbram had lived for ten years in the land of Caʹnaan, Aʹbram’s wife Sarʹai took her Egyptian servant Haʹgar and gave her to her husband Aʹbram as his wife.
So he had relations with Haʹgar, and she became pregnant. When she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise her mistress.
At this Sarʹai said to Aʹbram: “The injury done to me is your fault. I was the one who put my servant in your arms, but when she realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise me. May Jehovah judge between me and you.”
So Aʹbram said to Sarʹai: “Look! Your servant is under your authority. Do to her whatever you think is best.” Then Sarʹai humiliated her, and she ran away from her.
Later Jehovah’s angel found her at a spring of waters in the wilderness, the spring on the way to Shur.
And he said: “Haʹgar, servant of Sarʹai, where have you come from and where are you going?” To this she said: “I am running away from my mistress Sarʹai.”
Jehovah’s angel then said to her: “Return to your mistress and humble yourself under her hand.”
Then Jehovah’s angel said: “I will greatly multiply your offspring, so that they will be too numerous to count.”
Jehovah’s angel added: “Here you are pregnant, and you will give birth to a son, and you must name him Ishʹma·el, for Jehovah has heard your affliction.
He will be a wild donkey of a man. His hand will be against everyone, and everyone’s hand will be against him, and he will dwell opposite all his brothers.”
Then she called on the name of Jehovah, who was speaking to her: “You are a God of sight,” for she said: “Have I here actually looked upon the one who sees me?”
That is why the well was called Beʹer-laʹhai-roi. (It is between Kaʹdesh and Beʹred.)
So Haʹgar bore to Aʹbram a son, and Aʹbram named his son, whom Haʹgar bore, Ishʹma·el.
Aʹbram was 86 years old when Haʹgar bore Ishʹma·el to him.
This is the book of Adam’s history. In the day that God created Adam, he made him in the likeness of God.
Male and female he created them. On the day they were created, he blessed them and named them Man.
Adam lived for 130 years and then became father to a son in his likeness, in his image, and he named him Seth.
After becoming father to Seth, Adam lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Adam’s life amounted to 930 years, and then he died.
Seth lived for 105 years and then became father to Eʹnosh.
After becoming father to Eʹnosh, Seth lived for 807 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Seth amounted to 912 years, and then he died.
Eʹnosh lived for 90 years and then became father to Keʹnan.
After becoming father to Keʹnan, Eʹnosh lived for 815 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Eʹnosh amounted to 905 years, and then he died.
Keʹnan lived for 70 years and then became father to Ma·halʹa·lel.
After becoming father to Ma·halʹa·lel, Keʹnan lived for 840 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Keʹnan amounted to 910 years, and then he died.
Ma·halʹa·lel lived for 65 years and then became father to Jaʹred.
After becoming father to Jaʹred, Ma·halʹa·lel lived for 830 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Ma·halʹa·lel amounted to 895 years, and then he died.
Jaʹred lived for 162 years and then became father to Eʹnoch.
After becoming father to Eʹnoch, Jaʹred lived for 800 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Jaʹred amounted to 962 years, and then he died.
Eʹnoch lived for 65 years and then became father to Me·thuʹse·lah.
After becoming father to Me·thuʹse·lah, Eʹnoch continued to walk with the true God for 300 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Eʹnoch amounted to 365 years.
Eʹnoch kept walking with the true God. Then he was no more, for God took him.
Me·thuʹse·lah lived for 187 years and then became father to Laʹmech.
After becoming father to Laʹmech, Me·thuʹse·lah lived for 782 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Me·thuʹse·lah amounted to 969 years, and then he died.
Laʹmech lived for 182 years and then became father to a son.
He named him Noah, saying: “This one will bring us comfort from our labor and from the painful toil of our hands because of the ground that Jehovah has cursed.”
After becoming father to Noah, Laʹmech lived for 595 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.
So all the days of Laʹmech amounted to 777 years, and then he died.
After Noah reached 500 years of age, he became father to Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
So Israel took all that he had and departed. When he arrived at Beʹer-sheʹba, he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.
Then God spoke to Israel in a vision by night and said: “Jacob, Jacob!” to which he said: “Here I am!”
He said: “I am the true God, the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for there I will make you into a great nation.
I myself will go down with you to Egypt, and I myself will also bring you back from there, and Joseph will lay his hand on your eyes.”
After that Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba, and the sons of Israel transported Jacob their father and their children and their wives in the wagons that Pharʹaoh had sent to transport him.
They took along their herds and their goods, which they had accumulated in the land of Caʹnaan. And so they came into Egypt, Jacob and all his offspring with him.
He brought with him into Egypt his sons and his grandsons, his daughters and his granddaughters—all his offspring.
Now these are the names of Israel’s sons who came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Jacob’s firstborn was Reuʹben.
The sons of Reuʹben were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi.
The sons of Simʹe·on were Jem·uʹel, Jaʹmin, Oʹhad, Jaʹchin, Zoʹhar, and Shaʹul the son of a Caʹnaan·ite woman.
The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.
The sons of Judah were Er, Oʹnan, Sheʹlah, Peʹrez, and Zeʹrah. However, Er and Oʹnan died in the land of Caʹnaan. The sons of Peʹrez came to be Hezʹron and Haʹmul.
The sons of Isʹsa·char were Toʹla, Puʹvah, Iob, and Shimʹron.
The sons of Zebʹu·lun were Seʹred, Eʹlon, and Jahʹle·el.
These are the sons of Leʹah, whom she bore to Jacob in Padʹdan-aʹram, together with his daughter Diʹnah. All his sons and his daughters numbered 33.
The sons of Gad were Ziphʹi·on, Hagʹgi, Shuʹni, Ezʹbon, Eʹri, Ar·oʹdi, and A·reʹli.
The sons of Ashʹer were Imʹnah, Ishʹvah, Ishʹvi, and Be·riʹah, and their sister was Seʹrah. The sons of Be·riʹah were Heʹber and Malʹchi·el.
These are the sons of Zilʹpah, whom Laʹban gave to his daughter Leʹah. She bore these to Jacob: 16 persons in all.
The sons of Jacob’s wife Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.
There were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im, whom Asʹe·nath the daughter of Pot·iʹphe·ra the priest of On bore to him.
The sons of Benjamin were Beʹla, Beʹcher, Ashʹbel, Geʹra, Naʹa·man, Eʹhi, Rosh, Mupʹpim, Hupʹpim, and Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel who were born to Jacob: 14 persons in all.
The son of Dan was Huʹshim.
The sons of Naphʹta·li were Jahʹze·el, Guʹni, Jeʹzer, and Shilʹlem.
These are the sons of Bilʹhah, whom Laʹban gave to his daughter Rachel. She bore these to Jacob: seven persons in all.
All those who descended from Jacob and went into Egypt with him, aside from the wives of Jacob’s sons, were 66.
Joseph’s sons who were born to him in Egypt were two. All the people of the house of Jacob who came into Egypt were 70.
Jacob sent Judah ahead to tell Joseph that he was on the way to Goʹshen. When they came into the land of Goʹshen,
Joseph had his chariot prepared and went up to meet Israel his father at Goʹshen. When he presented himself to him, he at once embraced him and wept for some time.
Then Israel said to Joseph: “Now I am ready to die; I have seen your face and know that you are still alive.”
Joseph then said to his brothers and to his father’s household: “Let me go up and report to Pharʹaoh and tell him, ‘My brothers and my father’s household who were in the land of Caʹnaan have come here to me.
The men are shepherds, and they raise livestock, and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.’
When Pharʹaoh calls you and asks, ‘What is your occupation?’
you must say, ‘Your servants have raised livestock from our youth until now, both we and our forefathers,’ so that you may dwell in the land of Goʹshen, for every herder of sheep is detestable to the Egyptians.”
Now in the days of Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar, Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, and Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim,
these made war with Beʹra king of Sodʹom, Birʹsha king of Go·morʹrah, Shiʹnab king of Adʹmah, Shem·eʹber king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar.
All of these joined forces at the Valley of Sidʹdim, that is, the Salt Sea.
They had served Ched·or·la·oʹmer for 12 years, but they rebelled in the 13th year.
So in the 14th year, Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him came and defeated the Rephʹa·im in Ashʹte·roth-kar·naʹim, the Zuʹzim in Ham, the Eʹmim in Shaʹveh-kir·i·a·thaʹim,
and the Horʹites in their mountain of Seʹir down to El-paʹran, which is at the wilderness.
Then they turned back and came to En-mishʹpat, that is, Kaʹdesh, and conquered the whole territory of the A·malʹek·ites and also the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling in Hazʹa·zon-taʹmar.
At this point, the king of Sodʹom went on the march, and also the king of Go·morʹrah, the king of Adʹmah, the king of Ze·boiʹim, and the king of Beʹla, that is, Zoʹar, and they drew up in battle formation against them in the Valley of Sidʹdim,
against Ched·or·la·oʹmer king of Eʹlam, Tiʹdal king of Goiʹim, Amʹra·phel king of Shiʹnar, and Arʹi·och king of El·laʹsar—four kings against the five.
Now the Valley of Sidʹdim was full of bitumen pits, and the kings of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah tried to escape and fell into them, and those who remained fled to the mountainous region.
Then the victors took all the goods of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and all their food and went on their way.
They also took Lot, the son of Aʹbram’s brother who was dwelling in Sodʹom, as well as his goods, and they continued on their way.
After that a man who had escaped came and told Aʹbram the Hebrew. He was then dwelling among the big trees of Mamʹre the Amʹor·ite, the brother of Eshʹcol and Aʹner. These men were allies of Aʹbram.
Thus Aʹbram heard that his relative had been taken captive. With that he mobilized his trained men, 318 servants born in his household, and went in pursuit up to Dan.
During the night, he divided his forces, and he and his servants attacked and defeated them. And he pursued them up to Hoʹbah, which is north of Damascus.
He recovered all the goods, and he also recovered Lot his relative, his goods, the women, and the other people.
After Aʹbram returned from defeating Ched·or·la·oʹmer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodʹom went out to meet Aʹbram at the Valley of Shaʹveh, that is, the Valley of the King.
And Mel·chizʹe·dek king of Saʹlem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of the Most High God.
Then he blessed him and said: “Blessed be Aʹbram by the Most High God,Maker of heaven and earth;
And praised be the Most High God,Who has handed your oppressors over to you!” And Aʹbram gave him a tenth of everything.
After that the king of Sodʹom said to Aʹbram: “Give me the people, but take the goods for yourself.”
But Aʹbram said to the king of Sodʹom: “I raise my hand in an oath to Jehovah the Most High God, Maker of heaven and earth,
that I will not take anything that is yours, from a thread to a sandal lace, so that you may not say, ‘I made Aʹbram rich.’
I will take nothing except what the young men have already eaten. As for the share of the men who went with me, Aʹner, Eshʹcol, and Mamʹre—let them take their share.”
So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying: “You must not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan.
Go away to Padʹdan-aʹram to the house of Be·thuʹel, your mother’s father, and from there take for yourself a wife from the daughters of Laʹban, your mother’s brother.
God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and you will certainly become a congregation of peoples.
And he will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you, so that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner, which God has given to Abraham.”
So Isaac sent Jacob away, and he departed for Padʹdan-aʹram, to Laʹban the son of Be·thuʹel the A·ra·maeʹan, the brother of Re·bekʹah, the mother of Jacob and Eʹsau.
Eʹsau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and had sent him away to Padʹdan-aʹram to take a wife from there and that when he blessed him, he commanded him, “Do not take a wife from the daughters of Caʹnaan,”
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed for Padʹdan-aʹram.
Eʹsau then realized that the daughters of Caʹnaan were displeasing to his father Isaac,
so Eʹsau went to Ishʹma·el and took as wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of Abraham’s son Ishʹma·el, the sister of Ne·baʹioth, in addition to the other wives he already had.
Jacob departed from Beʹer-sheʹba and kept going toward Haʹran.
In time he came to a place and prepared to spend the night there because the sun had set. So he took one of the stones of that place and set it to rest his head on and lay down there.
Then he had a dream, and look! there was a stairway set on the earth, and its top reached up to the heavens; and there were God’s angels ascending and descending on it.
And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said: “I am Jehovah the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac. The land on which you are lying, to you I am going to give it and to your offspring.
And your offspring will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed.
I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: “Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.”
And he grew fearful and added: “How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.”
So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it.
So he named that place Bethʹel, but previously the city’s name was Luz.
Jacob then made a vow, saying: “If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear
and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God.
And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.”
Now after this the true God put Abraham to the test, and he said to him: “Abraham!” to which he replied: “Here I am!”
Then he said: “Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and travel to the land of Mo·riʹah and offer him up there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains that I will designate to you.”
So Abraham got up early in the morning and saddled his donkey and took two of his servants along with him and his son Isaac. He split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he rose and traveled to the place that the true God indicated to him.
On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place from a distance.
Abraham now said to his servants: “You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.”
So Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on his son Isaac. Then he took in his hands the fire and the knife, and the two of them walked on together.
Then Isaac said to his father Abraham: “My father!” He replied: “Yes, my son!” So he continued: “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?”
To this Abraham said: “God himself will provide the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.” And both of them walked on together.
Finally they reached the place that the true God had indicated to him, and Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac hand and foot and put him on the altar on top of the wood.
Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son.
But Jehovah’s angel called to him from the heavens and said: “Abraham, Abraham!” to which he answered: “Here I am!”
Then he said: “Do not harm the boy, and do not do anything at all to him, for now I do know that you are God-fearing because you have not withheld your son, your only one, from me.”
At that Abraham looked up, and there just beyond him was a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. So Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up as a burnt offering in place of his son.
And Abraham named that place Je·hoʹvah-jiʹreh. This is why it is still said today: “In the mountain of Jehovah it will be provided.”
And Jehovah’s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens,
saying: “‘By myself I swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one,
I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring will take possession of the gate of his enemies.
And by means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.’”
After that Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went back together to Beʹer-sheʹba; and Abraham continued to dwell at Beʹer-sheʹba.
After this it was reported to Abraham: “Here Milʹcah has also borne sons to Naʹhor your brother:
Uz his firstborn, Buz his brother, Kem·uʹel the father of Aʹram,
Cheʹsed, Haʹzo, Pilʹdash, Jidʹlaph, and Be·thuʹel.”
Be·thuʹel became the father of Re·bekʹah. Milʹcah bore these eight to Naʹhor the brother of Abraham.
His concubine, whose name was Reuʹmah, also bore sons: Teʹbah, Gaʹham, Taʹhash, and Maʹa·cah.
After this the word of Jehovah came to Aʹbram in a vision, saying: “Do not fear, Aʹbram. I am a shield for you. Your reward will be very great.”
Aʹbram replied: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, what will you give me, seeing that I continue childless and the one who will inherit my house is a man of Damascus, E·li·eʹzer?”
Aʹbram added: “You have given me no offspring, and a member of my household is succeeding me as heir.”
But look! Jehovah’s word in reply to him was, “This man will not succeed you as heir, but your own son will succeed you as heir.”
He now brought him outside and said: “Look up, please, to the heavens and count the stars, if you are able to do so.” Then he said to him: “So your offspring will become.”
And he put faith in Jehovah, and He counted it to him as righteousness.
Then he added: “I am Jehovah, who brought you out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans to give you this land as your possession.”
To this he said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, how will I know that I will take possession of it?”
He replied to him: “Take for me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.”
So he took all of these and cut them in two and put each part opposite the other, but he did not cut up the birds.
Then the birds of prey began to descend on the carcasses, but Aʹbram kept driving them away.
When the sun was about to set, a deep sleep fell upon Aʹbram and a great and frightening darkness descended on him.
Then He said to Aʹbram: “Know for certain that your offspring will be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people there will enslave them and afflict them for 400 years.
But I will judge the nation they will serve, and after that they will go out with many goods.
As for you, you will go to your forefathers in peace; you will be buried at a good old age.
But they will return here in the fourth generation, because the error of the Amʹor·ites has not yet reached its full measure.”
When the sun had set and it had become very dark, a smoking furnace appeared, and a fiery torch passed between the pieces.
On that day Jehovah made with Aʹbram a covenant, saying: “To your offspring I will give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Eu·phraʹtes:
the land of the Kenʹites, the Kenʹiz·zites, the Kadʹmon·ites,
the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Rephʹa·im,
the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Girʹga·shites, and the Jebʹu·sites.”
And Jacob called his sons and said: “Gather yourselves together that I may tell you what will happen to you in the final part of the days.
Assemble yourselves and listen, you sons of Jacob, yes, listen to Israel your father.
“Reuʹben, you are my firstborn, my vigor and the beginning of my procreative power, the excellence of dignity and the excellence of strength.
With recklessness like turbulent waters, you will not excel, because you have gone up to your father’s bed. At that time you defiled my bed. He actually went on to it!
“Simʹe·on and Leʹvi are brothers. Instruments of violence are their slaughter weapons.
Into their company do not come, O my soul. With their assembly do not join, O my honor, because in their anger they killed men, and for their pleasure they hamstrung bulls.
Cursed be their anger, because it is cruel, and their fury, because it is harsh. Let me disperse them in Jacob, and let me scatter them in Israel.
“As for you, Judah, your brothers will praise you. Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies. The sons of your father will bow down before you.
Judah is a lion cub. From the prey, my son, you will certainly go up. He has crouched down and stretched himself out like a lion, and like a lion, who dares rouse him?
The scepter will not depart from Judah, neither the commander’s staff from between his feet, until Shiʹloh comes, and to him the obedience of the peoples will belong.
Tying his donkey to a vine and his donkey’s colt to a choice vine, he will wash his clothing in wine and his garment in the blood of grapes.
Dark red are his eyes from wine, and his teeth are white from milk.
“Zebʹu·lun will reside by the seashore, by the shore where the ships lie anchored, and his remote border will be toward Siʹdon.
“Isʹsa·char is a strong-boned donkey, lying down between the two saddlebags.
And he will see that the resting-place is good and that the land is pleasant. He will bend his shoulder to bear the burden and will submit to forced labor.
“Dan will judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.
Let Dan be a serpent by the roadside, a horned snake beside the path, that bites the heels of the horse so that its rider falls backward.
I will wait for salvation from you, O Jehovah.
“As for Gad, a marauder band will raid him, but he will raid at their heels.
“Ashʹer’s bread will be abundant, and he will provide food fit for a king.
“Naphʹta·li is a slender doe. He is speaking words of elegance.
“Joseph is the offshoot of a fruitful tree, a fruitful tree by a spring, whose branches extend over the wall.
But the archers kept harassing him and shot at him and kept harboring animosity against him.
And yet his bow remained in place, and his hands stayed strong and agile. This was from the hands of the powerful one of Jacob, from the shepherd, the stone of Israel.
He is from the God of your father, and he will help you, and he is with the Almighty, and he will bless you with the blessings of the heavens above, with the blessings of the deep below, with the blessings of the breasts and womb.
The blessings of your father will be superior to the blessings of the eternal mountains, to the desirable things of the enduring hills. They will continue upon the head of Joseph, upon the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.
“Benjamin will keep on tearing like a wolf. In the morning he will eat the prey, and in the evening he will divide spoil.”
All of these are the 12 tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them when he was blessing them. He gave each of them an appropriate blessing.
After that he gave these commands to them: “I am being gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Eʹphron the Hitʹtite,
the cave in the field of Mach·peʹlah in front of Mamʹre in the land of Caʹnaan, the field that Abraham purchased from Eʹphron the Hitʹtite as a property for a burial place.
There they buried Abraham and his wife Sarah. There they buried Isaac and his wife Re·bekʹah, and there I buried Leʹah.
The field and the cave that is in it were purchased from the sons of Heth.”
Thus Jacob finished giving these instructions to his sons. Then he drew his feet up onto the bed and breathed his last and was gathered to his people.
Jacob then went on his way, and the angels of God met up with him.
As soon as he saw them, Jacob said: “This is the camp of God!” So he named that place Ma·ha·naʹim.
Then Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Eʹsau in the land of Seʹir, the territory of Eʹdom,
and he commanded them: “This is what you will say to my lord, to Eʹsau, ‘This is what your servant Jacob says: “I have resided with Laʹban for a long time until now.
And I have acquired bulls, donkeys, sheep, and male and female servants, and I send this message to inform my lord, in order to find favor in your eyes.”’”
In time the messengers returned to Jacob, saying: “We met your brother Eʹsau, and he is now on his way to meet you, and there are 400 men with him.”
And Jacob became very frightened and anxious. So he divided the people who were with him, as well as the flocks, the cattle, and the camels, into two camps.
He said: “If Eʹsau attacks the one camp, then the other camp will be able to escape.”
After that Jacob said: “O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, you who are saying to me, ‘Return to your land and to your relatives, and I will deal well with you,’
I am unworthy of all the loyal love and of all the faithfulness that you have shown toward your servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan and now I have become two camps.
Save me, I pray you, from the hand of my brother Eʹsau, for I am afraid of him that he may come and attack me, as well as the mothers and their children.
And you have said: ‘I will certainly deal well with you, and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea, which are too numerous to count.’”
And he spent the night there. Then he took some of his possessions as a gift for Eʹsau his brother:
200 female goats, 20 male goats, 200 female sheep, 20 rams,
30 camels nursing their young, 40 cows, 10 bulls, 20 female donkeys and 10 full-grown male donkeys.
He handed them over to his servants, one drove after another, and he said to his servants: “Cross over ahead of me, and you are to set a space between one drove and the next.”
He also commanded the first one: “In case Eʹsau my brother should meet you and ask, ‘To whom do you belong, and where are you going, and to whom do these ahead of you belong?’
then you should say, ‘To your servant Jacob. It is a gift sent to my lord, to Eʹsau, and look! he himself is also behind us.’”
And he commanded also the second, the third, and all those following the droves: “According to this word, you are to speak to Eʹsau when you meet him.
And you should also say, ‘Here is your servant Jacob behind us.’” For he said to himself: ‘If I appease him by sending a gift ahead of me, then afterward when I see him, he may give me a kindly reception.’
So the gift crossed over ahead of him, but he himself spent the night in the camp.
Later during that night, he rose and took his two wives and his two female servants and his 11 young sons and crossed over the ford of Jabʹbok.
So he took them and brought them across the stream, and he brought over everything else he had.
Finally Jacob was left by himself. Then a man began to wrestle with him until the dawn broke.
When he saw that he had not prevailed over him, he touched the socket of his hip; and the socket of Jacob’s hip was dislocated during his wrestling with him.
After that he said: “Let me go, for the dawn is breaking.” To this he said: “I am not going to let you go until you bless me.”
So he said to him: “What is your name?” to which he said: “Jacob.”
Then he said: “Your name will no longer be Jacob but Israel, for you have contended with God and with men and you have at last prevailed.”
In turn Jacob inquired: “Tell me, please, your name.” However, he said: “Why is it that you ask my name?” With that he blessed him there.
So Jacob named the place Pe·niʹel, for he said, “I have seen God face-to-face, yet my life was preserved.”
And the sun rose upon him as soon as he passed by Pe·nuʹel, but he was limping because of his hip.
That is why to this day the sons of Israel are not accustomed to eat the thigh sinew, which is on the socket of the hip joint, because he touched the socket of Jacob’s hip joint by the thigh sinew.
Now Adam had sexual relations with his wife Eve, and she became pregnant. When she gave birth to Cain, she said: “I have produced a male child with the help of Jehovah.”
Later she again gave birth, to his brother Abel. Abel became a shepherd of the flock, but Cain became a cultivator of the ground.
After some time, Cain brought some fruits of the land as an offering to Jehovah.
But Abel brought some firstlings of his flock, including their fat. While Jehovah looked with favor on Abel and on his offering,
he did not look with any favor on Cain and on his offering. So Cain grew hot with anger and was dejected.
Then Jehovah said to Cain: “Why are you so angry and dejected?
If you turn to doing good, will you not be restored to favor? But if you do not turn to doing good, sin is crouching at the door, and its craving is to dominate you; but will you get the mastery over it?”
After that Cain said to his brother Abel: “Let us go over into the field.” So while they were in the field, Cain assaulted his brother Abel and killed him.
Later on, Jehovah said to Cain: “Where is your brother Abel?” and he said: “I do not know. Am I my brother’s guardian?”
At this He said: “What have you done? Listen! Your brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground.
And now you are cursed in banishment from the ground that has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
When you cultivate the ground, it will not give you back its produce. You will become a wanderer and a fugitive in the earth.”
At this Cain said to Jehovah: “The punishment for my error is too great to bear.
Today you are driving me from the land, and I will be hidden from your face; and I will become a wanderer and a fugitive on the earth, and anyone who finds me will certainly kill me.”
So Jehovah said to him: “For that reason, anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times.” So Jehovah set up a sign for Cain in order that no one finding him would strike him.
Then Cain went away from before Jehovah and took up residence in the land of Exile, to the east of Eʹden.
Afterward Cain had sexual relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to Eʹnoch. Then he engaged in building a city and named the city after his son Eʹnoch.
Later Iʹrad was born to Eʹnoch. And Iʹrad became father to Me·huʹja·el, and Me·huʹja·el became father to Me·thuʹsha·el, and Me·thuʹsha·el became father to Laʹmech.
Laʹmech took two wives for himself. The name of the first was Aʹdah, and the name of the second was Zilʹlah.
Aʹdah gave birth to Jaʹbal. He was the founder of those who dwell in tents and have livestock.
His brother’s name was Juʹbal. He was the founder of all those who play the harp and the pipe.
Also, Zilʹlah gave birth to Tuʹbal-cain, who forged every sort of tool of copper and iron. And the sister of Tuʹbal-cain was Naʹa·mah.
Then Laʹmech composed these words for his wives Aʹdah and Zilʹlah: “Hear my voice, you wives of Laʹmech;Give ear to my saying: A man I have killed for wounding me,Yes, a young man for striking me.
If 7 times Cain is to be avenged,Then Laʹmech 77 times.”
Adam again had sexual relations with his wife, and she gave birth to a son. She named him Seth because, as she said, “God has appointed for me another offspring in place of Abel, because Cain killed him.”
There was also born to Seth a son, and he named him Eʹnosh. At that time people began calling on the name of Jehovah.
Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt, and an Egyptian named Potʹi·phar, a court official of Pharʹaoh and chief of the guard, bought him from the Ishʹma·el·ites who had taken him down there.
But Jehovah was with Joseph. As a result, he became successful and was put over the house of his master, the Egyptian.
And his master saw that Jehovah was with him and that Jehovah was making everything that he did successful.
Joseph kept finding favor in his eyes, and he became his personal attendant. So he appointed him over his house, and he put him in charge of all that was his.
From the time he appointed him over his house and in charge of all that was his, Jehovah kept blessing the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph, and Jehovah’s blessing came to be on all that he had in the house and in the field.
He eventually left everything that was his in Joseph’s care, and he gave no thought to anything except the food he was eating. Moreover, Joseph grew to be well-built and handsome.
Now after these things, the wife of his master began to cast her eyes on Joseph and say: “Lie down with me.”
But he refused and said to his master’s wife: “Here my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has entrusted everything he has into my care.
There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”
So day after day she spoke to Joseph, but he never consented to lie with her or to remain with her.
But on one of the days when he went into the house to do his work, none of the household servants were in the house.
Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside.
As soon as she saw that he had left his garment in her hand and had fled outside,
she began to cry out to the men of her house and to say to them: “Look! He brought to us this Hebrew man to make us a laughingstock. He came to me to lie down with me, but I began to cry out at the top of my voice.
Then as soon as he heard me raising my voice and screaming, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
After that she laid his garment beside her until his master came to his house.
Then she told him the same thing, saying: “The Hebrew servant whom you brought to us came to me to make me a laughingstock.
But as soon as I raised my voice and began to scream, he left his garment beside me and fled outside.”
As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: “These are the things your servant did to me,” his anger blazed.
So Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.
But Jehovah continued with Joseph and kept showing loyal love to him and granting him favor in the eyes of the chief officer of the prison.
So the chief officer of the prison put Joseph in charge of all the prisoners in the prison, and everything that they were doing there, he was the one having it done.
The chief officer of the prison was looking after absolutely nothing that was in Joseph’s care, for Jehovah was with Joseph and Jehovah made whatever he did successful.
Now Abraham moved his camp from there to the land of the Negʹeb and began dwelling between Kaʹdesh and Shur. While he was residing at Geʹrar,
Abraham repeated concerning his wife Sarah: “She is my sister.” So A·bimʹe·lech king of Geʹrar sent for Sarah and took her.
Afterward, God came by night to A·bimʹe·lech in a dream and said to him: “Here you are as good as dead because of the woman whom you have taken, since she is married and belongs to another man.”
However, A·bimʹe·lech had not gone near her. So he said: “Jehovah, will you kill a nation that is really innocent?
Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister,’ and did she too not say, ‘He is my brother’? I did this with an honest heart and innocent hands.”
Then the true God said to him in the dream: “I know that you did this with an honest heart, so I held you back from sinning against me. That is why I did not allow you to touch her.
Now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will make supplication for you and you will keep living. But if you are not returning her, know that you will surely die, you and all who are yours.”
A·bimʹe·lech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things, and they became very frightened.
Then A·bimʹe·lech called Abraham and said to him: “What have you done to us? What sin have I committed against you that you would bring upon me and my kingdom such a great sin? What you have done to me was not right.”
And A·bimʹe·lech went on to say to Abraham: “What were your intentions when you did this thing?”
Abraham said: “It was because I said to myself, ‘Surely there is no fear of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.’
And besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife.
So when God caused me to wander from the house of my father, I said to her: ‘Let this be how you show loyal love to me: Everywhere we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”’”
A·bimʹe·lech then took sheep and cattle and male and female servants and gave them to Abraham, and he returned his wife Sarah to him.
A·bimʹe·lech also said: “Here my land is available to you. Dwell wherever you please.”
And to Sarah he said: “Here I give 1,000 pieces of silver to your brother. It is a sign of your innocence to all who are with you and before everybody, and you are cleared of reproach.”
And Abraham began to make supplication to the true God, and God healed A·bimʹe·lech and his wife and his slave girls, and they began having children;
for Jehovah had made all the women of the house of A·bimʹe·lech barren because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.
And Jehovah said to Aʹbram: “Go out from your land and away from your relatives and from the house of your father to the land that I will show you.
I will make you a great nation, and I will bless you, and I will make your name great, and you will become a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you, and I will curse him who calls down evil on you, and all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed by means of you.”
So Aʹbram went just as Jehovah had told him, and Lot went with him. Aʹbram was 75 years old when he left Haʹran.
Aʹbram took his wife Sarʹai and Lot the son of his brother and all the goods that they had accumulated and the people whom they had acquired in Haʹran, and they set out for the land of Caʹnaan. When they reached the land of Caʹnaan,
Aʹbram traveled through the land as far as the site of Sheʹchem, near the big trees of Moʹreh. At that time the Caʹnaan·ites were in the land.
Jehovah then appeared to Aʹbram and said: “To your offspring I am going to give this land.” So he built an altar there to Jehovah, who had appeared to him.
Later he moved from there to the mountainous region east of Bethʹel and pitched his tent with Bethʹel on the west and Aʹi on the east. There he built an altar to Jehovah and began to call on the name of Jehovah.
Afterward, Aʹbram broke camp and journeyed toward the Negʹeb, moving his camp from one place to another.
Now a famine arose in the land, and Aʹbram went down toward Egypt to reside there for a while, because the famine in the land was severe.
As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarʹai: “Please listen! I know what a beautiful woman you are.
So when the Egyptians see you, they will surely say, ‘This is his wife.’ Then they will kill me but keep you alive.
Please say you are my sister, so that it may go well with me because of you, and my life will be spared.”
As soon as Aʹbram entered Egypt, the Egyptians noticed that the woman was very beautiful.
And the princes of Pharʹaoh also saw her, and they began praising her to Pharʹaoh, so that the woman was taken to the house of Pharʹaoh.
He treated Aʹbram well because of her, and he acquired sheep, cattle, male and female donkeys, male and female servants, and camels.
Then Jehovah struck Pharʹaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Sarʹai, Aʹbram’s wife.
So Pharʹaoh called Aʹbram and said: “What is this you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife?
Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I was about to take her as my wife? Here is your wife. Take her and go!”
So Pharʹaoh gave his men orders concerning him, and they sent him away with his wife and all that he had.
After these things, Joseph was told: “Look, your father is getting weak.” At that he took his two sons Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im with him.
Then Jacob was told: “Here your son Joseph has come to you.” So Israel gathered his strength and sat up on his bed.
And Jacob said to Joseph: “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Caʹnaan and blessed me.
And he said to me, ‘I am making you fruitful, and I will make you many, and I will transform you into a congregation of peoples, and I will give this land to your offspring after you as a lasting possession.’
Now your two sons who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt are mine. Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh will become mine just as Reuʹben and Simʹe·on are mine.
But the children born to you after them will become yours. They will be called by the name of their brothers in their inheritance.
As for me, when I was coming from Padʹdan, Rachel died alongside me in the land of Caʹnaan, while there was yet a good stretch of land before coming to Ephʹrath. So I buried her there on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem.”
Then Israel saw Joseph’s sons and asked: “Who are these?”
So Joseph said to his father: “They are my sons whom God has given me in this place.” At this he said: “Bring them to me, please, so that I may bless them.”
Now the eyes of Israel were failing from age, and he was unable to see. So Joseph brought them close to him, and he kissed them and embraced them.
Israel said to Joseph: “I never imagined I would see your face, but here God has also let me see your offspring.”
Joseph then removed them from Israel’s knees, and he bowed down with his face to the ground.
Joseph now took the two of them, Eʹphra·im with his right hand to Israel’s left and Ma·nasʹseh with his left hand to Israel’s right, and brought them close to him.
However, Israel put out his right hand and placed it on Eʹphra·im’s head, although he was the younger, and he placed his left hand on Ma·nasʹseh’s head. He purposely laid his hands this way, since Ma·nasʹseh was the firstborn.
Then he blessed Joseph and said: “The true God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked,The true God who has been shepherding me during all my life until this day,
The angel who has been recovering me from all calamity, bless the boys. Let my name be called upon them and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac,Let them increase to a multitude in the earth.”
When Joseph saw that his father kept his right hand placed on Eʹphra·im’s head, it was displeasing to him, so he tried to take hold of his father’s hand to move it from Eʹphra·im’s head to Ma·nasʹseh’s head.
Joseph said to his father: “Not so, my father, because this is the firstborn. Put your right hand on his head.”
But his father kept refusing and said: “I know it, my son, I know it. He too will become a people, and he too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother will become greater than he will, and his offspring will become the full equivalent of nations.”
So he continued to bless them on that day, saying: “Let Israel mention you when they pronounce blessings, saying,‘May God make you like Eʹphra·im and like Ma·nasʹseh.’” Thus he kept putting Eʹphra·im before Ma·nasʹseh.
Then Israel said to Joseph: “Look, I am dying, but God will certainly continue with you and return you to the land of your forefathers.
As for me, I do give you one portion of land more than to your brothers, which I took from the hand of the Amʹor·ites with my sword and my bow.”
Afterward, Jehovah appeared to him among the big trees of Mamʹre while he was sitting at the entrance of the tent during the hottest part of the day.
He looked up and saw three men standing some distance from him. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to meet them, and he bowed down to the ground.
Then he said: “Jehovah, if I have found favor in your eyes, please do not pass by your servant.
Please, let a little water be brought and have your feet washed; then recline under the tree.
Seeing that you have come here to your servant, let me bring a piece of bread so that you may refresh yourselves. Then you may go on your way.” At this they said: “All right. You may do as you have spoken.”
So Abraham hurried to the tent to Sarah and said: “Quick! Get three measures of fine flour, knead the dough, and make loaves of bread.”
Next Abraham ran to the herd and chose a tender and good young bull. He gave it to the attendant, who hurried to prepare it.
He then took butter and milk and the young bull that he had prepared and set the food before them. Then he stood by them under the tree as they were eating.
They said to him: “Where is your wife Sarah?” He replied: “Here in the tent.”
So one of them continued: “I will surely return to you next year at this time, and look! your wife Sarah will have a son.” Now Sarah was listening at the tent entrance, which was behind the man.
Abraham and Sarah were old, being advanced in years. Sarah was past the age of childbearing.
So Sarah began to laugh to herself, saying: “After I am worn out and my lord is old, will I really have this pleasure?”
Then Jehovah said to Abraham: “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Am I really going to give birth even though I am old?’
Is anything too extraordinary for Jehovah? I will return to you next year at this appointed time, and Sarah will have a son.”
But Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh!” for she was afraid. At this he said: “Yes! You did laugh.”
When the men got up to leave and looked down toward Sodʹom, Abraham was walking with them to escort them.
Jehovah said: “Am I keeping hidden from Abraham what I am going to do?
Why, Abraham is surely going to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed by means of him.
For I have come to know him in order that he may command his sons and his household after him to keep Jehovah’s way by doing what is right and just, so that Jehovah may bring about what he has promised concerning Abraham.”
Then Jehovah said: “The outcry against Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah is indeed great, and their sin is very heavy.
I will go down to see whether they are acting according to the outcry that has reached me. And if not, I can get to know it.”
Then the men left from there and went toward Sodʹom, but Jehovah remained with Abraham.
Then Abraham approached and said: “Will you really sweep away the righteous with the wicked?
Suppose there are 50 righteous men within the city. Will you, then, sweep them away and not pardon the place for the sake of the 50 righteous who are inside it?
It is unthinkable that you would act in this manner by putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one so that the outcome for the righteous man and the wicked is the same! It is unthinkable of you. Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?”
Then Jehovah said: “If I find in Sodʹom 50 righteous men in the city, I will pardon the whole place for their sake.”
But Abraham again responded: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah, whereas I am dust and ashes.
Suppose the 50 righteous should lack five. Because of the five will you destroy the whole city?” To this he said: “I will not destroy it if I find there 45.”
But yet again he spoke to him and said: “Suppose 40 are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it for the sake of the 40.”
But he continued: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me go on speaking: Suppose only 30 are found there.” He answered: “I will not do it if I find 30 there.”
But he continued: “Please, here I have presumed to speak to Jehovah: Suppose only 20 are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the 20.”
Finally he said: “Jehovah, please, do not become hot with anger, but let me speak just once more: Suppose only ten are found there.” He answered: “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.”
When Jehovah finished speaking to Abraham, he went his way and Abraham returned to his place.
And Sarah lived for 127 years; these were the years of Sarah’s life.
So Sarah died in Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan, and Abraham began to mourn and to weep over Sarah.
Then Abraham got up from before his dead wife and he said to the sons of Heth:
“I am a foreigner and settler among you. Give me a property to serve as a burial place in your midst so that I may remove my dead for burial.”
At this the sons of Heth answered Abraham:
“Hear us, my lord. You are a chieftain of God among us. You may bury your dead in the choicest of our burial places. None of us will hold back his burial place from you to prevent you from burying your dead.”
So Abraham got up and bowed down to the people of the land, to the sons of Heth,
and said to them: “If you agree to let me remove my dead for burial, then listen to me and urge Eʹphron the son of Zoʹhar
to sell me the cave of Mach·peʹlah, which belongs to him; it is at the edge of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence for the full amount of silver so that I may have a property for a burial place.”
Now Eʹphron was sitting among the sons of Heth. So Eʹphron the Hitʹtite answered Abraham in the hearing of the sons of Heth, and before all who entered the gate of his city, saying:
“No, my lord! Listen to me. I give you both the field and the cave that is in it. In the presence of the sons of my people, I give it to you. Bury your dead.”
At that Abraham bowed down before the people of the land
and spoke to Eʹphron in the hearing of the people, saying: “Listen to me, if you will! I will give you the full amount of silver for the field. Take it from me, in order that I may bury my dead there.”
Then Eʹphron answered Abraham:
“My lord, listen to me. This land is worth 400 silver shekels, but what is that between me and you? So bury your dead.”
Abraham listened to Eʹphron, and Abraham weighed out to Eʹphron the amount of silver that he had mentioned in the hearing of the sons of Heth, 400 silver shekels according to the weight accepted by the merchants.
Thus the field of Eʹphron in Mach·peʹlah, which was in front of Mamʹre—the field and the cave in it and all the trees within the boundaries of the field—became confirmed as
Abraham’s purchased property in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all those entering the gate of his city.
After that Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field of Mach·peʹlah in front of Mamʹre, that is, Hebʹron, in the land of Caʹnaan.
Thus the field and the cave that was in it were transferred by the sons of Heth to Abraham as property for a burial place.
After that God said to Jacob: “Rise, go up to Bethʹel and dwell there, and make an altar there to the true God, who appeared to you when you were running away from Eʹsau your brother.”
Then Jacob said to his household and to all who were with him: “Get rid of the foreign gods that are in your midst, and cleanse yourselves and change your garments,
and let us rise and go up to Bethʹel. There I will make an altar to the true God, who answered me in the day of my distress and who has been with me wherever I have gone.”
So they gave Jacob all the foreign gods they had and the earrings that were in their ears, and Jacob buried them under the big tree that was close to Sheʹchem.
When they traveled on, the terror of God struck the cities around them, so they did not chase after the sons of Jacob.
Jacob eventually came to Luz, that is, Bethʹel, in the land of Caʹnaan, he and all the people with him.
There he built an altar and called the place El-bethʹel, because there the true God had revealed himself to him when he had run away from his brother.
Later Debʹo·rah, Re·bekʹah’s nurse, died and was buried at the foot of Bethʹel under an oak. So he named it Alʹlon-bacʹuth.
God appeared to Jacob once again while he was coming from Padʹdan-aʹram and blessed him.
God said to him: “Your name is Jacob. Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel will be your name.” And he began to call him Israel.
God further said to him: “I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and become many. Nations and a congregation of nations will come from you, and kings will descend from you.
As for the land that I have given to Abraham and to Isaac, to you I will give it, and to your offspring after you I will give the land.”
Then God went up from him at the place where he had spoken with him.
So Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had spoken with him, a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering on it and poured oil on it.
And Jacob continued to call the place where God had spoken with him Bethʹel.
Then they pulled away from Bethʹel. And while they were still some distance from Ephʹrath, Rachel began to give birth, and her labor was very difficult.
But while she was struggling to deliver the child, the midwife said to her: “Do not be afraid, for you will have this son also.”
Just as her life was slipping away (for she was dying), she named him Ben-oʹni, but his father called him Benjamin.
So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephʹrath, that is, Bethʹle·hem.
Jacob set up a pillar over her grave; it is the pillar of Rachel’s grave to this day.
After that Israel pulled away and pitched his tent a distance beyond the tower of Eʹder.
Once while Israel was dwelling in that land, Reuʹben went and lay down with Bilʹhah his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it. So there were 12 sons of Jacob.
The sons by Leʹah were Jacob’s firstborn Reuʹben, then Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun.
The sons by Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.
And the sons by Bilʹhah, Rachel’s servant, were Dan and Naphʹta·li.
And the sons by Zilʹpah, Leʹah’s servant, were Gad and Ashʹer. These are Jacob’s sons, who were born to him in Padʹdan-aʹram.
Jacob eventually came to where his father Isaac was at Mamʹre, to Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, where Abraham and also Isaac had resided as foreigners.
Isaac lived to be 180 years old.
Then Isaac breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people, after a long and satisfying life; and his sons Eʹsau and Jacob buried him.
Now Diʹnah, Jacob’s daughter by Leʹah, used to go out to spend time with the young women of the land.
When Sheʹchem, the son of Haʹmor the Hiʹvite, a chieftain of the land, saw her, he took her and lay down with her and violated her.
And he became very attached to Diʹnah, the daughter of Jacob, and he fell in love with the young woman and spoke persuasively to her.
Finally Sheʹchem said to Haʹmor his father: “Get me this young woman to be my wife.”
When Jacob heard that he had defiled Diʹnah his daughter, his sons were with his herd in the field. So Jacob kept silent until they returned.
Later Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, went out to speak with Jacob.
But the sons of Jacob heard about it and returned from the field right away. They were offended and very angry because he had disgraced Israel by lying down with Jacob’s daughter, something that should not be done.
Haʹmor spoke with them, saying: “My son Sheʹchem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife,
and form marriage alliances with us. Give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves.
You may dwell with us, and the land will become available for you. Dwell and carry on trade in it and settle in it.”
Then Sheʹchem said to her father and to her brothers: “Let me find favor in your eyes, and I will give you whatever you ask me.
You can demand from me a very high bride price and gift. I am willing to give whatever you may say to me. Just give me the young woman as a wife.”
And Jacob’s sons answered Sheʹchem and Haʹmor his father deceitfully because he had defiled Diʹnah their sister.
They said to them: “We cannot possibly do such a thing, to give our sister to a man who is not circumcised, for that is a disgrace to us.
We can only consent on this condition: that you become like us and circumcise all your males.
Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will dwell with you and become one people.
But if you do not listen to us and get circumcised, then we will take our daughter and go.”
Their words pleased Haʹmor and Sheʹchem, Haʹmor’s son.
The young man did not delay in doing what they asked, because he found delight in Jacob’s daughter, and he was the most honorable of the whole house of his father.
So Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem went to the city gate and spoke to the men of their city, saying:
“These men wish to be at peace with us. Let them dwell in the land and carry on trade in it, for the land is large enough to accommodate them. We can take their daughters as wives, and our daughters we can give to them.
Only on this one condition will the men consent to dwell with us in order to become one people: that every male among us be circumcised just the way they are circumcised.
Then, will not their possessions, their wealth, and all their livestock be ours? So let us give them our consent that they may dwell with us.”
All those going out by the gate of his city listened to Haʹmor and to his son Sheʹchem, and all the males got circumcised, all those going out of the city gate.
However, on the third day, when they were still in pain, two sons of Jacob, Simʹe·on and Leʹvi, Diʹnah’s brothers, each took his sword and went into the unsuspecting city and killed every male.
They killed Haʹmor and his son Sheʹchem with the sword and then took Diʹnah from Sheʹchem’s house and left.
Jacob’s other sons came upon the slain men and plundered the city because they had defiled their sister.
They took their flocks, their herds, their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field.
They also took all their possessions, captured all their little children and their wives, and plundered everything in the houses.
At this Jacob said to Simʹe·on and to Leʹvi: “You have brought great trouble on me in making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, to the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites. I am few in number, and they will certainly gather together to attack me and I will be annihilated, I and my house.”
But they said: “Should anyone treat our sister like a prostitute?”
Now when men started to grow in number on the surface of the ground and daughters were born to them,
the sons of the true God began to notice that the daughters of men were beautiful. So they began taking as wives all whom they chose.
Then Jehovah said: “My spirit will not tolerate man indefinitely, because he is only flesh. Accordingly, his days will amount to 120 years.”
The Nephʹi·lim were on the earth in those days and afterward. During that time the sons of the true God continued to have relations with the daughters of men, and these bore sons to them. They were the mighty ones of old times, the men of fame.
Consequently, Jehovah saw that man’s wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time.
Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened.
So Jehovah said: “I am going to wipe men whom I have created off the surface of the ground, man together with domestic animals, creeping animals, and flying creatures of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.”
But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
This is the history of Noah. Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God.
In time Noah became father to three sons, Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
But the earth had become ruined in the sight of the true God, and the earth was filled with violence.
Yes, God looked upon the earth, and it was ruined; all flesh had ruined its way on the earth.
After that God said to Noah: “I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them, so I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth.
Make for yourself an ark from resinous wood. You will make compartments in the ark and cover it with tar inside and outside.
This is how you will make it: The ark should be 300 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high.
You will make a window for light for the ark, one cubit from the top. You should put the entrance of the ark in its side and make it with a lower deck, a second deck, and a third deck.
“As for me, I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish.
And I am establishing my covenant with you, and you must go into the ark, you, your sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives with you.
And bring into the ark two of every sort of living creature in order to preserve them alive with you, a male and a female;
of the flying creatures according to their kinds, the domestic animals according to their kinds, and all creeping animals of the ground according to their kinds, two of each will go in there to you to preserve them alive.
For your part, you are to collect and take with you every kind of food to eat, to serve as food for you and for the animals.”
And Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. He did just so.
After these things, the chief cupbearer of the king of Egypt and the chief baker sinned against their lord, the king of Egypt.
So Pharʹaoh grew indignant at his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker,
and he committed them to the jail of the house of the chief of the guard, to the place where Joseph was a prisoner.
Then the chief of the guard assigned Joseph to be with them and to take care of them, and they remained in jail for some time.
The cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, each had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own interpretation.
The next morning, when Joseph came in and saw them, they looked dejected.
So he asked the officers of Pharʹaoh who were in custody with him in his master’s house: “Why are your faces gloomy today?”
At this they said to him: “We each had a dream, but there is no interpreter with us.” Joseph said to them: “Do not interpretations belong to God? Relate it to me, please.”
So the chief cupbearer related his dream to Joseph, saying to him: “In my dream, there was a vine before me.
And on the vine, there were three twigs, and as it was sprouting shoots, it blossomed, and its clusters ripened into grapes.
And Pharʹaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them out into Pharʹaoh’s cup. After that I put the cup in Pharʹaoh’s hand.”
Then Joseph said to him: “This is its interpretation: The three twigs are three days.
Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will bring you out, restoring you to your office, and you will put Pharʹaoh’s cup into his hand as you did before when you were his cupbearer.
Nevertheless, you must remember me when things go well with you. Please show me loyal love and mention me to Pharʹaoh, in order to get me out of this place.
I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.”
When the chief baker saw that Joseph had interpreted something good, he said to him: “I too was in my dream, and there were three baskets of white bread on my head,
and in the top basket, there were all sorts of baked goods for Pharʹaoh, and there were birds eating them out of the basket on top of my head.”
Then Joseph answered, “This is its interpretation: The three baskets are three days.
Three days from now, Pharʹaoh will behead you and will hang you on a stake, and the birds will eat your flesh from you.”
Now the third day was Pharʹaoh’s birthday, and he made a feast for all his servants, and he brought out both the chief cupbearer and the chief baker in the presence of his servants.
And he returned the chief cupbearer to his post of cupbearer, and he continued to hand the cup to Pharʹaoh.
But he hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted to them.
However, the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph; he kept forgetting him.
After that Jacob resumed his journey and traveled on to the land of the people of the East.
Now he saw a well in the field and three droves of sheep lying down next to it, because they usually watered the droves from that well. There was a large stone over the mouth of the well.
When all the droves had been gathered there, they rolled away the stone from the mouth of the well, and they watered the flocks, after which they returned the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.
So Jacob said to them: “My brothers, what place are you from?” to which they said: “We are from Haʹran.”
He said to them: “Do you know Laʹban the grandson of Naʹhor?” to which they said: “We know him.”
At this he said to them: “Is he well?” They replied: “He is well. And here is his daughter Rachel coming with the sheep!”
Then he said: “It is still the middle of the day. It is not the time for gathering the herds. Water the sheep, and then go feed them.”
To this they said: “We are not allowed to do so until all the droves are gathered and they roll the stone away from the mouth of the well. Then we water the sheep.”
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess.
When Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laʹban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laʹban, Jacob immediately approached and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the sheep of Laʹban his mother’s brother.
Then Jacob kissed Rachel and raised his voice and burst into tears.
And Jacob began to tell Rachel that he was the relative of her father and that he was the son of Re·bekʹah. And she ran off and told her father.
As soon as Laʹban heard the report about Jacob the son of his sister, he ran to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him into his house. And he began to tell Laʹban all these things.
Laʹban said to him: “You are indeed my bone and my flesh.” So he stayed with him a full month.
Laʹban then said to Jacob: “Just because you are my relative, should you serve me for nothing? Tell me, what are your wages to be?”
Now Laʹban had two daughters. The name of the older was Leʹah, and the name of the younger, Rachel.
But the eyes of Leʹah had no luster, whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman.
Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said: “I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.”
To this Laʹban said: “It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man. Keep dwelling with me.”
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, but in his eyes they were like just a few days because of his love for her.
Then Jacob said to Laʹban: “Give over my wife because my days are up, and let me have relations with her.”
With that Laʹban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast.
But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leʹah and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her.
Laʹban also gave his female servant Zilʹpah to his daughter Leʹah as a servant.
In the morning Jacob saw that it was Leʹah! So he said to Laʹban: “What have you done to me? Was it not for Rachel that I served you? Why have you tricked me?”
To this Laʹban said: “It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn.
Celebrate the week of this woman. After that you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.”
Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman, after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife.
Besides, Laʹban gave his female servant Bilʹhah to his daughter Rachel as her servant.
Then Jacob had relations also with Rachel, and he loved Rachel more than Leʹah, and he served him for another seven years.
When Jehovah saw that Leʹah was unloved, he then enabled her to become pregnant, but Rachel was barren.
So Leʹah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Reuʹben, for she said: “It is because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will begin to love me.”
And she again became pregnant and gave birth to a son and then said: “It is because Jehovah has listened, in that I was unloved, so he gave me this one also.” Then she named him Simʹe·on.
And she became pregnant yet again and gave birth to a son and then said: “Now this time my husband will join himself to me, because I have borne him three sons.” Therefore, he was named Leʹvi.
And she became pregnant once more and gave birth to a son and then said: “This time I will praise Jehovah.” She therefore named him Judah. After that she stopped giving birth.
But God gave attention to Noah and to all the wild animals and domestic animals that were with him in the ark, and God caused a wind to blow over the earth, and the waters began to subside.
The springs of the watery deep and the floodgates of the heavens were stopped up, so the rain from the heavens stopped falling.
Then the waters began to recede progressively from the earth. By the end of 150 days, the waters had subsided.
In the seventh month, on the 17th day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Arʹa·rat.
And the waters were steadily decreasing until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first of the month, the tops of the mountains appeared.
So at the end of 40 days, Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark
and sent out a raven; it continued flying outside and returning, until the waters dried off the earth.
Later he sent out a dove to see whether the waters had receded from the surface of the ground.
The dove did not find any resting-place to perch, so it returned to him into the ark because the waters were still covering the surface of the whole earth. So he reached his hand out and brought it inside the ark.
He waited seven more days, and once again he sent out the dove from the ark.
When the dove came to him toward evening, he saw that there was a freshly plucked olive leaf in its bill! So Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth.
He waited still another seven days. Then he sent out the dove, but it did not return to him anymore.
Now in the 601st year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters had drained from the earth; and Noah removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was drying.
In the second month, on the 27th day of the month, the earth had dried off.
God now said to Noah:
“Go out of the ark, you, your wife, your sons, and your sons’ wives.
Bring out with you all the living creatures of every sort of flesh, of the flying creatures and of the animals and of all the creeping animals of the earth, that they may multiply on the earth and be fruitful and become many on the earth.”
So Noah went out, together with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives.
Every living creature, every creeping animal and every flying creature, everything that moves on the earth, went out of the ark by families.
Then Noah built an altar to Jehovah and took some of all the clean animals and of all the clean flying creatures and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma. So Jehovah said in his heart: “Never again will I curse the ground on man’s account, for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up; and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done.
From now on, the earth will never cease to have seed-sowing and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, and day and night.”
The entire assembly of the Israelites departed from the wilderness of Sin by stages according to the order of Jehovah, and they camped at Rephʹi·dim. But there was no water for the people to drink.
So the people began quarreling with Moses and saying: “Give us water to drink.” But Moses said to them: “Why are you quarreling with me? Why do you keep putting Jehovah to the test?”
But the people were very thirsty for water there, and they kept murmuring against Moses and saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to kill us and our sons and our livestock with thirst?”
Finally Moses cried out to Jehovah: “What should I do with this people? A little longer and they will stone me!”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go ahead of the people, and take with you some of the elders of Israel and your rod with which you struck the Nile River. Take it in your hand and walk on.
Look! I will be standing before you there on the rock in Hoʹreb. You must strike the rock, and water will come out of it, and the people will drink it.” Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
So he named the place Masʹsah and Merʹi·bah because of the quarreling of the Israelites and because they put Jehovah to the test by saying: “Is Jehovah in our midst or not?”
Then the A·malʹek·ites came and fought against Israel in Rephʹi·dim.
At this Moses said to Joshua: “Choose men for us and go out to fight against the A·malʹek·ites. Tomorrow I will stand on top of the hill, with the rod of the true God in my hand.”
Then Joshua did just as Moses told him, and he fought against the A·malʹek·ites. And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
As long as Moses kept his hands lifted up, the Israelites prevailed, but as soon as he would let down his hands, the A·malʹek·ites prevailed.
When the hands of Moses were heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur, one on each side, supported his hands, so that his hands remained steady until the sun set.
Thus Joshua defeated Amʹa·lek and his people with the sword.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Write this as a memorial in the book and repeat it to Joshua, ‘I will completely wipe out the memory of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens.’”
Then Moses built an altar and named it Je·hoʹvah-nisʹsi,
saying: “Because his hand is against the throne of Jah, Jehovah will have war with Amʹa·lek from generation to generation.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“See, I have chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah.
I will fill him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every kind of craftsmanship,
for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper,
for cutting and setting stones, and for making every kind of wood product.
Moreover, to assist him I have appointed O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan, and I am putting wisdom into the heart of all those who are skillful, so that they may make everything I have commanded you:
the tent of meeting, the ark of the Testimony and the cover that is on it, all the utensils of the tent,
the table and its utensils, the lampstand of pure gold and all its utensils, the altar of incense,
the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, the basin and its stand,
the finely woven garments, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, the garments of his sons to serve as priests,
the anointing oil, and the perfumed incense for the sanctuary. They will do everything I have commanded you.”
Jehovah said further to Moses:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘Especially, you are to keep my sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you during your generations in order that you may know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying you.
You must keep the Sabbath, for it is something holy to you. Whoever profanes it must be put to death. If anyone does any work on it, then that person must be cut off from among his people.
Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest. It is something holy to Jehovah. Anyone doing work on the Sabbath day must be put to death.
The Israelites must keep the Sabbath; they must observe the Sabbath during all their generations. It is a lasting covenant.
It is an enduring sign between me and the people of Israel, for in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth and on the seventh day he rested and refreshed himself.’”
Now as soon as he had finished speaking with him on Mount Siʹnai, he gave Moses two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone written on by God’s finger.
In the third month after the Israelites went out of the land of Egypt, on the same day, they came to the wilderness of Siʹnai.
They pulled away from Rephʹi·dim and came to the wilderness of Siʹnai and camped in the wilderness. Israel camped there in front of the mountain.
Then Moses went up to the true God, and Jehovah called to him from the mountain, saying: “This is what you are to say to the house of Jacob and to tell the Israelites,
‘You have seen for yourselves what I did to the Egyptians, in order to carry you on wings of eagles and bring you to myself.
Now if you will strictly obey my voice and keep my covenant, you will certainly become my special property out of all peoples, for the whole earth belongs to me.
You will become to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you are to say to the Israelites.”
So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people and declared to them all these words that Jehovah had commanded him.
After that all the people answered unanimously: “All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” Moses immediately took the people’s response to Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Moses: “Look! I am coming to you in a dark cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you and so that they may always put faith in you as well.” Then Moses reported the words of the people to Jehovah.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go to the people and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and they must wash their clothing.
And they must be ready for the third day, because on the third day Jehovah will come down upon Mount Siʹnai before the eyes of all the people.
You must set boundaries for the people all around it and tell them, ‘Beware of going up to the mountain or touching its border. Anybody touching the mountain will surely be put to death.
No hand is to touch him, but he will either be stoned or be shot through. Whether beast or man, he will not live.’ But at the sound of the ram’s horn they may come up to the mountain.”
Then Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and he began to sanctify the people, and they washed their clothing.
He said to the people: “Get ready for the third day. Abstain from sexual relations.”
On the morning of the third day, there was thunder and lightning, and there was a heavy cloud on the mountain and a very loud sound of a horn, and all the people in the camp began to tremble.
Moses now brought the people out of the camp to meet the true God, and they took their place at the base of the mountain.
Mount Siʹnai smoked all over, because Jehovah came down upon it in fire; and its smoke was rising like the smoke of a kiln, and the whole mountain was trembling violently.
As the sound of the horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and the voice of the true God answered him.
So Jehovah came down upon Mount Siʹnai to the top of the mountain. Then Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go down and warn the people not to try to force their way through to look at Jehovah, or many of them will perish.
And let the priests who regularly come near to Jehovah sanctify themselves, so that Jehovah may not strike them.”
Moses then said to Jehovah: “The people are not able to come up to Mount Siʹnai because you already warned us, saying, ‘Set boundaries around the mountain, and make it sacred.’”
However, Jehovah said to him: “Go, descend, and come back up, you and Aaron with you, but do not let the priests and the people force their way through to come up to Jehovah, so that he may not strike them.”
So Moses descended to the people and told them.
Jehovah said further to Moses: “Go on your way from here with the people whom you led up out of the land of Egypt. Journey to the land about which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give it.’
I will send an angel ahead of you and drive out the Caʹnaan·ites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go in the midst of you, for you are an obstinate people, and I might exterminate you on the way.”
When the people heard this harsh word, they began to mourn, and not one of them put on his ornaments.
Jehovah said to Moses: “Say to the Israelites, ‘You are an obstinate people. In one moment I could go through the midst of you and exterminate you. So now keep your ornaments off while I consider what to do to you.’”
So from Mount Hoʹreb onward, the Israelites refrained from wearing their ornaments.
Now Moses took his tent and pitched it outside the camp, at some distance from the camp, and he called it a tent of meeting. Everyone inquiring of Jehovah would go out to the tent of meeting, which was outside the camp.
As soon as Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise and stand at the entrance of their own tents, and they would gaze after Moses until he entered into the tent.
As soon as Moses would go into the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and stand at the entrance of the tent while God spoke with Moses.
When all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent, each of them rose and bowed down at the entrance of his own tent.
Jehovah spoke to Moses face-to-face, just as one man would speak to another man. When he returned to the camp, Joshua the son of Nun, his minister and attendant, would not depart from the tent.
Now Moses said to Jehovah: “See, you are saying to me, ‘Lead this people up,’ but you have not let me know whom you will send with me. Moreover, you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my eyes.’
Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.”
So he said: “I myself will go with you, and I will give you rest.”
Then Moses said to him: “If you yourself are not going along, do not lead us up from here.
How will it be known that I have found favor in your eyes, I and your people? Is it not by your going along with us, so that I and your people will be distinguished from every other people on the face of the earth?”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I will also do this thing that you request, because you have found favor in my eyes and I know you by name.”
Then he said: “Please show me your glory.”
But he said: “I will make all my goodness pass before your face, and I will declare before you the name of Jehovah; and I will favor the one whom I favor, and I will show mercy to the one to whom I show mercy.”
But he added: “You cannot see my face, for no man can see me and live.”
Jehovah said further: “Here is a place near me. Station yourself on the rock.
When my glory is passing by, I will place you in a crevice of the rock, and I will shield you with my hand until I have passed by.
After that I will take my hand away, and you will see my back. But my face may not be seen.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “One more plague I am going to bring upon Pharʹaoh and Egypt. After that he will send you away from here. When he does send you away, he will literally drive you out of here.
Now tell the people that all the men and women should ask their neighbor for articles of silver and of gold.”
And Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moreover, Moses himself had become highly esteemed in the land of Egypt among Pharʹaoh’s servants and among the people.
Moses then said: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘About midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt,
and every firstborn in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn of Pharʹaoh who is sitting on his throne to the firstborn of the slave girl who is working at the hand mill, and every firstborn of the livestock.
Throughout all the land of Egypt, there will be a great outcry such as has never occurred nor will ever occur again.
But not even a dog will bark at the Israelites, at the men or their livestock, so that you may know that Jehovah can make a distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites.’
And all your servants will certainly come down to me and prostrate themselves to me, saying, ‘Go, you and all the people who follow you.’ And after that I will go out.” With that he went out from Pharʹaoh in the heat of anger.
Jehovah then said to Moses: “Pharʹaoh will not listen to you, in order for my miracles to be multiplied in the land of Egypt.”
Moses and Aaron performed all these miracles before Pharʹaoh, but Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, so that he did not send the Israelites away from his land.
Bezʹal·el then made the Ark of acacia wood. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high.
He overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside and made a border of gold around it.
After that he cast four rings of gold for it, for above its four feet, with two rings on its one side and two rings on its other side.
He next made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
Then he put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark for carrying the Ark.
He made the cover of pure gold. It was two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
He then made two cherubs of hammered gold on both ends of the cover.
One cherub was on one end, and the other cherub on the other end. He made the cherubs on both ends of the cover.
The two cherubs spread out their wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings. They were facing each other, and their faces were turned toward the cover.
He then made the table of acacia wood. It was two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high.
And he overlaid it with pure gold and made a border of gold around it.
Next he made a rim the width of a handbreadth to go around it and a border of gold to go around the rim.
Further, he cast four rings of gold for it and placed the rings on the four corners where the four legs were attached.
The rings were near the rim, as holders for the poles used for carrying the table.
Then he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold for carrying the table.
After that he made out of pure gold the utensils that went on the table—its dishes, its cups, its bowls, and its pitchers from which drink offerings would be poured.
Then he made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms were one piece.
Six branches were extending out from its stem, three branches of the lampstand from its one side and three branches from its other side.
Three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers were on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This was done for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand.
And on the stem of the lampstand were four cups shaped like almond flowers, with knobs and blossoms alternating.
There was a knob under the first two branches that extended out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem of the lampstand.
The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand were made to be one piece of pure, hammered gold.
Then he made its seven lamps and its snuffers and its fire holders out of pure gold.
He made it, along with all its utensils, from a talent of pure gold.
He now made the altar of incense out of acacia wood. It was square, a cubit long, a cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns were one piece with it.
He overlaid it with pure gold, its top surface and its sides all around and its horns, and he made a border of gold around it.
He made two rings of gold for it below its border on two opposite sides to hold the poles used for carrying it.
After that he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
He also made the holy anointing oil and the pure, perfumed incense, skillfully blended.
“You are to make the tabernacle with ten tent cloths of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material. You are to make them with embroidered cherub designs.
Each tent cloth will be 28 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All the tent cloths are to be the same size.
Five tent cloths are to be joined one to another to form a series, and the other five tent cloths will be joined in a series.
You will make loops of blue thread on the edge of the one tent cloth at the end of the series, and you are to do the same on the outermost edge of the other set where it will join.
You will make 50 loops on the one tent cloth and 50 loops on the edge of the other tent cloth so that they will be opposite each other where they join.
You are to make 50 gold clasps and join the tent cloths together with the clasps, and the tabernacle will form one unit.
“You will also make cloths of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle. You will make 11 tent cloths.
Each tent cloth will be 30 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All 11 tent cloths are to be the same size.
You are to join five of the tent cloths together and join the other six tent cloths together, and you are to fold over the sixth tent cloth at the front of the tent.
And you are to make 50 loops on the edge of the one tent cloth, the outermost one in the series, and 50 loops on the edge of the tent cloth at the other place where they join.
You are to make 50 copper clasps and put the clasps in the loops and join the tent together, and it will become one unit.
The remaining part of the tent cloths will serve as an overhanging. Half of the tent cloth that remains will hang over the back of the tabernacle.
The remaining length of the cloths of the tent will serve as an overhanging for the tabernacle by one cubit on each side, in order to cover it.
“You will also make a covering for the tent of ram skins dyed red and over that a covering of sealskins.
“You will make the panel frames for the tabernacle out of acacia wood standing upright.
Each panel frame is to be ten cubits high and a cubit and a half wide.
Each panel frame has two tenons joined to each other. That is how you should make all the panel frames of the tabernacle.
You are to make 20 panel frames for the south side of the tabernacle, facing south.
“You will make 40 silver socket pedestals under the 20 panel frames: two socket pedestals under the one panel frame for its two tenons and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame for its two tenons.
For the other side of the tabernacle, the northern side, make 20 panel frames
and their 40 silver socket pedestals, two socket pedestals under one panel frame and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame.
For the rear section of the tabernacle to the west, you will make six panel frames.
You will make two panel frames to serve as the two rear corner posts of the tabernacle.
They should be doubled from the bottom to the top, up to the first ring. This should be done for both of them, and they will form the two corner posts.
And there will be eight panel frames and their 16 silver socket pedestals, two socket pedestals under the one panel frame and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame.
“You will make bars of acacia wood, five for the panel frames of the one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the panel frames of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the panel frames of the side of the tabernacle to the west, for the rear section.
The middle bar that runs along the center of the panel frames should extend from end to end.
“You will overlay the panel frames with gold, and you will make their rings of gold as holders for the bars, and you will overlay the bars with gold.
You must set up the tabernacle according to its plan that you were shown in the mountain.
“You are to make a curtain of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. It will be made with cherubs embroidered on it.
You will hang it on four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold. Their hooks are to be of gold. The pillars are set on four socket pedestals of silver.
You will hang the curtain under the clasps and bring the ark of the Testimony there within the curtain. The curtain will make a division for you between the Holy and the Most Holy.
You must put the cover on the ark of the Testimony in the Most Holy.
“You will place the table outside the curtain, with the lampstand opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle; and the table you will put on the north side.
You will make a screen for the entrance of the tent out of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together.
You will make five pillars of acacia for the screen and overlay them with gold. Their hooks are to be of gold, and you will cast five socket pedestals of copper for them.
Now these are the names of Israel’s sons who came into Egypt with Jacob, each man who came with his household:
Reuʹben, Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, and Judah;
Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun, and Benjamin;
Dan and Naphʹta·li; Gad and Ashʹer.
And all those who were born to Jacob were 70 people, but Joseph was already in Egypt.
Joseph eventually died, and also all his brothers and all that generation.
And the Israelites became fruitful and began to increase greatly, and they kept on multiplying and growing mightier at an extraordinary rate, so that the land became filled with them.
In time there arose over Egypt a new king, one who did not know Joseph.
So he said to his people: “Look! The people of Israel are more numerous and mightier than we are.
Let us deal shrewdly with them. Otherwise, they will continue to multiply, and if a war breaks out, they will join our enemies and fight against us and leave the country.”
So they appointed chiefs of forced labor over them to oppress them with hard labor, and they built storage cities for Pharʹaoh, namely, Piʹthom and Ra·amʹses.
But the more they would oppress them, the more they would multiply and the more they kept spreading out, so they felt sick with fear because of the Israelites.
Consequently, the Egyptians forced the Israelites into harsh slavery.
They made their life bitter with hard labor, as they worked with clay mortar and bricks and in every form of slavery in the field. Yes, they made them toil in harsh conditions in every form of slavery.
Later the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives whose names were Shiphʹrah and Puʹah,
and he told them: “When you help the Hebrew women to give birth and you see them on the stool for childbirth, you must put the child to death if it is a son; but if it is a daughter, she must live.”
However, the midwives feared the true God, and they did not do what the king of Egypt told them. Instead, they would keep the male children alive.
In time the king of Egypt called the midwives and said to them: “Why have you kept the male children alive?”
The midwives said to Pharʹaoh: “The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women. They are lively and have already given birth before the midwife can come in to them.”
So God dealt well with the midwives, and the people kept increasing and becoming very mighty.
And because the midwives had feared the true God, he later gave them families.
Finally Pharʹaoh commanded all his people: “You are to throw every newborn son of the Hebrews into the Nile River, but you are to keep every daughter alive.”
“Bezʹal·el will work along with O·hoʹli·ab and every skilled man to whom Jehovah has given wisdom and understanding so as to know how to do all the work of the holy service just as Jehovah has commanded.”
Moses then called Bezʹal·el and O·hoʹli·ab and every skilled man into whose heart Jehovah had put wisdom, everyone whose heart impelled him to volunteer to do the work.
Then they took from Moses all the contribution that the Israelites had brought for the work of the holy service. However, these continued to bring him voluntary offerings, morning after morning.
Then after they started the holy work, all the skilled workers were coming, one after another,
and they were telling Moses: “The people are bringing much more than what is required for the work that Jehovah has commanded to be done.”
So Moses commanded that an announcement be made throughout the camp, saying: “Men and women, do not bring any more goods for the holy contribution.” With that the people were restrained from bringing in anything else.
The goods were enough for all the work to be done, and more than enough.
So all the skilled workers made the tabernacle of ten tent cloths of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material; he made them with cherubs embroidered on them.
Each tent cloth was 28 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. All the tent cloths were the same size.
Then he joined five of the tent cloths together, and the other five tent cloths he joined together.
After that he made loops of blue thread on the edge of the one tent cloth where it would join. He did the same on the edge of the outermost tent cloth at the corresponding place where it would join.
He made 50 loops on the one tent cloth and 50 loops on the other edge of the tent cloth at the place where it would join so that the loops would be opposite one another.
Finally, he made 50 gold clasps and joined the tent cloths together with the clasps, so that the tabernacle became one unit.
Then he made tent cloths of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle. He made 11 tent cloths.
Each tent cloth was 30 cubits long and 4 cubits wide. The 11 tent cloths were the same size.
Then he joined five of the tent cloths together, and he joined the other six tent cloths together.
Next he made 50 loops along the edge of the outermost tent cloth where it joined, and he made 50 loops along the edge of the other tent cloth that joined with it.
And he made 50 copper clasps for joining the tent together to become one unit.
He made a covering for the tent out of ram skins dyed red and a covering out of sealskins to go over that.
Then he made out of acacia wood the tabernacle’s panel frames, which stood upright.
Each panel frame was ten cubits high and one and a half cubits wide.
Each panel frame had two tenons joined to each other. That is how he made all the panel frames of the tabernacle.
Thus he made the panel frames for the south side of the tabernacle, 20 panel frames, facing south.
Then he made 40 socket pedestals of silver to go under the 20 panel frames, two socket pedestals beneath one panel frame for its two tenons and two socket pedestals under each following panel frame for its two tenons.
For the other side of the tabernacle, the northern side, he made 20 panel frames
and their 40 socket pedestals of silver, two socket pedestals beneath the one panel frame and two socket pedestals beneath each of the other panel frames.
For the rear section of the tabernacle to the west, he made six panel frames.
He made two panel frames as corner posts of the tabernacle at the two rear corners.
The posts were doubled from the bottom to the top, up to the first ring. That is what he did with the two corner posts.
So they amounted to eight panel frames along with their 16 socket pedestals of silver, two socket pedestals under each panel frame.
Then he made bars of acacia wood, five bars for the panel frames of the one side of the tabernacle
and five bars for the panel frames of the other side of the tabernacle and five for the panel frames of the tabernacle for the rear section to the west.
Then he made the middle bar to extend along the middle of the panel frames from one end to the other.
He overlaid the panel frames with gold, and he made their rings of gold as holders for the bars, and he overlaid the bars with gold.
Then he made a curtain of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. He made it with cherubs embroidered on it.
Then he made for it four acacia pillars and overlaid them with gold, along with hooks of gold, and cast four socket pedestals of silver for them.
Next he made a screen for the entrance of the tent out of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together,
as well as its five pillars and their hooks. He overlaid their tops and their connectors with gold, but their five socket pedestals were of copper.
Jehovah then said to Moses: “See, I have made you like God to Pharʹaoh, and Aaron your own brother will become your prophet.
You are to repeat everything that I will command you, and Aaron your brother will speak to Pharʹaoh, and he will send the Israelites away from his land.
As for me, I will allow Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and I will multiply my signs and my miracles in the land of Egypt.
But Pharʹaoh will not listen to you, and I will lay my hand upon Egypt and bring my multitudes, my people, the Israelites, out of the land of Egypt with great judgments.
And the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah when I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring the Israelites out from among them.”
Moses and Aaron did what Jehovah had commanded them; they did just so.
Moses was 80 years old and Aaron was 83 years old when they spoke to Pharʹaoh.
Jehovah now said to Moses and Aaron:
“If Pharʹaoh says to you, ‘Perform a miracle,’ then tell Aaron, ‘Take your rod and throw it down before Pharʹaoh.’ It will become a big snake.”
So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharʹaoh and did exactly as Jehovah had commanded. Aaron threw his rod down before Pharʹaoh and his servants, and it became a big snake.
However, Pharʹaoh summoned the wise men and the sorcerers, and the magic-practicing priests of Egypt also did the same thing with their magic.
Each one threw down his rod, and they became big snakes; but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.
Still, Pharʹaoh’s heart became obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Pharʹaoh’s heart is unresponsive. He has refused to send the people away.
Go to Pharʹaoh in the morning. Look! He is going out to the water! And you should station yourself to meet him by the edge of the Nile River; and take with you in your hand the rod that turned into a serpent.
And you must say to him, ‘Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to you, and he says: “Send my people away so that they may serve me in the wilderness,” but you have not obeyed until now.
This is what Jehovah says: “By this you will know that I am Jehovah. Here I am striking the water that is in the Nile River with the rod that is in my hand, and it will turn into blood.
And the fish that are in the Nile will die, and the Nile will stink, and the Egyptians will find it impossible to drink water from the Nile.”’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Take your rod and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over its rivers, over its canals, over its marshes, and over all its reservoirs, that they may become blood.’ There will be blood in all the land of Egypt, even in the wooden and stone containers.”
Immediately Moses and Aaron did just as Jehovah had commanded. He lifted up the rod and struck the water that was in the Nile River before the eyes of Pharʹaoh and his servants, and all the water that was in the river was turned into blood.
And the fish that were in the river died, and the river began to stink, and the Egyptians were unable to drink water from the Nile, and there was blood throughout the land of Egypt.
Nevertheless, the magic-practicing priests of Egypt did the same thing with their secret arts, so that Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
Then Pharʹaoh returned to his house, and he did not take this to heart either.
So all the Egyptians were digging all around the Nile for water to drink, because they could not drink any water of the Nile.
And seven full days passed after Jehovah struck the Nile.
Jehovah then said to Moses:
“Tell the people of Israel to take up a contribution for me; from every person whose heart moves him, you are to take up my contribution.
This is the contribution that you are to accept from them: gold, silver, copper,
blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair,
ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood,
oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and the perfumed incense,
and onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece.
They are to make a sanctuary for me, and I will reside among them.
You are to make it, the tabernacle and all its furnishings, following exactly the pattern that I am showing you.
“They are to make an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high.
Then you will overlay it with pure gold. Inside and outside you are to overlay it, and you will make a border of gold all around it.
And you will cast four rings of gold for it and attach them above its four feet, with two rings on one side and two rings on the other side.
And you will make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
You will put the poles through the rings on the sides of the Ark in order to carry the Ark with them.
The poles will stay in the rings of the Ark; they are not to be removed from it.
You will place in the Ark the Testimony that I will give you.
“You will make a cover of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
You are to make two cherubs of gold; you will make them of hammered work on the two ends of the cover.
Make the cherubs on the two ends, one cherub on each end of the cover.
The cherubs are to spread out their two wings upward, overshadowing the cover with their wings, and they will face each other. The faces of the cherubs will be turned toward the cover.
You will put the cover on the Ark, and in the Ark you will place the Testimony that I will give you.
I will present myself to you there and speak with you from above the cover. From between the two cherubs that are on the ark of the Testimony, I will make known to you all that I will command you for the Israelites.
“You will also make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long and a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high.
You will overlay it with pure gold and make a golden border around it.
You will make a rim around it a handbreadth wide and a border of gold to go around the rim.
You will make for it four rings of gold and place the rings on the four corners, where the four legs are attached.
The rings are to be close to the rim as holders for the poles for carrying the table.
You will make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold and carry the table with them.
“You will also make its dishes, its cups, its pitchers, and its bowls from which they will pour drink offerings. You are to make them out of pure gold.
And you will put the showbread on the table before me constantly.
“You will make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand is to be made of hammered work. Its base, its stem, its branches, its cups, its knobs, and its blossoms will be one piece.
And six branches will extend out from the sides of the lampstand, three branches from one side and three branches from the other side.
Three cups shaped like almond flowers will be on the one set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating, and three cups shaped like almond flowers on the other set of branches, with knobs and blossoms alternating. This is how the six branches will extend out from the stem of the lampstand.
On the stem of the lampstand are four cups shaped like almond flowers, with its knobs and its blossoms alternating.
A knob will be under the first two branches that extend out of the stem and a knob under the next two branches and a knob under the next two branches, for the six branches extending out from the stem.
The knobs and the branches and the whole lampstand are to be one piece of pure, hammered gold.
You will make seven lamps for it, and when the lamps are lit, they will shine on the area in front of it.
Its snuffers and its fire holders are to be of pure gold.
It should be made, along with these utensils, from a talent of pure gold.
See that you make them after their pattern that was shown to you on the mountain.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Sanctify to me every firstborn male among the Israelites. The first male to be born, of both human and animal, belongs to me.”
Then Moses said to the people: “Remember this day on which you went out of Egypt, from the house of slavery, because with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of here. So nothing leavened may be eaten.
You are going out on this day, in the month of Aʹbib.
When Jehovah has brought you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, which he swore to your forefathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, then you must keep this observance in this month.
Seven days you are to eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day, there will be a festival to Jehovah.
Unleavened bread is to be eaten for the seven days; and nothing leavened is to be found with you, and no sourdough is to be found with you within all your territory.
And you must tell your son on that day, ‘It is because of what Jehovah did for me when I came out of Egypt.’
And this will serve for you as a sign on your hand and as a memorial on your forehead, so that Jehovah’s law may be in your mouth, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought you out of Egypt.
You must keep this statute at its appointed time from year to year.
“When Jehovah brings you into the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, which he has sworn to you and to your forefathers to give to you,
you must devote to Jehovah every firstborn male, as well as every male firstling of the livestock that you acquire. The males belong to Jehovah.
Every firstling donkey you are to redeem with a sheep, and if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. And every firstborn male of your sons you are to redeem.
“In case your son should ask you later on, ‘What does this mean?’ then you should say to him, ‘With a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery.
When Pharʹaoh stubbornly refused to send us away, Jehovah killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of man to the firstborn of beast. That is why I am sacrificing to Jehovah all the firstborn males, and I redeem every firstborn of my sons.’
This must serve as a sign on your hand and as a headband on your forehead, for with a mighty hand Jehovah brought us out of Egypt.”
Now when Pharʹaoh sent the people away, God did not lead them by the way of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, although it was near. For God said: “The people may change their minds when they are confronted by war and will return to Egypt.”
So God made the people go around by the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea. But it was in battle formation that the Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt.
Moses also took Joseph’s bones with him, because Joseph had made the sons of Israel solemnly swear: “God will not fail to turn his attention to you, and you must take my bones up out of here with you.”
They departed from Sucʹcoth and encamped at Eʹtham, at the edge of the wilderness.
Now Jehovah was going ahead of them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them along the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, so that they could travel by day and by night.
The pillar of cloud would not move away from before the people during the day, nor the pillar of fire at night.
“These are the judicial decisions that you are to convey to them:
“If you buy a Hebrew slave, he will serve as a slave for six years, but in the seventh year, he will be set free without paying anything.
If he came by himself, he will go out by himself. If he is the husband of a wife, then his wife must go out with him.
If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children will become her master’s, and he will go out by himself.
But if the slave should insist and say, ‘I love my master, my wife, and my sons; I do not want to be set free,’
his master must bring him before the true God. Then he will bring him up against the door or the doorpost, and his master will pierce his ear through with an awl, and he will be his slave for life.
“If a man sells his daughter as a slave, she will not go free the same way that a slave man does.
If her master is not pleased with her and he does not designate her as a concubine but causes her to be purchased by someone else, he will not be entitled to sell her to foreigners, for he has betrayed her.
If he selects her for his son, he is to grant her the rights of a daughter.
If he takes another wife for himself, the sustenance, the clothing, and the marriage due of the first wife are not to be diminished.
If he will not render these three things to her, then she is to go free without paying any money.
“Anyone who strikes a man so that he dies must be put to death.
But if he does it unintentionally and the true God lets it happen, I will designate for you a place where he can flee.
If a man becomes very angry with his fellow man and he deliberately kills him, the man must die even if you have to take him from my altar.
One who strikes his father or his mother must be put to death.
“If anyone kidnaps a man and sells him or is caught holding him, he must be put to death.
“Anyone who curses his father or his mother must be put to death.
“This is what should happen if men quarrel and one strikes his fellow man with a stone or a fist and he does not die but is confined to his bed:
If he is able to get up and walk around outdoors with the aid of a staff, then the one who struck him must be free from punishment. He will only make compensation for the time the injured man lost from his work until he is completely healed.
“If a man strikes his slave man or his slave girl with a stick and that one dies by his hand, that one must be avenged.
However, if he survives for one or two days, he is not to be avenged, because he is someone bought with his owner’s money.
“If men should struggle with each other and they hurt a pregnant woman and she gives birth prematurely but no fatality results, the offender must pay the damages imposed on him by the husband of the woman; and he must pay it through the judges.
But if a fatality does occur, then you must give life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burn for burn, wound for wound, blow for blow.
“If a man strikes the eye of his slave man or the eye of his slave girl and he destroys it, he is to let the slave go free in compensation for his eye.
And if he knocks out the tooth of his slave man or of his slave girl, he is to let the slave go free in compensation for his tooth.
“If a bull gores a man or a woman and that one dies, the bull must be stoned to death and its meat is not to be eaten; but the owner of the bull is free from punishment.
But if a bull was in the habit of goring and its owner had been warned but he would not keep it under guard and it killed a man or a woman, the bull is to be stoned and its owner is also to be put to death.
If a ransom is imposed on him, he must give as the redemption price for his life all that may be imposed on him.
Whether it gored a son or a daughter, it is to be done to the bull’s owner according to this judicial decision.
If the bull gored a slave man or a slave girl, he will give the price of 30 shekels to that one’s master, and the bull will be stoned to death.
“If a man uncovers or digs a pit and does not cover it and a bull or a donkey falls into it,
the owner of the pit is to make compensation. He is to pay the price to its owner, and the dead animal will become his.
If a man’s bull hurts another’s bull and it dies, then they must sell the live bull and divide the price paid for it; they should also divide the dead animal.
Or if it was known that a bull had been in the habit of goring but its owner would not keep it under guard, he must make compensation with bull for bull, and the dead one will become his own.
Moses became a shepherd of the flock of his father-in-law Jethʹro, the priest of Midʹi·an. While he was leading the flock to the west side of the wilderness, he eventually came to the mountain of the true God, to Hoʹreb.
Then Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a flame of fire in the midst of a thornbush. As he kept looking, he saw that the thornbush was on fire, and yet the thornbush was not consumed.
So Moses said: “I will go over to inspect this unusual sight to see why the thornbush does not burn up.”
When Jehovah saw that he went over to look, God called to him out of the thornbush and said: “Moses! Moses!” to which he said: “Here I am.”
Then he said: “Do not come any nearer. Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy ground.”
He went on to say: “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at the true God.
Jehovah added: “I have certainly seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their outcry because of those who force them to work; I well know the pains they suffer.
I will go down to rescue them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a land good and spacious, a land flowing with milk and honey, the territory of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
Now look! The outcry of the people of Israel has reached me, and I have seen also the harsh way that the Egyptians are oppressing them.
Now come, I will send you to Pharʹaoh, and you will bring my people the Israelites out of Egypt.”
However, Moses said to the true God: “Who am I that I should go to Pharʹaoh and bring the Israelites out of Egypt?”
To this he said: “I will prove to be with you, and this is the sign for you that it was I who sent you: After you have brought the people out of Egypt, you people will serve the true God on this mountain.”
But Moses said to the true God: “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your forefathers has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is his name?’ What should I say to them?”
So God said to Moses: “I Will Become What I Choose to Become.” And he added: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘I Will Become has sent me to you.’”
Then God said once more to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name forever, and this is how I am to be remembered from generation to generation.
Now go, and gather the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers has appeared to me, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and he said: “I have certainly taken notice of you and of what is being done to you in Egypt.
So I say, I will take you away from affliction at the hands of the Egyptians to the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’
“They will certainly listen to your voice, and you will go, you and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and you men should say to him: ‘Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. So, please, let us make a three-day journey into the wilderness so that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.’
But I myself well know that the king of Egypt will not give you permission to go unless a mighty hand compels him.
So I will have to stretch out my hand and strike Egypt with all my extraordinary acts that I will do in it, and after that he will send you out.
And I will give this people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, and when you go, you will by no means go empty-handed.
Each woman must ask her neighbor and the woman lodging in her house for articles of silver and of gold as well as clothing, and you will put them on your sons and your daughters; and you will plunder the Egyptians.”
“You are to make an altar as a place for burning incense; you will make it of acacia wood.
It should be square, one cubit long, one cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns will be one piece with it.
You are to overlay it with pure gold: its top surface, its sides all around, and its horns; and you are to make a gold border around it.
You will also make two rings of gold for it below its border on two opposite sides, and these will hold the poles used to carry it.
Make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
You are to put it before the curtain that is near the ark of the Testimony, before the cover that is over the Testimony, where I will present myself to you.
“Aaron will burn perfumed incense on it, making it smoke on the altar when he maintains the lamps each morning.
Also, when Aaron lights the lamps at twilight, he will burn the incense. It is a regular incense offering before Jehovah throughout your generations.
You must not offer on it unauthorized incense or a burnt offering or a grain offering, and you must not pour a drink offering on it.
Aaron must make atonement on its horns once a year. With some of the blood of the sin offering of the atonement, he will make atonement for it once a year throughout your generations. It is most holy to Jehovah.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Whenever you take a census and count the sons of Israel, each one must give a ransom for his life to Jehovah at the time of the census. This is so that no plague may be brought upon them when they are registered.
This is what all those who are registered will give: a half shekel by the standard shekel of the holy place. Twenty geʹrahs equal a shekel. A half shekel is the contribution to Jehovah.
Everyone registered who is 20 years old and up will give Jehovah’s contribution.
The rich should not give more and the poor should not give less than the half shekel as a contribution to Jehovah to make atonement for your lives.
You are to take the silver money of the atonement from the Israelites and give it in behalf of the service of the tent of meeting, that it may serve as a remembrance before Jehovah for the Israelites, to make atonement for your lives.”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Make a copper basin and its stand for washing; then place it between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water into it.
Aaron and his sons will wash their hands and their feet there.
When they go into the tent of meeting or when they approach the altar to minister and to make offerings of fire and smoke to Jehovah, they will wash with water so that they do not die.
They must wash their hands and their feet so that they may not die, and it must serve as a permanent regulation for them, for him and his offspring, throughout their generations.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses:
“Next, take the choicest perfumes: 500 units of solidified myrrh, and half that amount, 250 units, of sweet cinnamon, 250 units of sweet calamus,
and 500 units of cassia, measured by the standard shekel of the holy place, along with a hin of olive oil.
Then make out of it a holy anointing oil; it should be skillfully blended together. It is to be a holy anointing oil.
“You are to anoint the tent of meeting and the ark of the Testimony with it,
as well as the table and all its utensils, the lampstand and its utensils, the altar of incense,
the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the basin and its stand.
You must sanctify them that they may become most holy. Anyone touching them is to be holy.
And you will anoint Aaron and his sons and sanctify them to serve as priests to me.
“You will speak to the Israelites, saying, ‘This is to continue as a holy anointing oil to me during your generations.
It is not to be applied to the flesh of mankind, and you must not make anything with a composition like it. It is something holy. It is to continue as something holy for you.
Anyone who makes an ointment like it and who puts some of it on an unauthorized person must be cut off from his people.’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Take equal portions of these perfumes: stacte drops, onycha, perfumed galbanum, and pure frankincense.
Make it into an incense; the spice mixture should be skillfully blended, salted, pure, and holy.
You are to pound some of it into fine powder and put some of it before the Testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will present myself to you. It should be most holy to you.
You must not make for your own use the incense that you make with this composition. You are to regard it as something holy to Jehovah.
Whoever makes any like it to enjoy its smell must be cut off from his people.”
So Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
But if you refuse to send them away and you keep holding them,
look! Jehovah’s hand will come against your livestock in the field. On the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herd, and the flock, there will be a devastating plague.
And Jehovah will certainly make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, and nothing that belongs to the Israelites will die.”’”
Moreover, Jehovah set an appointed time, saying: “Tomorrow Jehovah will do this in the land.”
And Jehovah did this on the very next day, and all sorts of livestock of Egypt began to die, but not one of Israel’s livestock died.
When Pharʹaoh inquired, look! not so much as one of Israel’s livestock had died. Nevertheless, Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be unresponsive, and he did not send the people away.
Jehovah then said to Moses and Aaron: “Fill both of your hands with soot from a kiln, and Moses must throw it into the air in front of Pharʹaoh.
And it will become a fine dust on all the land of Egypt, and it will become festering boils on man and beast in all the land of Egypt.”
So they took soot from a kiln and stood before Pharʹaoh, and Moses tossed it into the air, and it became festering boils breaking out on man and beast.
The magic-practicing priests were unable to stand before Moses because of the boils, for they had developed on the magic-practicing priests and on all the Egyptians.
But Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had told Moses.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh, and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
For now I am directing all my blows to strike your heart, your servants, and your people, so that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth.
For by now I could have thrust my hand out to strike you and your people with a devastating plague, and you would have been wiped out from the earth.
But for this very reason I have kept you in existence: to show you my power and to have my name declared in all the earth.
Are you still behaving arrogantly against my people by not sending them away?
Here I will cause a very great hail to rain down tomorrow about this time, such as has never occurred in Egypt from the day it was founded until now.
Therefore, send word to bring all your livestock and all that is yours in the field under shelter. Every man and beast caught in the field and not brought into the house will die when the hail comes down on them.”’”
Anyone among Pharʹaoh’s servants who feared Jehovah’s word quickly brought his own servants and his livestock into the houses,
but whoever did not take Jehovah’s word to heart left his servants and his livestock in the field.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens, so that hail may come down on all the land of Egypt, on man and beast and all the vegetation of the field in the land of Egypt.”
So Moses stretched out his rod toward the heavens, and Jehovah sent thunder and hail, and fire fell down to the earth, and Jehovah kept making it rain down hail on the land of Egypt.
There was hail, and there was fire flashing in the midst of the hail. It was very heavy; there had never been any like it in the land since Egypt had become a nation.
The hail struck everything in the field throughout the land of Egypt, from man to beast, and it struck down all the vegetation and shattered all the trees of the field.
Only in the land of Goʹshen, where the Israelites were, there was no hail.
So Pharʹaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and said to them: “I have sinned this time. Jehovah is righteous, and I and my people are in the wrong.
Plead with Jehovah that there may be an end to God’s thunder and hail. Then I will be willing to send you away, and you will not stay any longer.”
So Moses said to him: “As soon as I go out of the city, I will spread out my hands before Jehovah. The thunder will stop and the hail will not continue any longer, so that you may know that the earth belongs to Jehovah.
But as for you and your servants, I know already that even then, you will not fear Jehovah God.”
Now the flax and the barley had been struck down, because the barley was in the ear and the flax had flower buds.
But the wheat and the spelt had not been struck down, because they were later crops.
Moses now went out of the city from Pharʹaoh and spread out his hands before Jehovah, and the thunder and the hail stopped and the rain quit pouring down on the earth.
When Pharʹaoh saw that the rain, the hail, and the thunder had stopped, he sinned again and hardened his heart, he as well as his servants.
And Pharʹaoh’s heart continued obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away, just as Jehovah had stated through Moses.
He made the altar of burnt offering out of acacia wood. It was square, five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high.
Then he made its horns on its four corners. Its horns were one piece with it. Next he overlaid it with copper.
After that he made all the utensils of the altar, the cans, the shovels, the bowls, the forks, and the fire holders. All its utensils he made of copper.
He also made a grating for the altar, a network of copper, under its rim, down toward its center.
He cast four rings on the four corners near the grating of copper, as holders for the poles.
After that he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with copper.
He inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar for carrying it. He made the altar in the form of a hollow chest of planks.
Then he made the basin of copper and its copper stand; he used the mirrors of the women who were organized to serve at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Then he made the courtyard. For the south side of the courtyard, facing south, he made the hanging curtains of fine twisted linen, for 100 cubits.
There were 20 pillars and 20 socket pedestals of copper, and the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver.
Also, for the north side, there were 100 cubits of hanging curtains. Their 20 pillars and their 20 socket pedestals were of copper. The hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver.
But for the west side, the hanging curtains were for 50 cubits. There were ten pillars and ten socket pedestals, and the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver.
The width of the east side, toward the sunrising, was 50 cubits.
There were 15 cubits of hanging curtains on the one wing, with three pillars and three socket pedestals.
And for the other wing on the other side of the entrance of the courtyard, there were hanging curtains for 15 cubits, with three pillars and three socket pedestals.
All the hanging curtains around the courtyard were of fine twisted linen.
The socket pedestals for the pillars were of copper, the hooks of the pillars and their connectors were of silver, the tops were overlaid with silver, and there were silver fasteners for all the pillars of the courtyard.
The screen of the entrance of the courtyard was woven of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen. It was 20 cubits long and 5 cubits high, the same height as the hanging curtains of the courtyard.
Their four pillars and their four socket pedestals were made of copper. Their hooks were of silver, and their tops and connectors were overlaid with silver.
All the tent pins for the tabernacle and around the courtyard were of copper.
The following is the inventory of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the Testimony, which was inventoried at the command of Moses, as the responsibility of the Levites under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.
Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah did all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.
With him was O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan, a craftsman and an embroiderer and a weaver of the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen.
All the gold that was used for all the work of the holy place equaled the amount of the gold of the wave offering, 29 talents and 730 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place.
And the silver of the ones registered of the assembly was 100 talents and 1,775 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place.
The half shekel for each individual was half a shekel by the standard shekel of the holy place for every man who was among those registered from 20 years of age and up, amounting to 603,550.
The casting of the socket pedestals of the holy place and the socket pedestals of the curtain amounted to 100 talents; 100 socket pedestals equaled 100 talents, one talent for each socket pedestal.
From the 1,775 shekels, he made hooks for the pillars and overlaid their tops and joined them together.
The copper of the offering was 70 talents and 2,400 shekels.
With this he made the socket pedestals of the entrance of the tent of meeting, the copper altar and its copper grating, all the utensils of the altar,
the socket pedestals around the courtyard, the socket pedestals of the entrance of the courtyard, and all the tent pins of the tabernacle and all the tent pins around the courtyard.
Then he said to Moses: “Go up to Jehovah, you and Aaron, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, and 70 of the elders of Israel, and bow down from a distance.
Moses should approach Jehovah by himself; but the others should not approach, and the people should not go up with him.”
Then Moses came and related to the people all the words of Jehovah and all the judicial decisions, and all the people answered with one voice: “All the words that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.”
So Moses wrote down all the words of Jehovah. Then he got up early in the morning and built at the foot of the mountain an altar and 12 pillars corresponding to the 12 tribes of Israel.
After that he sent young Israelite men, and they offered up burnt offerings and sacrificed bulls as communion sacrifices to Jehovah.
Then Moses took half of the blood and put it in bowls, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
Then he took the book of the covenant and read it aloud to the people. And they said: “All that Jehovah has spoken we are willing to do, and we will be obedient.”
So Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said: “This is the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you in harmony with all these words.”
Moses and Aaron, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, and 70 of the elders of Israel went up,
and they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was what seemed like a sapphire pavement, and it was as pure as the heavens themselves.
He did not harm the distinguished men of Israel, and they saw a vision of the true God and ate and drank.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Come up to me on the mountain and stay there. I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandment that I will write for their instruction.”
So Moses got up with his attendant Joshua, and Moses went up the mountain of the true God.
But to the elders he had said: “Wait here for us until we return to you. You have Aaron and Hur with you. Whoever has a legal case may go to them.”
Then Moses went up the mountain while the cloud was covering it.
Jehovah’s glory remained on Mount Siʹnai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day he called to Moses from the midst of the cloud.
To the Israelites who were watching, the appearance of Jehovah’s glory was like a consuming fire on the mountaintop.
Moses then entered into the cloud and went up the mountain. And Moses stayed on the mountain 40 days and 40 nights.
“You will make the altar of acacia wood; it will be five cubits long and five cubits wide. The altar should be square and three cubits high.
You will make horns on its four corners; the horns will be part of the altar, and you will overlay the altar with copper.
You will make buckets for clearing away its ashes, along with shovels, bowls, forks, and fire holders, and you will make all its utensils of copper.
You will make a grating for the altar, a network of copper, and on the network four rings of copper at its four corners.
You will set it down below the rim of the altar, and the network will extend partway down into the altar.
You will make poles of acacia wood for the altar and overlay them with copper.
The poles will be inserted into the rings so that the poles are on the two sides of the altar when it is carried.
You will make the altar in the form of a hollow chest of planks. It should be made just as He showed you on the mountain.
“You will make the courtyard of the tabernacle. For the south side, facing south, the courtyard will have hanging curtains of fine twisted linen, 100 cubits long for the one side.
It will have 20 pillars with 20 copper socket pedestals. The hooks of the pillars and their connectors are of silver.
The hanging curtains for the north side will also be 100 cubits long, along with its 20 pillars and their 20 copper socket pedestals, with silver hooks and connectors for the pillars.
There are to be hanging curtains on the west side for 50 cubits across the width of the courtyard, with ten pillars and ten socket pedestals.
The width of the courtyard on the east side toward the sunrise is 50 cubits.
There will be 15 cubits of hanging curtains on the one side, with three pillars and three socket pedestals.
And for the other side, there will be 15 cubits of hanging curtains, with three pillars and three socket pedestals.
“The entrance of the courtyard should have a screen 20 cubits long made of blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen woven together, with four pillars and their four socket pedestals.
All the pillars surrounding the courtyard will have silver fasteners and silver hooks, but their socket pedestals will be of copper.
The courtyard is to be 100 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 5 cubits high, made from fine twisted linen, and it should have copper socket pedestals.
All the utensils and the items used in the service of the tabernacle, as well as its tent pins and all the pins of the courtyard, are to be of copper.
“You are to command the Israelites to bring you pure, beaten olive oil for the lighting, in order to keep the lamps burning constantly.
In the tent of meeting, outside the curtain that is near the Testimony, Aaron and his sons will arrange to keep the lamps lit from evening until morning before Jehovah. It is a lasting statute for all their generations to be carried out by the Israelites.
About that time, a certain man of the house of Leʹvi married a daughter of Leʹvi.
And the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son. When she saw how beautiful he was, she kept him concealed for three months.
When she was no longer able to conceal him, she took a papyrus basket and coated it with bitumen and pitch and put the child in it and placed it among the reeds by the bank of the Nile River.
But his sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him.
When Pharʹaoh’s daughter came down to bathe in the Nile, her female attendants were walking by the side of the Nile. And she caught sight of the basket in the middle of the reeds. She immediately sent her slave girl to get it.
When she opened it, she saw the child, and the boy was crying. She felt compassion for him, but she said: “This is one of the children of the Hebrews.”
Then his sister said to Pharʹaoh’s daughter: “Shall I go and call a nursing woman from the Hebrews to nurse the child for you?”
Pharʹaoh’s daughter said to her: “Go!” At once the girl went and called the child’s mother.
Pharʹaoh’s daughter then said to her: “Take this child with you and nurse him for me, and I will pay you.” So the woman took the child and nursed him.
When the child grew older, she brought him to Pharʹaoh’s daughter, and he became a son to her. She named him Moses and said: “It is because I have drawn him out of the water.”
Now in those days, after Moses had become an adult, he went out to his brothers to look at the burdens they were bearing, and he caught sight of an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his brothers.
So he looked this way and that, and seeing no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.
But he went out on the following day, and there were two Hebrew men fighting with each other. So he said to the one in the wrong: “Why do you strike your companion?”
At this he said: “Who appointed you as a prince and a judge over us? Are you planning to kill me just as you killed the Egyptian?” Moses now was afraid and said: “Surely the matter has become known!”
Then Pharʹaoh heard about it, and he attempted to kill Moses; but Moses ran away from Pharʹaoh and went to dwell in the land of Midʹi·an, and he sat down by a well.
Now the priest of Midʹi·an had seven daughters, and these came to draw water and to fill the troughs to water their father’s flock.
But as usual, the shepherds came and drove them away. At this Moses got up and helped the women and watered their flock.
When they came home to their father Reuʹel, he exclaimed: “How is it that you have come home so quickly today?”
They replied: “A certain Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds, and he even drew water for us and watered the flock.”
He said to his daughters: “But where is he? Why did you leave the man behind? Call him, so that he may eat with us.”
After that Moses consented to stay with the man, and he gave his daughter Zip·poʹrah to Moses in marriage.
Later she bore a son, and he named him Gerʹshom, for he said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land.”
After a long time, the king of Egypt died, but the Israelites continued to groan because of the slavery and to cry out in complaint, and their cry for help because of the slavery kept going up to the true God.
In time God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
So God looked on the Israelites; and God took notice.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh, for I have allowed his heart and the hearts of his servants to become unresponsive, so that I may display these signs of mine right before him,
and in order that you may declare to your sons and your grandsons how severely I have dealt with Egypt and what signs I have performed among them; and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah.”
So Moses and Aaron went in to Pharʹaoh and said to him: “This is what Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has said, ‘How long will you refuse to submit to me? Send my people away so that they may serve me.
For if you keep refusing to send my people away, here I am bringing locusts within your boundaries tomorrow.
And they will cover the surface of the earth, and it will not be possible to see the ground. They will eat up what escaped the hail and was left for you, and they will eat all your trees that are growing in the field.
They will fill your houses, the houses of all your servants, and the houses of all Egypt to an extent that your fathers and your grandfathers never saw from the time they have been in this land until today.’” With that he turned and went out from Pharʹaoh.
Then Pharʹaoh’s servants said to him: “How long will this man continue to menace us? Send the men away so that they may serve Jehovah their God. Do you not yet realize that Egypt has been ruined?”
So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharʹaoh, and he said to them: “Go, serve Jehovah your God. But just who will be going?”
Then Moses said: “We will go with our young people, our old people, our sons, our daughters, our sheep, and our cattle, because we will hold a festival to Jehovah.”
He said to them: “If I ever send you and your children away, then Jehovah is indeed with you! It is clear that you intend to do something evil.
No! Only your men may go and serve Jehovah, for that is what you requested.” With that they were driven out from before Pharʹaoh.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come up over the land of Egypt and eat up all the vegetation of the land, everything that the hail has let remain.”
At once Moses stretched out his rod over the land of Egypt, and Jehovah caused an east wind to blow on the land all that day and all night. The morning came, and the east wind brought the locusts.
And the locusts came up over all the land of Egypt and settled down on the whole territory of Egypt. It was extremely severe; never before had there been so many locusts, nor would there ever be so many again.
They covered the surface of the entire land, and the land grew dark with them; they devoured all the vegetation of the land and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left; nothing green was left on the trees or on the vegetation of the field in all the land of Egypt.
So Pharʹaoh quickly called Moses and Aaron and said: “I have sinned against Jehovah your God and against you.
Now, please, pardon my sin just this once, and plead with Jehovah your God that he just remove this deadly plague from upon me.”
So he went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah.
Then Jehovah caused the wind to shift, and it became a very stiff west wind, and it carried the locusts away and drove them into the Red Sea. Not a single locust remained in all the territory of Egypt.
However, Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not send the Israelites away.
Jehovah then said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand toward the heavens so that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, a darkness so thick that it can be felt.”
Moses immediately stretched out his hand toward the heavens, and there was a dense darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days.
They did not see one another, and none of them got up from where they were for three days; but all the Israelites had light in their dwellings.
Pharʹaoh then called Moses and said: “Go, serve Jehovah. Only your sheep and your cattle will remain behind. Even your children may go with you.”
But Moses said: “You yourself will also provide us with sacrifices and burnt offerings, and we will offer them to Jehovah our God.
Our livestock will also go with us. Not an animal will be allowed to remain, because we will be using some of them to worship Jehovah our God, and we do not know what we will offer in worship to Jehovah until we arrive there.”
So Jehovah allowed Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he did not consent to send them away.
Pharʹaoh said to him: “Get out of my sight! Make sure that you do not try to see my face again, for on the day you see my face, you will die.”
To this Moses said: “Just as you have spoken, I will not try to see your face again.”
After they departed from Eʹlim, the entire assembly of the Israelites eventually came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Eʹlim and Siʹnai, on the 15th day of the second month after their departure from the land of Egypt.
Then the entire assembly of the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.
The Israelites kept saying to them: “If only we had died by Jehovah’s hand in the land of Egypt while we were sitting by the pots of meat, while we were eating bread to satisfaction. Now you have brought us out into this wilderness to put this whole congregation to death by famine.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Here I am raining down bread for you from the heavens, and each of the people should go out to gather his amount day by day, so that I may put them to the test to see whether they will walk in my law or not.
But on the sixth day when they prepare what they have gathered, it is to be double the amount that they pick up on each of the other days.”
So Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites: “In the evening you will certainly know that it is Jehovah who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
In the morning you will see Jehovah’s glory, for he has heard your murmurings against Jehovah. Who are we that you should murmur against us?”
Moses continued: “When Jehovah gives you meat to eat in the evening and in the morning bread to satisfaction, you will see that Jehovah has heard your murmurings that you are murmuring against him. But who are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against Jehovah.”
Then Moses said to Aaron: “Tell the entire assembly of the Israelites, ‘Come near before Jehovah, for he has heard your murmurings.’”
As soon as Aaron had spoken to the entire assembly of the Israelites, they turned and faced toward the wilderness, and look! Jehovah’s glory appeared in the cloud.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“I have heard the murmurings of the Israelites. Tell them, ‘At twilight you will eat meat, and in the morning you will be satisfied with bread, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah your God.’”
So that evening quail came and covered the camp, and in the morning a layer of dew was all around the camp.
When the layer of dew evaporated, there was a fine, flaky substance on the surface of the wilderness, as fine as frost on the ground.
When the Israelites saw it, they began to say to one another, “What is it?” for they did not know what it was. Moses said to them: “It is the bread that Jehovah has given you for food.
This is what Jehovah has commanded, ‘Each one should gather it according to how much he can eat. You are to take an omer measure for each individual according to the number of the people that each of you has in his tent.’”
The Israelites began to do so; they gathered it, some gathering much and some gathering little.
When they would measure it by the omer, the one who had gathered much had no surplus and the one who had gathered little had no shortage. They each gathered it according to what they could eat.
Then Moses said to them: “Nobody should leave any of it until the morning.”
But they did not listen to Moses. When some men left some of it until the morning, it bred worms and stank, and Moses became indignant at them.
They would pick it up morning by morning, each one according to what he could eat. When the sun got hot, it melted.
On the sixth day, they picked up twice as much bread, two omer measures for each person. So all the chieftains of the assembly came and reported it to Moses.
At that he said to them: “It is what Jehovah has said. Tomorrow there will be a complete rest, a holy sabbath to Jehovah. Bake what you need to bake, and boil what you need to boil; then save whatever is left over and keep it until the morning.”
So they saved it until the morning, just as Moses had commanded, and it did not stink nor were there maggots in it.
Then Moses said: “Eat it today, because today is a sabbath to Jehovah. Today you will not find it on the ground.
You will pick it up for six days, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will be none.”
However, some of the people did go out to pick it up on the seventh day, but they found nothing.
So Jehovah said to Moses: “How long will you refuse to keep my commandments and my laws?
Take notice of the fact that Jehovah has given you the Sabbath. That is why he is giving you the bread for two days on the sixth day. Everyone must stay where he is; nobody is to leave his locality on the seventh day.”
So the people observed the Sabbath on the seventh day.
The house of Israel named the bread “manna.” It was white like coriander seed, and its taste was like that of flat cakes with honey.
Then Moses said: “This is what Jehovah has commanded, ‘Fill an omer measure of it as something to be kept throughout your generations, so that they may see the bread that I gave you to eat in the wilderness when I was bringing you out of the land of Egypt.’”
So Moses said to Aaron: “Take a jar and put in it an omer measure of manna and deposit it before Jehovah as something to be kept throughout your generations.”
Just as Jehovah commanded Moses, Aaron placed it before the Testimony so that it might be preserved.
The Israelites ate the manna for 40 years, until they came to a land that was inhabited. They ate the manna until they came to the frontier of the land of Caʹnaan.
Now an omer is a tenth of an eʹphah measure.
Afterward, Moses and Aaron went in and said to Pharʹaoh: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Send my people away so that they may celebrate a festival to me in the wilderness.’”
But Pharʹaoh said: “Who is Jehovah, that I should obey his voice to send Israel away? I do not know Jehovah at all, and what is more, I will not send Israel away.”
But they said: “The God of the Hebrews has communicated with us. Please, we want to make a three-day journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to Jehovah our God; otherwise, he will strike us with disease or with the sword.”
The king of Egypt replied to them: “Why is it, Moses and Aaron, that you are taking the people away from their work? Return to your labor!”
And Pharʹaoh continued: “Look at how many people of the land there are, and you would have them rest from their labor.”
That same day, Pharʹaoh commanded the taskmasters and their foremen:
“You must no longer give straw to the people to make bricks. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
But you must still impose on them the same quota of bricks as they made in the past. Do not reduce it for them, for they are relaxing. That is why they are crying out, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to our God!’
Make them work harder, and keep them busy so that they will not pay attention to lies.”
So the taskmasters and their foremen went out and said to the people: “Here is what Pharʹaoh has said, ‘I am giving you no more straw.
Go and get your own straw for yourselves wherever you can find it, but your work will not be reduced at all.’”
Then the people scattered throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
And the taskmasters kept urging them: “You must each finish your work every day, just as when straw was provided.”
Also the foremen of the Israelites, whom Pharʹaoh’s taskmasters had appointed over them, were beaten. They asked them: “Why did you not reach the quota of bricks that you used to make? It happened both yesterday and today.”
So the foremen of the Israelites went in and complained to Pharʹaoh: “Why are you treating your servants this way?
No straw is given to your servants, yet they are saying to us, ‘Make bricks!’ Your servants are beaten, but your own people are at fault.”
But he said: “You are relaxing, you are relaxing! That is why you are saying, ‘We want to go, we want to sacrifice to Jehovah.’
So now go, get back to work! No straw will be given to you, but you must still produce your quota of bricks.”
Then the foremen of the Israelites saw that they were in serious trouble because of the order: “You must not reduce your daily quota of bricks at all.”
After that they met up with Moses and Aaron, who were standing there to meet them as they came out from Pharʹaoh.
At once they said to them: “May Jehovah look upon you and judge, since you have made Pharʹaoh and his servants despise us and you have put a sword in their hand to kill us.”
Then Moses turned to Jehovah and said: “Jehovah, why have you afflicted this people? Why have you sent me?
From the time that I went in before Pharʹaoh to speak in your name, he has dealt worse with this people, and you have certainly not rescued your people.”
Jehovah now said to Moses:
“Tell the Israelites that they should turn back and encamp before Pi·ha·hiʹroth, between Migʹdol and the sea, within view of Baʹal-zeʹphon. You are to encamp facing it by the sea.
Then Pharʹaoh will say about the Israelites, ‘They are wandering in confusion in the land. The wilderness has closed in on them.’
I will allow Pharʹaoh’s heart to become obstinate, and he will chase after them, and I will glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh and all his army; and the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah.” So that is what they did.
Later it was reported to the king of Egypt that the people had run away. Immediately, Pharʹaoh and his servants had a change of heart regarding the people, and they said: “Why did we do this and release Israel from serving as slaves for us?”
So he made his war chariots ready, and he took his people with him.
He took 600 chosen chariots and all the other chariots of Egypt, with warriors on every one of them.
Thus Jehovah allowed the heart of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt to become obstinate, and he chased after the Israelites, while the Israelites were going out with confidence.
The Egyptians chased after them, and all the chariot horses of Pharʹaoh and his cavalrymen and his army were catching up with them while they were camping by the sea, by Pi·ha·hiʹroth, facing Baʹal-zeʹphon.
When Pharʹaoh got closer, the Israelites raised their eyes and saw the Egyptians pursuing them. The Israelites became terrified and began to cry out to Jehovah.
They said to Moses: “Is it because there are no burial places in Egypt that you have brought us here to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us by leading us out of Egypt?
Is this not the very thing we told you in Egypt when we said, ‘Let us alone, so that we may serve the Egyptians’? For it is better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.”
Then Moses said to the people: “Do not be afraid. Stand firm and see the salvation of Jehovah that he will perform for you today. For the Egyptians whom you see today, you will never ever see again.
Jehovah himself will fight for you, and you will keep silent.”
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Why do you keep crying out to me? Tell the Israelites that they should break camp.
As for you, lift up your rod and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it, so that the Israelites may go through the midst of the sea on dry ground.
As for me, I am allowing the hearts of the Egyptians to become obstinate, so that they will go in after them; thus I will glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh and all his army, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen.
And the Egyptians will certainly know that I am Jehovah when I glorify myself by means of Pharʹaoh, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen.”
Then the angel of the true God who was going ahead of the camp of Israel departed and went to their rear, and the pillar of cloud that was in front of them moved to the rear and stood behind them.
So it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel. On the one side, it was a dark cloud. On the other side, it was lighting up the night. So the one camp did not come near the other camp all night long.
Moses now stretched out his hand over the sea; and Jehovah drove the sea back with a strong east wind all night long, turning the sea basin into dry ground, and the waters divided.
So the Israelites went through the midst of the sea on dry ground, while the waters formed a wall on their right hand and on their left.
The Egyptians pursued them, and all Pharʹaoh’s horses, his war chariots, and his cavalrymen began going after them into the midst of the sea.
During the morning watch, Jehovah looked at the camp of the Egyptians from within the pillar of fire and cloud, and he threw the camp of the Egyptians into confusion.
He kept taking wheels off their chariots so that they were driving them with difficulty, and the Egyptians were saying: “Let us flee from any contact with Israel, because Jehovah is fighting for them against the Egyptians.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Stretch out your hand over the sea so that the waters may come back over the Egyptians, their war chariots, and their cavalrymen.”
Moses at once stretched out his hand over the sea, and as morning approached, the sea returned to its normal condition. As the Egyptians fled from it, Jehovah shook the Egyptians off into the midst of the sea.
The returning waters covered the war chariots and the cavalrymen and all of Pharʹaoh’s army who had gone into the sea after them. Not so much as one among them was allowed to survive.
But the Israelites walked on dry ground in the midst of the seabed, and the waters formed a wall on their right hand and on their left.
Thus Jehovah saved Israel on that day from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore.
Israel also saw the great power that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians, and the people began to fear Jehovah and to put faith in Jehovah and in his servant Moses.
“You are to summon from the Israelites your brother Aaron, along with his sons, so that he may serve as priest to me—Aaron, along with Naʹdab and A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, the sons of Aaron.
You are to make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for glory and beauty.
You are to speak to all those who are skillful, those whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, and they will make Aaron’s garments for his sanctification, so that he may serve as priest to me.
“These are the garments that they will make: a breastpiece, an ephʹod, a sleeveless coat, a checkered robe, a turban, and a sash; they will make these holy garments for your brother Aaron and his sons, so that he may serve as priest to me.
The skilled workers will use the gold, the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen.
“They are to make the ephʹod of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen, and it should be embroidered.
It is to have two attached shoulder pieces that join it at its two edges.
The woven belt, which is attached to the ephʹod for tying it securely in position, should be of the same materials: gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen.
“You are to take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel,
six names on the one stone and the six remaining names on the other stone, in the order of their births.
A stone engraver will engrave the names of the sons of Israel on the two stones as he would engrave a seal. Then you are to have them mounted in gold settings.
You are to put the two stones on the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, and Aaron must carry their names before Jehovah on his two shoulder pieces as a memorial.
You are to make settings of gold
and two chains of pure gold twisted like a cord, and you must attach the corded chains to the settings.
“You are to have an embroiderer make the breastpiece of judgment. It should be made like the ephʹod, out of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen.
It should be square when doubled, a span long and a span wide.
You should set in it mounted stones, four rows of stones. The first row is ruby, topaz, and emerald.
The second row is turquoise, sapphire, and jasper.
The third row is leshʹem stone, agate, and amethyst.
The fourth row is chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade. They should be mounted in settings of gold.
The stones will correspond to the names of the 12 sons of Israel. Each one should be engraved like a seal, each name representing one of the 12 tribes.
“You are to make wreathed chains on the breastpiece, like cords of pure gold.
You are to make two rings of gold for the breastpiece and attach the two rings to the two ends of the breastpiece.
You are to put the two cords of gold through the two rings at the ends of the breastpiece.
You will put the two ends of the two cords through the two settings, and you must attach them to the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod, at the front.
You are to make two rings of gold and set them at the two ends on the inside edge of the breastpiece, facing the ephʹod.
You should make two more rings of gold on the front of the ephʹod, below the two shoulder pieces, close to where it is joined, above the woven belt of the ephʹod.
The breastpiece should be held in place by a blue cord, tying its rings to the rings of the ephʹod. This will keep the breastpiece in place on the ephʹod, above the woven belt.
“Aaron must carry the names of the sons of Israel on the breastpiece of judgment over his heart when he comes into the Holy as a constant memorial before Jehovah.
You will put the Uʹrim and the Thumʹmim into the breastpiece of judgment, and they must be over Aaron’s heart when he comes in before Jehovah, and Aaron must carry the means for making judgments of the Israelites over his heart before Jehovah constantly.
“You are to make the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod entirely of blue thread.
There will be an opening at the top in the middle of it. Its opening should have a border woven all around it by a loom worker. It should be like the opening of a coat of mail, so that it will not be torn.
You should make pomegranates of blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material all around its hem, along with bells of gold in between them.
You should alternate a bell of gold and a pomegranate, a bell of gold and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the sleeveless coat.
It must be worn by Aaron so that he may minister, and the sound from it must be heard when he goes into the sanctuary before Jehovah and when he comes out, so that he will not die.
“You are to make a shining plate of pure gold and engrave on it as one would engrave a seal: ‘Holiness belongs to Jehovah.’
You must fasten it to the turban with a blue cord; it is to remain on the front of the turban.
It will be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron will bear responsibility when someone commits an error against the holy things, which the Israelites sanctify when they offer them as holy gifts. It must always remain on his forehead, so that they may gain approval before Jehovah.
“You are to weave the checkered robe of fine linen, make a turban of fine linen, and make a woven sash.
“You will also make robes, sashes, and headgear for Aaron’s sons, for glory and beauty.
You will clothe your brother Aaron and his sons with him, and you are to anoint them and install them and sanctify them, and they will serve as priests to me.
Also make linen shorts for them to cover their naked flesh. These are to extend from the hips to the thighs.
These must be worn by Aaron and his sons when they come into the tent of meeting or when they approach the altar to minister in the holy place, so that they may not incur guilt and die. It is a permanent statute for him and his offspring after him.
“If a man steals a bull or a sheep and he slaughters or sells it, he is to compensate with five bulls for the bull and four sheep for the sheep.
(“If a thief is found in the act of breaking in and he gets struck and dies, there is no bloodguilt for him.
But if it happens after sunrise, there is bloodguilt for him.) “He must make compensation. If he has nothing, then he must be sold for the things he stole.
If what he stole is found alive in his possession, whether it is a bull or a donkey or a sheep, he is to make double compensation.
“If anyone puts his animals out to graze in a field or a vineyard and lets them graze in someone else’s field, he is to make compensation with the best of his own field or with the best of his own vineyard.
“If a fire starts and spreads to thornbushes and it causes sheaves or standing grain or a field to be consumed, the one who started the fire must make compensation for what was burned.
“If a man gives his fellow man money or articles to keep and these are stolen from the fellow man’s house, if the thief is found, he must make double compensation.
If the thief is not found, the owner of the house must be brought before the true God in order to determine whether he put his hand on the goods of his fellow man.
In all cases of illegal possession of goods, concerning a bull, a donkey, a sheep, a garment, or anything lost of which he may say, ‘This is mine!’ both parties will present their case before the true God. The one whom God pronounces guilty is to make double compensation to his fellow man.
“If a man gives his fellow man a donkey or a bull or a sheep or any domestic animal to keep and it dies or gets maimed or gets led away while nobody is looking,
there should be an oath made between them before Jehovah, that he did not lay his hand on the goods of his fellow man; and the owner must accept it. The other man is not to make compensation.
But if the animal has been stolen from him, he is to make compensation to its owner.
If it was torn by a wild animal, he is to bring it as evidence. He is not to make compensation for something torn by a wild animal.
“But if anybody asks to borrow an animal from his fellow man and it gets maimed or it dies while its owner is not with it, the man who borrowed it must make compensation.
If its owner is with it, he is not to make compensation. If it was hired, the money paid for the hire is the compensation.
“Now if a man seduces a virgin who is not engaged and he lies down with her, he must pay the bride-price for her to become his wife.
If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him, he is to pay the money at the rate of the bride-price.
“You must not allow a sorceress to live.
“Anyone lying down with an animal must surely be put to death.
“Whoever sacrifices to any gods but Jehovah alone is to be devoted to destruction.
“You must not mistreat a foreign resident or oppress him, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.
“You must not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
If you afflict him at all, so that he cries out to me, I will unfailingly hear his outcry;
and my anger will blaze, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives will become widows, and your children will be fatherless.
“If you lend money to anyone poor of my people, someone who is dwelling with you, you must not become like a moneylender to him. You must not charge him interest.
“If you seize the garment of your fellow man as security for a loan, you are to return it to him by sunset.
For it is his only covering, his clothing to cover his body; in what will he lie down to sleep? When he cries out to me, I will certainly hear, for I am compassionate.
“You must not curse God nor curse a chieftain among your people.
“You must not hesitate to make offerings from your abundant produce and the overflow of your presses. The firstborn of your sons you are to give to me.
This is what you should do with your bull and your sheep: Seven days it will continue with its mother. On the eighth day, you are to give it to me.
“You should prove yourselves holy people to me, and you must not eat the flesh of anything in the field that has been torn by a wild animal. You should throw it to the dogs.
At that time Moses and the Israelites sang this song to Jehovah: “Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.
My strength and my might is Jah, since he has become my salvation. This is my God, and I will praise him; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.
Jehovah is a powerful warrior. Jehovah is his name.
Pharʹaoh’s chariots and his army He has cast into the sea,And his finest warriors have sunk into the Red Sea.
The surging waters covered them; down into the depths they sank like a stone.
Your right hand, O Jehovah, is great in power;Your right hand, O Jehovah, can shatter an enemy.
In your great majesty you can throw down those who rise up against you;You send out your burning anger, it eats them up like stubble.
By a breath from your nostrils waters massed together;They stood still, holding back the floods;The surging waters congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said: ‘I will pursue! I will overtake! I will divide spoil until I am satisfied! I will draw my sword! My hand will subdue them!’
You blew with your breath, the sea covered them;They sank like lead in majestic waters.
Who among the gods is like you, O Jehovah? Who is like you, showing yourself mighty in holiness? The One to be feared with songs of praise, the One doing wonders.
You stretched out your right hand, and the earth swallowed them up.
In your loyal love you have led the people whom you have redeemed;In your strength you will guide them to your holy place of dwelling.
Peoples must hear; they will shudder;Anguish will seize the inhabitants of Phi·lisʹti·a.
At that time the sheikhs of Eʹdom will be terrified,And trembling will take hold of the mighty rulers of Moʹab. All the inhabitants of Caʹnaan will be disheartened.
Fear and dread will fall upon them. Because of the greatness of your arm they will be as motionless as a stoneUntil your people pass by, O Jehovah,Until the people whom you produced pass by.
You will bring them and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance,The established place that you have prepared for yourself to inhabit, O Jehovah,A sanctuary, O Jehovah, that your hands have established.
Jehovah will rule as king forever and ever.
When Pharʹaoh’s horses with his war chariots and his cavalrymen went into the sea,Then Jehovah brought back the waters of the sea upon them,But the people of Israel walked on dry ground through the midst of the sea.”
Then Mirʹi·am the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and with dances.
Mirʹi·am sang in response to the men: “Sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.”
Moses later led Israel away from the Red Sea, and they went out to the wilderness of Shur and marched on for three days in the wilderness, but they did not find water.
They came to Maʹrah, but they were not able to drink the water from Maʹrah because it was bitter. That is why he named it Maʹrah.
So the people began to murmur against Moses, saying: “What are we to drink?”
He cried out to Jehovah, and Jehovah directed him to a tree. When he threw it into the water, the water became sweet. There He established for them a regulation and a case for judgment, and there He put them to the test.
He said: “If you will strictly listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and will do what is right in his eyes and will pay attention to his commandments and keep all his regulations, I will not bring upon you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians, for I, Jehovah, am healing you.”
After that they came to Eʹlim, where there were 12 springs of water and 70 palm trees. So they camped there by the water.
Meanwhile, the people saw that Moses was taking a long time coming down from the mountain. So the people gathered around Aaron and said to him: “Get up, make for us a god who will go ahead of us, because we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.”
At this Aaron said to them: “Take the gold earrings from the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters and bring them to me.”
So all the people began taking off the gold earrings that were in their ears and bringing them to Aaron.
Then he took the gold from them, and he formed it with an engraving tool and made it into a statue of a calf. They began to say: “This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.”
When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. Then Aaron called out: “There is a festival to Jehovah tomorrow.”
So they got up early on the next day and began offering up burnt offerings and presenting communion sacrifices. After that the people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Go, descend, because your people, whom you led up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves.
They have quickly deviated from the way I commanded them to go. They have made for themselves a statue of a calf, and they keep bowing down to it and sacrificing to it and saying, ‘This is your God, O Israel, who led you up out of the land of Egypt.’”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “I have seen that this is an obstinate people.
So now let me be, and I will exterminate them in my burning anger, and let me make a great nation from you instead.”
Then Moses appealed to Jehovah his God and said: “Why, O Jehovah, should you turn your burning anger against your people after bringing them out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
Why should the Egyptians say, ‘He had evil intentions when he led them out. He wanted to kill them in the mountains and exterminate them from the surface of the earth’? Turn from your burning anger and reconsider your decision to bring this calamity on your people.
Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom you swore by yourself and said: ‘I will multiply your offspring like the stars of the heavens, and I will give all this land that I have designated to your offspring, so that they may take it as a permanent possession.’”
So Jehovah began to reconsider the calamity that he had spoken of bringing on his people.
Moses then turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hand. The tablets were inscribed on both sides; they were written on the front and on the back.
The tablets were the workmanship of God, and the writing was the writing of God engraved on the tablets.
When Joshua began to hear the noise of the people because of their shouting, he said to Moses: “There is the sound of battle in the camp.”
But Moses said: “It is not the sound of singing over a victory,And it is not the sound of wailing over a defeat;I hear the sound of another kind of singing.”
As soon as Moses got near the camp and saw the calf and the dances, his anger began to blaze, and he threw the tablets from his hands and shattered them at the foot of the mountain.
He took the calf that they had made and he burned it with fire and crushed it into powder; then he scattered it on the water and made the Israelites drink it.
And Moses said to Aaron: “What did this people do to you that you have brought a great sin upon them?”
Aaron replied: “Do not be enraged, my lord. You well know that the people are inclined to do evil.
So they said to me, ‘Make for us a god who will go ahead of us, for we do not know what has happened to this Moses, the man who led us up out of the land of Egypt.’
So I said to them, ‘Whoever has any gold must take it off and give it to me.’ Then I threw it into the fire and out came this calf.”
Moses saw that the people were unrestrained, for Aaron had let them go unrestrained, so that they were a disgrace before their opposers.
Then Moses took his position in the gate of the camp and said: “Who is on Jehovah’s side? Come to me!” And all the Levites gathered around him.
He now said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel has said, ‘Each of you must fasten on his sword and pass through all the camp from gate to gate, killing his brother, his neighbor, and his close companion.’”
The Levites did what Moses said. So about 3,000 men were killed on that day.
Then Moses said: “Set yourselves apart for Jehovah today, for each of you has gone against his own son and his own brother; today he will give you a blessing.”
On the very next day, Moses said to the people: “You committed a very great sin, and now I will go up to Jehovah to see if I can make amends for your sin.”
So Moses returned to Jehovah and said: “What a great sin this people has committed! They made themselves a god of gold!
But now if you are willing, pardon their sin; if not, please wipe me out from your book that you have written.”
However, Jehovah said to Moses: “Whoever has sinned against me, I will wipe him out of my book.
Go now, lead the people to the place about which I have spoken to you. Look! My angel will go ahead of you, and on the day when I make an accounting, I will bring punishment on them for their sin.”
Then Jehovah began plaguing the people because they had made the calf, the one that Aaron had made.
However, Moses answered: “But suppose they do not believe me and do not listen to my voice, for they will say, ‘Jehovah did not appear to you.’”
Then Jehovah said to him: “What is that in your hand?” He answered: “A rod.”
He said: “Throw it on the ground.” So he threw it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from it.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Reach out your hand and seize it by the tail.” So he reached out and seized it, and it became a rod in his hand.
God then said: “This is so that they may believe that Jehovah the God of their forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.”
Jehovah said to him once more: “Put your hand, please, into the upper fold of your garment.” So he put his hand into the fold of his garment. When he drew it out, why, his hand was stricken with leprosy like snow!
Then he said: “Return your hand into the upper fold of your garment.” So he returned his hand into his garment. When he drew it out of the garment, it was restored like the rest of his flesh!
He said: “If they will not believe you or pay attention to the first sign, then they will certainly heed the next sign.
Still, even if they will not believe these two signs and refuse to listen to your voice, you will take some water from the Nile River and pour it out on the dry land, and the water that you take from the Nile will become blood on the dry land.”
Moses now said to Jehovah: “Pardon me, Jehovah, but I have never been a fluent speaker, neither in the past nor since you have spoken to your servant, for I am slow of speech and slow of tongue.”
Jehovah said to him: “Who made a mouth for man, or who makes them speechless, deaf, clear-sighted, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah?
So go now, and I will be with you as you speak, and I will teach you what you should say.”
But he said: “Pardon me, Jehovah, please send anyone whom you want to send.”
Then Jehovah’s anger blazed against Moses, and he said: “What about your brother Aaron the Levite? I know that he can speak very well. And he is now on his way here to meet you. When he sees you, his heart will rejoice.
So you must speak to him and put the words in his mouth, and I will be with you and him as you speak, and I will teach you men what to do.
He will speak for you to the people, and he will be your spokesman, and you will serve as God to him.
And you will take this rod in your hand and perform the signs with it.”
So Moses went back to Jethʹro his father-in-law and said to him: “I want to go, please, and return to my brothers who are in Egypt to see whether they are still alive.” Jethʹro said to Moses: “Go in peace.”
After that Jehovah said to Moses in Midʹi·an: “Go, return to Egypt, because all the men who were seeking to kill you are dead.”
Then Moses took his wife and his sons and lifted them onto a donkey, and he started back to the land of Egypt. Moreover, Moses took the rod of the true God in his hand.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “After you have returned to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharʹaoh all the miracles that I have empowered you to do. But I will allow his heart to become obstinate, and he will not send the people away.
You must say to Pharʹaoh, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Israel is my son, my firstborn.
I say to you, Send my son away so that he may serve me. But if you refuse to send him away, I am going to kill your son, your firstborn.”’”
Now on the road at the lodging place, Jehovah met him and was seeking to put him to death.
Finally Zip·poʹrah took a flint and circumcised her son and caused his foreskin to touch his feet and said: “It is because you are a bridegroom of blood to me.”
So He let him go. At that time she said, “a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision.
Then Jehovah said to Aaron: “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went and met him at the mountain of the true God and greeted him with a kiss.
And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah, who had sent him, and all the signs that He had commanded him to do.
After that Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the Israelites.
Aaron told them all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and he performed the signs before the eyes of the people.
At this the people believed. When they heard that Jehovah had turned his attention to the Israelites and that he had seen their affliction, they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
From the blue thread, the purple wool, and the scarlet material, they made finely woven garments for ministering in the holy place. They made the holy garments that were for Aaron, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
He made the ephʹod of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen.
They hammered plates of gold into thin sheets, and he cut it into threads to work in with the blue thread, the purple wool, the scarlet material, and the fine linen, and it was embroidered.
They made shoulder pieces for it that were attached, and it was joined to them at its two edges.
And the woven belt, which was attached to the ephʹod for tying it securely in position, was made of the same material, of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then they mounted the onyx stones in gold settings, and they engraved them with the names of the sons of Israel, as they would engrave a seal.
He placed them on the shoulder pieces of the ephʹod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then he made the breastpiece with the workmanship of an embroiderer, like the workmanship of the ephʹod, out of gold, blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine twisted linen.
It was square when doubled. They made the breastpiece, which, when doubled, was as long and as wide as the span of the hand.
They set four rows of stones in it. The first row was ruby, topaz, and emerald.
The second row was turquoise, sapphire, and jasper.
The third row was leshʹem stone, agate, and amethyst.
And the fourth row was chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade. They were mounted in settings of gold.
The stones corresponded to the names of the 12 sons of Israel, and the names were engraved like a seal, each name representing one of the 12 tribes.
Then they made wreathed chains on the breastpiece, like cords of pure gold.
And they made two settings of gold and two rings of gold and attached the two rings to the two corners of the breastpiece.
After that they put the two cords of gold through the two rings at the corners of the breastpiece.
Then they put the two ends of the two cords through the two settings and attached them to the shoulder pieces on the front of the ephʹod.
Next they made two rings of gold and set them at the two ends on the inside edge of the breastpiece, facing the ephʹod.
Then they made two more rings of gold and put them on the front of the ephʹod, below the two shoulder pieces, close to where it is joined, above the woven belt of the ephʹod.
Finally, they tied the breastpiece with a blue cord from its rings to the rings of the ephʹod, in order to keep the breastpiece in its place on the ephʹod, above the woven belt, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then he made the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod, woven by a loom worker, all of blue thread.
The opening of the sleeveless coat was in the middle of it, like the opening of a coat of mail. Its opening had a border around it, so that it would not be torn.
Next they made on the hem of the sleeveless coat pomegranates of blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material, twisted together.
And they made bells of pure gold and put the bells in between the pomegranates all around the hem of the sleeveless coat, in between the pomegranates;
they alternated a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, all around the hem of the sleeveless coat, which was used for ministering, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
And they made the robes of fine linen, woven by a loom worker, for Aaron and his sons,
and the turban of fine linen, the ornamental headgear of fine linen, the linen shorts of fine twisted linen,
and the sash of fine twisted linen, blue thread, purple wool, and scarlet material woven together, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Finally, they made the shining plate, the holy sign of dedication, out of pure gold and inscribed on it an inscription as one would engrave a seal: “Holiness belongs to Jehovah.”
They attached to it a cord made from blue thread in order to put it on the turban, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
So all the work for the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, was completed, and the Israelites did everything that Jehovah had commanded Moses. They did just so.
Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses, the tent and all its utensils: its clasps, its panel frames, its bars and its pillars and its socket pedestals;
its covering of ram skins dyed red, its covering of sealskins, the curtain for the screen;
the ark of the Testimony and its poles and the cover;
the table, all its utensils and the showbread;
the lampstand of pure gold, its lamps, the row of lamps, and all its utensils and the oil for lighting;
the altar of gold, the anointing oil, the perfumed incense, the screen for the entrance of the tent;
the altar of copper and its grating of copper, its poles, all its utensils, the basin and its stand;
the hanging curtains of the courtyard, its pillars and its socket pedestals, the screen for the entrance of the courtyard, its tent cords and its tent pins and all the utensils for the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting;
the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.
According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, that was how the Israelites did all the work.
When Moses inspected all their work, he saw that they had done it just as Jehovah had commanded; and Moses blessed them.
Then God spoke all these words:
“I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
You must not have any other gods besides me.
“You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth.
You must not bow down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.
“You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave unpunished the one who takes up His name in a worthless way.
“Remember the Sabbath day to keep it sacred.
You are to labor and do all your work for six days,
but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your domestic animal nor your foreign resident who is inside your settlements.
For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and he began to rest on the seventh day. That is why Jehovah blessed the Sabbath day and made it sacred.
“Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live a long time in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
“You must not murder.
“You must not commit adultery.
“You must not steal.
“You must not testify falsely when you are a witness against your fellow man.
“You must not desire your fellow man’s house. You must not desire your fellow man’s wife nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.”
Now all the people were witnessing the thunder and lightning, the sound of the horn, and the mountain smoking; and seeing this made them tremble and stand at a distance.
So they said to Moses: “You speak with us, and we will listen, but do not let God speak with us, for fear that we will die.”
So Moses said to the people: “Do not be afraid, for the true God has come to put you to the test, in order that the fear of him may continue with you so that you may not sin.”
So the people kept standing at a distance, but Moses went near to the dark cloud where the true God was.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘You have seen for yourselves that I spoke with you from heaven.
You must not make gods of silver alongside me, and you must not make gods of gold for yourselves.
An altar of earth you are to make for me, and you will sacrifice on it your burnt offerings, your communion sacrifices, your flock, and your herd. In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will come to you and I will bless you.
If you make an altar of stones for me, you must not build it using stones cut with tools. For if you do use your chisel on it, you will profane it.
And you must not go up by steps to my altar, that your private parts may not be exposed upon it.’
Jehovah now said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt:
“This month will be the beginning of the months for you. It will be the first of the months of the year for you.
Speak to the entire assembly of Israel, saying, ‘On the tenth day of this month, they should each take for themselves a sheep for their father’s house, a sheep to a house.
But if the household is too small for the sheep, they and their nearest neighbor should share it between themselves in their house according to the number of people. When making the calculation, determine how much of the sheep each one will eat.
Your sheep should be a sound, one-year-old male. You may choose from the young rams or from the goats.
You must care for it until the 14th day of this month, and the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel must slaughter it at twilight.
They must take some of the blood and splash it on the two doorposts and the upper part of the doorway of the houses in which they eat it.
“‘They must eat the meat on this night. They should roast it over the fire and eat it along with unleavened bread and bitter greens.
Do not eat any of it raw or boiled, cooked in water, but roast it over the fire, its head together with its shanks and its inner parts.
You must not save any of it until morning, but any of it left over until morning you should burn with fire.
And this is how you should eat it, with your belt fastened, sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you should eat it in a hurry. It is Jehovah’s Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt on this night and strike every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from man to beast; and I will execute judgment on all the gods of Egypt. I am Jehovah.
The blood will serve as your sign on the houses where you are; and I will see the blood and pass over you, and the plague will not come on you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
“‘This day will serve as a memorial for you, and you must celebrate it as a festival to Jehovah throughout your generations. As a lasting statute, you should celebrate it.
Seven days you are to eat unleavened bread. Yes, on the first day you are to remove the sourdough from your houses, because anyone eating what is leavened from the first day down to the seventh, that person must be cut off from Israel.
On the first day you will hold a holy convention, and on the seventh day, another holy convention. No work is to be done on these days. Only what every person needs to eat, that alone may be prepared for you.
“‘You must keep the Festival of Unleavened Bread, for on this very day, I will bring your multitudes out of the land of Egypt. And you must keep this day throughout your generations as a lasting statute.
In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, in the evening, you are to eat unleavened bread until the 21st day of the month, in the evening.
No sourdough is to be found in your houses for seven days, because if anyone eats what is leavened, whether he is a foreigner or a native of the land, that person must be cut off from the assembly of Israel.
You should not eat anything leavened. In all your homes, you are to eat unleavened bread.’”
Moses promptly called all the elders of Israel and said to them: “Go and select young animals for each of your families, and slaughter the Passover sacrifice.
Then you must dip a bunch of hyssop into the blood that is in a basin and strike the upper part of the doorway and the two doorposts with the blood; and none of you should go out of the entrance of his house until morning.
Then when Jehovah passes through to plague the Egyptians and sees the blood on the upper part of the doorway and on the two doorposts, Jehovah will certainly pass over the entrance, and he will not allow the plague of death to enter into your houses.
“You must observe this event as a lasting regulation for you and your sons.
And when you come into the land that Jehovah will give you just as he has stated, you must keep this observance.
And when your sons ask you, ‘What does this observance mean to you?’
you must say, ‘It is the sacrifice of the Passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when he plagued the Egyptians, but he spared our houses.’” Then the people bowed low and prostrated themselves.
So the Israelites went and did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron. They did just so.
Then at midnight, Jehovah struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharʹaoh who was sitting on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the prison, and every firstborn of the animals.
Pharʹaoh got up that night along with all his servants and all the other Egyptians, and there was a great outcry among the Egyptians, because there was not a house where someone was not dead.
At once he called Moses and Aaron by night and said: “Get up, get out from among my people, both you and the other Israelites. Go and serve Jehovah, just as you have said.
Take also your flocks and your herds and go, just as you have said. But you must also bless me.”
And the Egyptians began to urge the people to depart quickly out of the land “because,” as they said, “we are all as good as dead!”
So the people carried their flour dough before it was leavened, with their kneading troughs wrapped up in their clothing on their shoulder.
The Israelites did what Moses had told them and asked the Egyptians for articles of silver and of gold as well as clothing.
Jehovah gave the people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, so that they gave them what they asked for, and they plundered the Egyptians.
Then the Israelites departed from Ramʹe·ses for Sucʹcoth, about 600,000 men on foot, besides children.
And a vast mixed company also went with them, as well as flocks and herds, a great number of livestock.
They began to bake the dough that they brought from Egypt into round loaves of unleavened bread. It was not leavened, because they had been driven out of Egypt so suddenly that they had not prepared any provisions for themselves.
The dwelling of the Israelites, who had dwelled in Egypt, was 430 years.
At the end of the 430 years, on this very day, all the multitudes of Jehovah went out of the land of Egypt.
It is a night on which they will celebrate Jehovah’s bringing them out of the land of Egypt. This night is to be observed to Jehovah by all the people of Israel throughout their generations.
Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the statute of the Passover: No foreigner may eat of it.
But if someone has a slave man who was purchased with money, you should circumcise him. Only then may he share in eating it.
A settler and a hired worker may not eat of it.
In one house it is to be eaten. You must not take any of the meat outside of the house, and you must not break any of its bones.
All the assembly of Israel are to celebrate it.
If a foreigner resides with you and he wants to celebrate the Passover to Jehovah, every male of his must be circumcised. Then he may come near to celebrate it, and he will become like a native of the land. But no uncircumcised man may eat of it.
One law will apply for the native and for the foreigner who is residing among you.”
So all the Israelites did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron. They did just so.
On this very day, Jehovah brought the Israelites along with their multitudes out of the land of Egypt.
Now Jethʹro the priest of Midʹi·an, Moses’ father-in-law, heard about all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, how Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.
Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, had taken in Zip·poʹrah, Moses’ wife, when she was sent back to him,
along with her two sons. One son was named Gerʹshom, because Moses said, “I have become a foreign resident in a foreign land,”
and the other was named E·li·eʹzer, because he said, “The God of my father is my helper, who rescued me from Pharʹaoh’s sword.”
So Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, along with Moses’ sons and his wife, came to Moses into the wilderness where he was camping at the mountain of the true God.
Then he sent word to Moses: “I, your father-in-law Jethʹro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons.”
At once Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and he bowed down and kissed him. Each of them asked about the other’s welfare, and then they went into the tent.
Moses related to his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharʹaoh and Egypt in behalf of Israel, all the hardships that had befallen them along the way, and how Jehovah had delivered them.
Jethʹro rejoiced over all the good that Jehovah had done for Israel by rescuing them from Egypt.
Then Jethʹro said: “Praised be Jehovah, who rescued you from Egypt and from Pharʹaoh, and who rescued the people from under Egypt’s control.
Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all the other gods, because of what he did to those who acted arrogantly against his people.”
Then Jethʹro, Moses’ father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat a meal with Moses’ father-in-law before the true God.
On the next day, Moses sat down as usual to serve as judge for the people, and the people kept standing before Moses from morning until evening.
When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he was doing for the people, he said: “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit here alone with all the people standing before you from morning until evening?”
Moses said to his father-in-law: “Because the people keep coming to me to inquire of God.
When a case arises, it comes to me and I must judge between one person and the other, and I make known the decisions of the true God and his laws.”
Moses’ father-in-law said to him: “What you are doing is not good.
You will surely wear out, both you and this people who are with you, because this is too big a load for you and you cannot carry it by yourself.
Now listen to me. I will give you advice, and God will be with you. You serve as representative for the people before the true God, and you must bring the cases to the true God.
You should warn them about what the regulations and the laws are and make known to them the way in which they should walk and the work that they should do.
But you should select from the people capable men fearing God, trustworthy men hating dishonest profit, and appoint these over them as chiefs over thousands, chiefs over hundreds, chiefs over fifties, and chiefs over tens.
They should judge the people when cases arise, and they will bring every difficult case to you, but every minor case they will decide. Make it easier for yourself by letting them share the load along with you.
If you do this, and God so commands you, you will be able to stand the strain, and everyone will go home satisfied.”
Moses immediately listened to his father-in-law and did all that he had said.
Moses chose capable men out of all Israel and appointed them heads over the people, as chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens.
So they judged the people when cases arose. A difficult case they would bring to Moses, but every minor case they would judge.
After that Moses saw his father-in-law off, and he went his way to his land.
“You must not spread a report that is not true. Do not cooperate with a wicked one by becoming a malicious witness.
You must not follow after the crowd to do evil, and you must not pervert justice by giving testimony to go along with the crowd.
You must show impartiality in the dispute of a poor person.
“If you come upon your enemy’s bull or his donkey straying, you must return it to him.
If you see that the donkey of someone who hates you has fallen under its load, you must not ignore it and leave. You must help him release the animal.
“You are not to pervert the judgment of the poor one among you in his legal case.
“Have nothing to do with a false accusation, and do not kill the innocent and the righteous, for I will not declare the wicked one righteous.
“You must not accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds clear-sighted men and can distort the words of righteous men.
“You must not oppress a foreign resident. You know how it feels to be a foreigner, because you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt.
“You are to sow your land with seed and gather its produce for six years.
But the seventh year you should leave it uncultivated and let it lie fallow, and the poor among your people will eat of it, and what they leave, the wild animals of the field will eat. That is what you should do with your vineyard and your olive grove.
“Six days you are to do your work; but on the seventh day, you are to cease from your labor, in order that your bull and your donkey may rest and the son of your slave girl and the foreign resident may refresh themselves.
“You must be careful to do all that I have said to you, and you must not mention the names of other gods; they should not be heard on your lips.
“Three times a year you are to celebrate a festival to me.
You will observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread. You will eat unleavened bread for seven days, just as I have commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Aʹbib, for at that time you came out of Egypt. No one is to appear before me empty-handed.
Also, you are to observe the Festival of Harvest of the first ripe fruits of your labors, of what you sow in the field; and the Festival of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather in from the field the results of your labors.
Three times a year all your men are to appear before the true Lord, Jehovah.
“You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice with anything leavened. And the sacrifices of fat offered at my festivals should not stay overnight until the morning.
“You are to bring the best of the first ripe fruits of your ground to the house of Jehovah your God. “You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
“I am sending an angel ahead of you to guard you on the way and to bring you into the place that I have prepared.
Pay attention to him, and obey his voice. Do not rebel against him, for he will not pardon your transgressions, because my name is in him.
However, if you strictly obey his voice and do all that I say, I will show hostility to your enemies and oppose those who oppose you.
For my angel will go ahead of you and will bring you to the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, and I will annihilate them.
You must not bow down to their gods or be persuaded to serve them, and you must not imitate their practices. Instead, you must demolish them and smash their sacred pillars.
You must serve Jehovah your God, and he will bless your bread and your water. I will remove sickness from among you.
The women in your land will not suffer a miscarriage or be barren, and I will give you a full life span.
“I will send the fear of me ahead of you, and I will throw into confusion all the people you encounter, and I will cause all your enemies to flee from you in defeat.
I will send the feeling of dejection ahead of you, and it will drive the Hiʹvites, the Caʹnaan·ites, and the Hitʹtites out from before you.
I will not drive them out from before you in one year, so that the land does not become desolate and the wild animals of the field multiply against you.
Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until you become fruitful and take possession of the land.
“I will set your boundary from the Red Sea to the sea of the Phi·lisʹtines and from the wilderness to the River; for I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you will drive them out from before you.
You must not make a covenant with them or their gods.
They should not dwell in your land, so that they may not cause you to sin against me. If you should serve their gods, it would surely become a snare to you.”
Moses later gathered the entire assembly of the Israelites together and said to them: “These are the things that Jehovah has commanded to be done:
Work may be done for six days, but the seventh day will become something holy to you, a sabbath of complete rest to Jehovah. Anybody doing work on it will be put to death.
You must not light a fire in any of your dwelling places on the Sabbath day.”
Moses then said to the entire assembly of the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah has commanded,
‘Take up a contribution for Jehovah from among yourselves. Let everyone with a willing heart bring a contribution for Jehovah: gold, silver, copper,
blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair,
ram skins dyed red, sealskins, acacia wood,
oil for the lamps, balsam for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense,
onyx stones, and other stones for setting in the ephʹod and the breastpiece.
“‘Let all who are skilled among you come and make everything that Jehovah has commanded,
namely, the tabernacle with its tent and its covering, its clasps and its panel frames, its bars, its pillars, and its socket pedestals;
the Ark and its poles, the cover, and the curtain for the screen;
the table and its poles and all its utensils and the showbread;
the lampstand for light and its utensils and its lamps and the oil for lighting;
the altar of incense and its poles; the anointing oil and the perfumed incense; the screen for the tabernacle’s entrance;
the altar of burnt offering and its copper grating, its poles and all its utensils; the basin and its stand;
the hanging curtains of the courtyard, its pillars and its socket pedestals; the screen of the entrance to the courtyard;
the tent pins of the tabernacle and the tent pins of the courtyard and their cords;
the finely woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons for serving as priests.’”
So all the assembly of the Israelites went out from before Moses.
Then everyone whose heart impelled him and everyone whose spirit incited him came and brought their contribution for Jehovah to be used for the tent of meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments.
They kept coming, the men along with the women, each with a willing heart, bringing brooches, earrings, rings, and other jewelry, as well as all sorts of articles of gold. They all presented their offerings of gold to Jehovah.
And all who had blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, fine linen, goat hair, ram skins dyed red, and sealskins brought them.
All those contributing silver and copper brought Jehovah’s contribution, and all who had acacia wood for any part of the work brought it.
All the skilled women spun with their hands, and they brought what they had spun: blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen.
And all the skilled women whose hearts impelled them spun the goat hair.
And the chieftains brought onyx stones and other stones to be set in the ephʹod and the breastpiece,
and the balsam and the oil for lighting and for the anointing oil and for the perfumed incense.
All the men and women whose hearts incited them brought something for the work that Jehovah, through Moses, had commanded to be done; the Israelites brought it as a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
Then Moses said to the Israelites: “See, Jehovah has chosen Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur of the tribe of Judah.
He has filled him with the spirit of God, giving him wisdom, understanding, and knowledge of every sort of craftsmanship
for making artistic designs, for working with gold, silver, and copper,
for cutting and setting stones, and for making all kinds of artistic wood products.
And he has put it into his heart to teach, he and O·hoʹli·ab the son of A·hisʹa·mach of the tribe of Dan.
He has filled them with skill to do all the work of a craftsman, an embroiderer, and a weaver using blue thread, purple wool, scarlet material, and fine linen, and of a loom worker. These men will do every sort of work and prepare every sort of design.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Carve out for yourself two tablets of stone like the first ones, and I will write on the tablets the words that appeared on the first tablets, which you shattered.
Get ready for the morning, as you will go up in the morning to Mount Siʹnai and station yourself before me there on the top of the mountain.
But nobody may go up with you, and nobody else should be seen anywhere on the mountain. Not even the flocks or herds should graze in front of that mountain.”
So Moses carved out two tablets of stone like the first ones and got up early in the morning and went up Mount Siʹnai, just as Jehovah had commanded him, and he took the two tablets of stone in his hand.
Then Jehovah came down in the cloud and stationed himself with him there and declared the name of Jehovah.
Jehovah was passing before him and declaring: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth,
showing loyal love to thousands, pardoning error and transgression and sin, but he will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons and upon grandsons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation.”
Moses hurried to bow low to the earth and prostrate himself.
Then he said: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, O Jehovah, then please, Jehovah, go along with us in our midst, although we are an obstinate people, and forgive our error and our sin, and take us as your own possession.”
In turn he said: “Here I am making a covenant: Before all your people, I will do wonderful things that have never been done in all the earth or among all the nations, and all the people among whom you live will see the work of Jehovah, for it is an awe-inspiring thing that I am doing with you.
“Pay attention to what I am commanding you today. Here I am driving out from before you the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
Be careful that you do not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land to which you are going, or it may prove to be a snare among you.
But you are to pull down their altars, you are to shatter their sacred pillars, and their sacred poles you are to cut down.
You must not bow down to another god, for Jehovah is known for requiring exclusive devotion. Yes, he is a God who requires exclusive devotion.
Be careful not to make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, because when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to their gods, someone will invite you and you will eat from his sacrifice.
Then you will surely take some of their daughters for your sons, and their daughters will prostitute themselves to their gods and cause your sons to prostitute themselves to their gods.
“You must not make gods of cast metal.
“You are to observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread. You will eat unleavened bread, just as I have commanded you; do this for seven days at the appointed time in the month of Aʹbib, because it was in the month of Aʹbib that you came out of Egypt.
“Every firstborn male is mine, including all your livestock, whether the first male bull or sheep.
The firstling of a donkey you are to redeem with a sheep. But if you do not redeem it, then you must break its neck. You are to redeem every firstborn of your sons. No one may appear before me empty-handed.
“Six days you are to work, but on the seventh day you will rest. Even during plowing time and in harvest, you will rest.
“And you will celebrate your Festival of Weeks with the first ripe fruits of the wheat harvest, and the Festival of Ingathering at the turn of the year.
“Three times a year, all your men are to appear before the true Lord, Jehovah, the God of Israel.
For I will drive the nations away from before you, and I will enlarge your territory, and nobody will desire your land while you are going up to see the face of Jehovah your God three times a year.
“You must not offer the blood of my sacrifice along with anything leavened. The sacrifice of the festival of the Passover should not be kept overnight until the morning.
“The best of the first ripe fruits of your soil you are to bring to the house of Jehovah your God. “You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “You are to write down these words, because in accordance with these words, I am making a covenant with you and with Israel.”
And he remained there with Jehovah 40 days and 40 nights. He ate no bread and drank no water. And He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.
Moses then came down from Mount Siʹnai, and the two tablets of the Testimony were in his hand. When he came down from the mountain, Moses did not know that the skin of his face was emitting rays because he had been speaking with God.
When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, they noticed that the skin of his face emitted rays and they were afraid to go near him.
But Moses called to them, so Aaron and all the chieftains of the assembly came to him, and Moses spoke with them.
After that all the Israelites came near to him, and he gave them all the commands that Jehovah had given him on Mount Siʹnai.
When Moses would finish speaking with them, he would put a veil over his face.
But when Moses would go in before Jehovah to speak with him, he would take off the veil until he went out. Then he went out and revealed to the Israelites the commands he had received.
And the Israelites saw that the skin of Moses’ face emitted rays; then Moses put the veil back over his face until he went in to speak with God.
So Jehovah said to Moses: “Now you will see what I will do to Pharʹaoh. A mighty hand will force him to send them away, and a mighty hand will force him to drive them out of his land.”
Then God said to Moses: “I am Jehovah.
And I used to appear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as God Almighty, but with regard to my name Jehovah I did not make myself known to them.
I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Caʹnaan, the land in which they lived as foreigners.
Now I myself have heard the groaning of the people of Israel, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I remember my covenant.
“Therefore, say to the Israelites: ‘I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians and rescue you from their slavery, and I will reclaim you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments.
And I will take you in as my people, and I will be your God, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah your God who is bringing you out from under the burdens of Egypt.
And I will bring you into the land that I swore with an oath to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and I will give it to you as something to possess. I am Jehovah.’”
Moses later gave this message to the Israelites, but they did not listen to Moses because of their discouragement and because of the harsh slavery.
Then Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying:
“Go in and tell Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, that he should send the Israelites away out of his land.”
However, Moses replied to Jehovah: “Look! The Israelites have not listened to me; how will Pharʹaoh ever listen to me, as I speak with difficulty?”
But Jehovah again told Moses and Aaron what commands to give to the Israelites and to Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, in order to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.
These are the heads of the house of their fathers: The sons of Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn, were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi. These are the families of Reuʹben.
The sons of Simʹe·on were Jem·uʹel, Jaʹmin, Oʹhad, Jaʹchin, Zoʹhar, and Shaʹul, the son of a Caʹnaan·ite woman. These are the families of Simʹe·on.
These are the names of the sons of Leʹvi, according to their family descents: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi. The length of Leʹvi’s life was 137 years.
The sons of Gerʹshon were Libʹni and Shimʹe·i, according to their families.
The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el. The length of Koʹhath’s life was 133 years.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi. These were the families of the Levites, according to their family descents.
Now Amʹram took Jochʹe·bed, his father’s sister, as his wife. She bore him Aaron and Moses. The length of Amʹram’s life was 137 years.
The sons of Izʹhar were Korʹah, Neʹpheg, and Zichʹri.
The sons of Uzʹzi·el were Mishʹa·el, El·zaʹphan, and Sithʹri.
Now Aaron took E·liʹshe·ba, Am·minʹa·dab’s daughter, the sister of Nahʹshon, as his wife. She bore him Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.
The sons of Korʹah were Asʹsir, El·kaʹnah, and A·biʹa·saph. These were the families of the Korʹah·ites.
El·e·aʹzar, Aaron’s son, took one of the daughters of Puʹti·el as his wife. She bore him Phinʹe·has. These are the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites, according to their families.
This is the Aaron and Moses to whom Jehovah said: “Bring the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, company by company.”
It was they who spoke to Pharʹaoh, Egypt’s king, to bring the people of Israel out of Egypt. It was this Moses and Aaron.
On that day when Jehovah spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
Jehovah told Moses: “I am Jehovah. Speak to Pharʹaoh, king of Egypt, everything I am speaking to you.”
Then Moses said before Jehovah: “Look! I speak with difficulty, so how will Pharʹaoh ever listen to me?”
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“On the first day of the first month, you are to set up the tabernacle, the tent of meeting.
Place the ark of the Testimony in it, and screen off the Ark with the curtain.
You are to bring the table in and arrange the things that belong on it and bring in the lampstand and light its lamps.
Then put the golden altar for incense before the ark of the Testimony and put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.
“You are to put the altar of burnt offering before the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting,
and place the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it.
Then set up the courtyard around it and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard.
Next you are to take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and sanctify it and all its utensils, so that it will become something holy.
You are to anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils and sanctify the altar, so that it will become a most holy altar.
And anoint the basin and its stand and sanctify it.
“Then bring Aaron and his sons near to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and wash them with water.
And you are to clothe Aaron with the holy garments and anoint him and sanctify him, and he will serve as priest to me.
After that bring his sons near, and clothe them with robes.
You are to anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they will serve as priests to me, and their anointing will serve continually for them as a lasting priesthood during their generations.”
Moses did according to all that Jehovah had commanded him. He did just so.
In the first month, in the second year, on the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set up.
When Moses set up the tabernacle, he put its socket pedestals down, set up the panel frames, put its bars in, and set up its pillars.
He spread out the tent over the tabernacle and placed the covering of the tent over it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
After that he took the Testimony and put it into the Ark and placed the poles on the Ark and put the cover on the Ark.
He brought the Ark into the tabernacle and put the curtain of the screen in place and screened off the ark of the Testimony, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Next he put the table in the tent of meeting on the north side of the tabernacle outside the curtain,
and he arranged the row of bread on it before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
He placed the lampstand in the tent of meeting in front of the table, on the south side of the tabernacle.
He lit the lamps before Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
He next placed the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the curtain,
in order to make perfumed incense smoke on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then he put the screen for the entrance of the tabernacle in place.
He placed the altar of burnt offering at the entrance of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, so that he might offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on it, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
He then placed the basin between the tent of meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing.
Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet at it.
Whenever they went into the tent of meeting or approached the altar, they would wash, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Finally he set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and the altar and put up the screen for the entrance of the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.
And the cloud began to cover the tent of meeting, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle.
Moses was not able to go into the tent of meeting because the cloud remained over it, and Jehovah’s glory filled the tabernacle.
And when the cloud lifted from the tabernacle, the Israelites would break camp during all stages of their journey.
However, if the cloud did not lift up, then they would not break camp until the day it lifted.
For Jehovah’s cloud was over the tabernacle by day, and a fire remained over it by night in the sight of all the house of Israel during all stages of their journey.
“This is what you are to do to sanctify them to serve as priests to me: Take a young bull, two unblemished rams,
unleavened bread, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil. You are to make them with fine wheat flour
and put them in a basket and present them in the basket, along with the bull and the two rams.
“You will present Aaron and his sons at the entrance of the tent of meeting and wash them with water.
Then you are to take the garments and clothe Aaron with the robe, the sleeveless coat of the ephʹod, the ephʹod, and the breastpiece, and you are to tie the woven belt of the ephʹod securely around his waist.
You will put the turban on his head and put the holy sign of dedication on the turban;
and take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him.
“Then bring his sons forward and clothe them with the robes
and wrap the sashes around them, Aaron as well as his sons, and put on their headgear; and the priesthood will become theirs as a permanent statute. This is how you should install Aaron and his sons to serve as priests.
“You are now to present the bull before the tent of meeting, and Aaron and his sons will lay their hands on the bull’s head.
Slaughter the bull before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Take some of the bull’s blood on your finger and put it on the horns of the altar, and pour out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
Then take all the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage on the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and burn them so that they smoke on the altar.
But the bull’s flesh and its skin and its dung, you will burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin offering.
“Then take the one ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head.
Slaughter the ram and take its blood and sprinkle it on all sides of the altar.
Cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its intestines and its shanks, and arrange the pieces together with its head.
You must burn the entire ram, making it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering to Jehovah, a pleasing aroma. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
“Next you are to take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on the ram’s head.
Slaughter the ram and take some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on his sons’ right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and the big toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar.
Then take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil and spatter it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and his sons’ garments, so that he and his garments and his sons and their garments may be holy.
“Then take from the ram the fat, the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and the right leg, for it is a ram of installation.
Take also a round loaf of bread and a ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread and a wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Jehovah.
You must place them all in the hands of Aaron and in the hands of his sons, and you are to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
Then you will take them out of their hands and burn them on the altar, on top of the burnt offering, as a pleasing aroma before Jehovah. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
“Then take the breast of the ram of installation, which is offered in behalf of Aaron, and wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, and it will become your portion.
You are to sanctify the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion that was waved and that was taken from the ram of installation, from what was offered for Aaron and for his sons.
It is to become Aaron’s and his sons’ by a permanent regulation to be carried out by the Israelites, for it is a sacred portion, and it will become a sacred portion to be given by the Israelites. It is their sacred portion for Jehovah from their communion sacrifices.
“The holy garments that belong to Aaron will be used by his sons after him when they are anointed and installed as priests.
The priest from among his sons who succeeds him and who comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place will wear them for seven days.
“You will take the ram of installation and boil its flesh in a holy place.
Aaron and his sons will eat the flesh of the ram and the bread that is in the basket at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
They are to eat the things with which atonement was made to install them as priests and to sanctify them. But an unauthorized person may not eat them, for they are something holy.
If any of the flesh of the installation sacrifice and of the bread is left over until the morning, then you must burn what is left with fire. It must not be eaten, for it is something holy.
“You are to do this way to Aaron and his sons, according to all that I have commanded you. You will take seven days to install them as priests.
You will offer the bull of the sin offering daily for an atonement, and you are to purify the altar from sin by making atonement for it, and you must anoint it to sanctify it.
You will take seven days to make atonement for the altar, and you must sanctify it so that it may become a most holy altar. Anyone who touches the altar is to be holy.
“This is what you will offer on the altar: two one-year-old rams each day, continually.
Offer the one young ram in the morning and the other ram at twilight.
A tenth part of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil, and a drink offering of a fourth of a hin of wine, will go for the first young ram.
You will offer the second young ram at twilight, along with the same grain and drink offerings as in the morning. You will render it as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
It is to be a regular burnt offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will present myself to you to speak to you there.
“I will present myself there to the Israelites, and it will be sanctified by my glory.
I will sanctify the tent of meeting and the altar, and I will sanctify Aaron and his sons so that they may serve as priests to me.
I will reside among the people of Israel, and I will be their God.
And they will certainly know that I am Jehovah their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I may reside among them. I am Jehovah their God.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go in to Pharʹaoh and say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
If you keep refusing to send them away, I will plague all your territory with frogs.
And the Nile River will swarm with frogs, and they will come up and enter into your house, into your bedroom, on your bed, into the houses of your servants and on your people, into your ovens, and into your kneading troughs.
On you, on your people, and on all your servants, the frogs will come up.”’”
Jehovah later said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the rivers, the Nile canals, and the marshes, and make the frogs come up over the land of Egypt.’”
So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs began to come up and to cover the land of Egypt.
However, the magic-practicing priests did the same thing by their secret arts, and they too made the frogs come up over the land of Egypt.
Pharʹaoh then called Moses and Aaron and said: “Plead with Jehovah to remove the frogs from me and my people, as I want to send the people away so that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.”
Then Moses said to Pharʹaoh: “I leave to you the honor of telling me when I should plead to have the frogs removed from you, your servants, your people, and your houses. Only in the Nile River will they be left.”
To this he said: “Tomorrow.” So he said: “It will be according to your word so that you may know that there is no one else like Jehovah our God.
The frogs will depart from you, your houses, your servants, and your people. They will be left only in the Nile.”
So Moses and Aaron went out from Pharʹaoh, and Moses pleaded with Jehovah about the frogs that He had brought upon Pharʹaoh.
Then Jehovah did as Moses asked, and the frogs began to die in the houses, the courtyards, and the fields.
They were piling them up in countless heaps, and the land began to stink.
When Pharʹaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and he refused to listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your rod and strike the dust of the earth, and it must become gnats in all the land of Egypt.’”
And they did this. Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod and struck the dust of the earth, and the gnats came on man and beast. All the dust of the earth became gnats in all the land of Egypt.
The magic-practicing priests tried to do the same and produce gnats by their secret arts, but they could not. And the gnats came on man and beast.
So the magic-practicing priests said to Pharʹaoh: “It is the finger of God!” But Pharʹaoh’s heart continued to be obstinate, and he did not listen to them, just as Jehovah had said.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Get up early in the morning and station yourself in front of Pharʹaoh. Look! He is coming out to the water! And you must say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah has said: “Send my people away so that they may serve me.
But if you do not send my people away, I will send on you, your servants, and your people and into your houses the gadfly; and the houses of Egypt will be full of gadflies, and they will even cover the ground they stand on.
On that day I will certainly set apart the land of Goʹshen, where my people are dwelling. No gadflies will exist there, and by this you will know that I, Jehovah, am here in the land.
And I will make a distinction between my people and your people. Tomorrow this sign will take place.”’”
And Jehovah did so, and heavy swarms of gadflies began to invade the house of Pharʹaoh and the houses of his servants and all the land of Egypt. The land was ruined by the gadflies.
Finally, Pharʹaoh called Moses and Aaron and said: “Go, sacrifice to your God in the land.”
But Moses said: “It is not proper to do so, because what we would sacrifice to Jehovah our God would be detestable to the Egyptians. If we would make a sacrifice that was detestable to the Egyptians right before their eyes, would they not stone us?
We will make a three-day journey into the wilderness, and there we will sacrifice to Jehovah our God, just as he has said to us.”
Pharʹaoh now said: “I will send you away to sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness. Only, you must not go so far away. Plead in my behalf.”
Then Moses said: “Now I am going away from you, and I will plead with Jehovah, and the gadflies will depart from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people tomorrow. But Pharʹaoh must stop trifling with us by refusing to send the people away to sacrifice to Jehovah.”
Moses then went out from Pharʹaoh and pleaded with Jehovah.
So Jehovah did according to Moses’ word, and the gadflies departed from Pharʹaoh, his servants, and his people. Not one was left.
However, Pharʹaoh again hardened his heart and did not send the people away.
Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
“Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah has commanded:
“‘“If any man of the house of Israel slaughters a bull or a young ram or a goat in the camp or if he slaughters it outside the camp,
instead of bringing it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to present it as an offering to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, bloodguilt will be counted to that man. He has shed blood, and that man must be cut off from among his people.
This is so that the Israelites will bring the sacrifices, which they now sacrifice in the open field, to Jehovah, to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest. They are to sacrifice these as communion sacrifices to Jehovah.
And the priest will sprinkle the blood on Jehovah’s altar at the entrance of the tent of meeting and make the fat smoke as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
So they should no longer offer sacrifices to the goatlike demons, with which they are prostituting themselves. This will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.”’
“You should say to them, ‘Any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst who offers up a burnt offering or a sacrifice
and does not bring it to the entrance of the tent of meeting to offer it to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.
“‘If any man of the house of Israel or any foreigner who is residing in your midst eats any sort of blood, I will certainly set my face against the one who is eating the blood, and I will cut him off from among his people.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I myself have given it on the altar for you to make atonement for yourselves, because it is the blood that makes atonement by means of the life in it.
That is why I have said to the Israelites: “None of you should eat blood, and no foreigner who is residing in your midst should eat blood.”
“‘If one of the Israelites or some foreigner who is residing in your midst is hunting and catches a wild animal or a bird that may be eaten, he must pour its blood out and cover it with dust.
For the life of every sort of flesh is its blood, because the life is in it. Consequently, I said to the Israelites: “You must not eat the blood of any sort of flesh because the life of every sort of flesh is its blood. Anyone eating it will be cut off.”
If anyone, whether a native or a foreigner, eats an animal found dead or one torn by a wild animal, he must then wash his garments and bathe in water and be unclean until the evening; then he will be clean.
But if he does not wash them and does not bathe himself, he will answer for his error.’”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the entire assembly of the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should be holy, because I, Jehovah your God, am holy.
“‘Each of you should respect his mother and his father, and you should keep my sabbaths. I am Jehovah your God.
Do not turn to worthless gods or make for yourselves gods of cast metal. I am Jehovah your God.
“‘Now if you offer a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it in such a way that you gain approval for yourselves.
It should be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day, but what is left over until the third day should be burned in the fire.
If, though, any of it is eaten on the third day, it is an offensive thing that will not be accepted with approval.
The one eating it will answer for his error because he has profaned a holy thing of Jehovah, and that person must be cut off from his people.
“‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not reap the edge of your field completely and you must not pick up the gleaning of your harvest.
Also, you must not gather the leftovers of your vineyard or pick up the scattered grapes of your vineyard. You should leave them for the poor and the foreign resident. I am Jehovah your God.
“‘You must not steal, you must not deceive, and you must not deal falsely with one another.
You must not swear to a lie in my name and thus profane the name of your God. I am Jehovah.
You must not defraud your fellow man, and you must not rob. You should not withhold the wages of a hired worker all night until morning.
“‘You must not curse a deaf man or put an obstacle before a blind man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.
“‘You must not be unjust in your judgment. You must not show partiality to the poor or show preference to the rich. With justice you should judge your fellow man.
“‘You must not go around spreading slander among your people. You must not stand up against the life of your fellow man. I am Jehovah.
“‘You must not hate your brother in your heart. You should by all means reprove your fellow man, so that you will not bear sin along with him.
“‘You must not take vengeance nor hold a grudge against the sons of your people, and you must love your fellow man as yourself. I am Jehovah.
“‘You should keep my statutes: You must not interbreed two sorts of your domestic animals. You must not sow your field with two sorts of seed, and you must not wear a garment made with two sorts of thread mixed together.
“‘Now if a man lies down with a woman and has intercourse with her and she is a servant who is designated for another man, but she has not been redeemed or given her freedom, there should be a punishment. However, they should not be put to death, for she was not yet set free.
He should bring his guilt offering to Jehovah to the entrance of the tent of meeting, a ram of guilt offering.
The priest will make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before Jehovah for the sin that he committed, and he will be forgiven for the sin that he committed.
“‘When you come into the land and you plant any tree for food, you must consider its fruitage impure and forbidden. For three years it will be forbidden to you. It must not be eaten.
But in the fourth year, all its fruit will be holy for rejoicing before Jehovah.
Then in the fifth year, you may eat its fruit in order to add its produce to your harvest. I am Jehovah your God.
“‘You must eat nothing containing blood. “‘You must not look for omens or practice magic.
“‘You must not shave the hair on the side of your head or disfigure the edges of your beard.
“‘You must not make cuts in your flesh for a dead person, and you must not make tattoo markings on yourselves. I am Jehovah.
“‘Do not dishonor your daughter by making her a prostitute, so that the land may not commit prostitution and be filled with loose morals.
“‘You must keep my sabbaths, and you must show reverence for my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
“‘Do not turn to the spirit mediums, and do not consult fortune-tellers so as to become unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.
“‘Before gray hair you should rise up, and you must show honor to an older man, and you must be in fear of your God. I am Jehovah.
“‘If a foreigner resides with you in your land, you must not mistreat him.
The foreigner who resides with you should become to you like a native among you; and you must love him as yourself, for you were foreign residents in the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
“‘You must not use dishonest standards in measuring length, weight, or volume.
You should use accurate scales, accurate weights, an accurate dry measure, and an accurate liquid measure. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
So you must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions, and you must follow them. I am Jehovah.’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘These are the living creatures of the earth that you may eat:
Every animal that has a split hoof and a cleft in its hooves and that chews the cud may be eaten.
“‘But you must not eat these animals that chew the cud or have a split hoof: the camel, which chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
Also the rock badger, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
Also the hare, because it chews the cud but does not have a split hoof. It is unclean for you.
Also the pig, because it has a split hoof and a cleft in the hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you.
You must not eat any of their flesh or touch their dead body. They are unclean for you.
“‘This is what you may eat of everything in the waters: Anything in the waters that has fins and scales, whether in the seas or in the rivers, it you may eat.
But anything in the seas and in the rivers that has no fins and scales, among all the swarming creatures and of every other living creature that is in the waters, it is a loathsome thing for you.
Yes, they should be loathsome to you, and you must not eat any of their flesh and you must loathe their carcasses.
Everything in the waters that has no fins and scales is a loathsome thing to you.
“‘These are the flying creatures that you are to loathe; they should not be eaten, for they are loathsome: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture,
the red kite and every kind of black kite,
every kind of raven,
the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon,
the little owl, the cormorant, the long-eared owl,
the swan, the pelican, the vulture,
the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
Every winged swarming creature that goes on all fours is something loathsome to you.
“‘Of the winged swarming creatures that move on all fours, you may eat only those that have jointed legs above their feet for leaping on the ground.
Of these you may eat: various kinds of migratory locusts, other edible locusts, crickets, and grasshoppers.
All other winged swarming creatures with four legs are something loathsome to you.
By these you would make yourselves unclean. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
Anyone carrying any of their dead bodies should wash his garments; he will be unclean until the evening.
“‘Any animal that has a split hoof but does not have a cleft and does not chew its cud is unclean to you. Everyone touching them will be unclean.
Every living creature that walks on paws among the creatures that walk on all fours is unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
The one who carries their dead bodies should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. They are unclean to you.
“‘These are the swarming creatures of the earth that are unclean to you: the mole rat, the mouse, every kind of lizard,
the gecko, the large lizard, the newt, the sand lizard, and the chameleon.
These swarming creatures are unclean to you. Everyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean until the evening.
“‘Now anything they fall on when they die will be unclean, whether a wooden utensil, a garment, a skin, or a piece of sackcloth. Any utensil that is used should be immersed in water, and it will be unclean until the evening; then it will be clean.
If they fall into an earthenware vessel, you are to smash it, and anything that was in it will be unclean.
Any kind of food that comes in contact with water from such a vessel will be unclean, and any drinkable liquid in such a vessel will be unclean.
Anything their dead bodies fall on will be unclean. Whether oven or small stove, it should be broken into pieces. They are unclean, and they will remain unclean to you.
Only a spring and a cistern for storing water will continue clean, but anyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean.
If their dead bodies fall on a plant seed that is to be sown, it is clean.
But if water is put on a seed and part of their dead body falls on it, the seed is unclean to you.
“‘Now if an animal that you use for food dies, whoever touches its dead body will be unclean until the evening.
Whoever eats any of its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening. Whoever carries off its dead body should wash his garments, and he will be unclean until the evening.
Every swarming creature of the earth is something loathsome. It must not be eaten.
You must not eat any creature that crawls on its belly, any creature that goes on all fours, or any of earth’s swarming creatures with a great number of legs, for they are something loathsome.
Do not make yourselves loathsome by means of any swarming creature, and do not defile yourselves and become unclean by them.
For I am Jehovah your God, and you must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am holy. So you must not make yourselves unclean by any swarming creature that moves on the earth.
For I am Jehovah, who is leading you up out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you, and you must be holy, because I am holy.
“‘This is the law about the animals, the flying creatures, every living creature that moves through the waters, and concerning every creature that swarms on the earth,
in order to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean and between the living creatures that may be eaten and those that may not be eaten.’”
“‘You must not make worthless gods for yourselves, and you must not set up a carved image or a sacred pillar for yourselves, and you must not put a stone figure in your land in order to bow down toward it; for I am Jehovah your God.
You should keep my sabbaths and show reverence for my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
“‘If you continue walking in my statutes and keeping my commandments and you carry them out,
I will give you showers of rain at their proper time, and the land will yield its produce, and the trees of the field will give their fruit.
Your threshing season will extend until your grape harvest, and the grape harvest will extend until the sowing season; and you will eat your bread to satisfaction and dwell in security in your land.
I will put peace in the land, and you will lie down with no one making you afraid; and I will rid the land of vicious wild animals, and a sword of war will not pass through your land.
You will certainly pursue your enemies, and they will fall before you by the sword.
Five of you will pursue 100, and 100 of you will pursue 10,000, and your enemies will fall before you by the sword.
“‘I will direct my favor to you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will keep my covenant with you.
While you are still eating the old produce of the preceding year, you will need to clear out the old to make way for the new.
And I will place my tabernacle in your midst, and I will not reject you.
I will walk among you and be your God, and you for your part will be my people.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be their slaves no longer, and I broke the bars of your yoke and made you walk with heads held high.
“‘However, if you will not listen to me or keep all these commandments,
and if you reject my statutes, and if you abhor my judicial decisions so that you do not keep all my commandments, and you violate my covenant,
I, for my part, will do the following to you: I will punish you with distress, with tuberculosis and burning fever, making your eyes fail and your life waste away. You will sow your seed simply for nothing, for your enemies will eat it.
I will set my face against you, and you will be defeated by your enemies; and those who hate you will tread on you, and you will flee when no one is pursuing you.
“‘If even this does not make you listen to me, I will have to chastise you seven times as much for your sins.
I will break your stubborn pride and make your heavens like iron and your earth like copper.
You will exhaust your strength for nothing, as your land will not yield its produce, and the trees of the land will not produce fruit.
“‘But if you keep walking in opposition to me and refuse to listen to me, I will then have to strike you seven times as much, according to your sins.
I will send the wild animals of the field among you, and they will bereave you of children and annihilate your domestic animals and reduce your numbers, and your roads will be deserted.
“‘If in spite of these things you do not accept my correction and you insist on walking in opposition to me,
then I too will walk in opposition to you, and I myself will strike you seven times for your sins.
I will bring an avenging sword upon you for breaking the covenant. If you gather yourselves into your cities, I will send disease into your midst, and you will be given into the hand of an enemy.
When I destroy your supply of bread, ten women will be able to bake your bread in only one oven and then ration your bread by weight; and you will eat but you will not be satisfied.
“‘If in spite of this you will not listen to me and you insist on walking in opposition to me,
I will intensify my opposition to you, and I myself will have to chastise you seven times for your sins.
So you will have to eat the flesh of your sons, and you will eat the flesh of your daughters.
I will annihilate your sacred high places and cut down your incense stands and pile your carcasses on the carcasses of your disgusting idols, and I will turn away from you in disgust.
I will give your cities to the sword and make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will not smell the pleasing aromas of your sacrifices.
I myself will make the land desolate, and your enemies who are dwelling in it will stare in amazement over it.
And I will scatter you among the nations, and I will unsheathe a sword after you; and your land will be made desolate, and your cities will be devastated.
“‘At that time the land will pay off its sabbaths all the days it lies desolate, while you are in the land of your enemies. At that time the land will rest, as it must repay its sabbaths.
All the days it lies desolate it will rest, because it did not rest during your sabbaths when you were dwelling on it.
“‘As for those who survive, I will fill their hearts with despair in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a blowing leaf will cause them to flee, and they will flee like someone running from the sword and fall without anyone pursuing them.
They will stumble over one another like those running from a sword, though no one is pursuing them. You will not be able to resist your enemies.
You will perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies will consume you.
Those of you who remain will be left to rot in the lands of your enemies because of your error. Yes, they will rot away because of the errors of their fathers.
Then they will confess their own error and the error and unfaithfulness of their fathers and admit that they behaved unfaithfully by walking in opposition to me.
Then I also walked in opposition to them by bringing them into the land of their enemies. “‘Perhaps then their uncircumcised heart will be humbled, and then they will pay off their error.
And I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and my covenant with Isaac, and I will remember my covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land.
While the land was abandoned by them, it was paying off its sabbaths and lying desolate without them, and they were paying for their error, because they rejected my judicial decisions and they abhorred my statutes.
But despite all of this, while they are in the land of their enemies, I will never completely reject them nor cast them away to the point of exterminating them, which would violate my covenant with them, for I am Jehovah their God.
For their sakes I will remember the covenant with their ancestors whom I brought out of the land of Egypt under the eyes of the nations, in order to prove myself their God. I am Jehovah.’”
These are the regulations, the judicial decisions, and the laws that Jehovah established between himself and the Israelites on Mount Siʹnai through Moses.
And Jehovah called Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If any one of you would present an offering to Jehovah from the domestic animals, you should present your offering from the herd or from the flock.
“‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he should present a sound male animal. He should present it of his own free will before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
He is to lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it will be accepted in his behalf to make atonement for him.
“‘Then the young bull must be slaughtered before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will present the blood and sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
The burnt offering should be skinned and cut into pieces.
The sons of Aaron, the priests, are to put fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire.
The sons of Aaron, the priests, will arrange the pieces of the offering with the head and the suet over the wood that is on the fire on the altar.
Its intestines and its shanks will be washed with water, and the priest is to make all of it smoke on the altar as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘If his offering for a burnt offering is from the flock, from the young rams or the goats, he should present a sound male.
It is to be slaughtered at the north side of the altar before Jehovah, and the sons of Aaron, the priests, will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
He will cut it up into pieces, and with its head and its suet, the priest will arrange them over the wood on the fire on the altar.
He will wash the intestines and the shanks with water, and the priest will present all of it and make it smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘However, if he offers birds as a burnt offering to Jehovah, he will present his offering from the turtledoves or the young pigeons.
The priest will present it at the altar and nip off its head and make it smoke on the altar, but its blood should be drained out on the side of the altar.
He should remove its crop and its feathers and throw them beside the altar, to the east, to the place for the ashes.
He will split it at its wings without dividing it into two parts. Then the priest will make it smoke on the altar over the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘This is the law of the guilt offering: It is something most holy.
They will slaughter the guilt offering in the place where they slaughter the burnt offerings, and its blood should be sprinkled on all sides of the altar.
He will present all its fat, including the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines,
and the two kidneys with their fat that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
The priest will make them smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a guilt offering.
Every male among the priests will eat it, and it should be eaten in a holy place. It is something most holy.
The law regarding the sin offering applies to the guilt offering; it belongs to the priest who makes atonement with it.
“‘When the priest presents the burnt offering for someone, the skin of the burnt offering that was presented to the priest will become his.
“‘Every grain offering that is baked in the oven or prepared in the pan or on the griddle belongs to the priest who presents it. It will become his.
But every grain offering that is mixed with oil or that is dry will be for all of Aaron’s sons; each will have an equal share.
“‘Now this is the law of the communion sacrifice that one may present to Jehovah:
If he presents it as an expression of thanksgiving, he will present along with the thanksgiving sacrifice unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and ring-shaped loaves made with fine flour, well-mixed and blended with oil.
He will present his offering along with ring-shaped loaves of leavened bread and the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices.
He is to present from it one of each offering as a sacred portion to Jehovah; it will belong to the priest who sprinkles the blood of the communion sacrifices.
The flesh of the thanksgiving sacrifice of his communion sacrifices is to be eaten on the day he offers it. He must not save any of it until morning.
“‘If the sacrifice of his offering is a vow or a voluntary offering, it is to be eaten on the day he presents his sacrifice, and what is left of it may also be eaten on the next day.
But whatever is left of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day is to be burned with fire.
However, if any of the flesh of his communion sacrifice is eaten on the third day, the one presenting it will not be accepted with approval. It will not be credited to him; it is an offensive thing, and the person who eats some of it will answer for his error.
Flesh that touches anything unclean is not to be eaten. It is to be burned with fire. Everyone who is clean may eat the clean flesh.
“‘But any person who is unclean and eats the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people.
If someone touches anything unclean, whether the uncleanness of a man or an unclean animal or any unclean disgusting thing, and eats some of the flesh of the communion sacrifice, which is for Jehovah, that person must be cut off from his people.’”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘You must not eat any fat of a bull or a young ram or a goat.
The fat of an animal found dead and the fat of an animal killed by another animal may be used for any other purpose, but you must never eat it.
For whoever eats fat from an animal that he presents as an offering made by fire to Jehovah must be cut off from his people.
“‘You must not eat any blood in any of your dwelling places, whether that of birds or that of animals.
Anyone who eats any blood must be cut off from his people.’”
Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘Whoever presents his communion sacrifice to Jehovah will bring part of the offering from his communion sacrifice to Jehovah.
He will bring in his own hands the fat along with the breast as an offering made by fire to Jehovah, and he will wave it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
The priest will make the fat smoke on the altar, but the breast will belong to Aaron and his sons.
“‘You will give the right leg as a sacred portion to the priest from your communion sacrifices.
The son of Aaron who presents the blood of the communion sacrifices and the fat will have the right leg as his portion.
For I take the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites, and I give them to Aaron the priest and his sons as a lasting regulation for the Israelites.
“‘This was the portion from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire to be set aside for the priests, for Aaron and his sons, on the day he presented them to serve as priests to Jehovah.
Jehovah commanded to give them this portion from the Israelites on the day he anointed them. It is a permanent statute for their generations.’”
This is the law concerning the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the installation sacrifice, and the communion sacrifice,
just as Jehovah commanded Moses on Mount Siʹnai in the day he commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to Jehovah in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses on Mount Siʹnai, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you, then the land will observe a sabbath to Jehovah.
Six years you should sow your field with seed, and six years you should prune your vineyard, and you will gather the land’s produce.
But in the seventh year, there should be a sabbath of complete rest for the land, a sabbath to Jehovah. You should not sow your field with seed or prune your vineyard.
You must not reap what grows on its own from the grain left after the harvest, and the grapes of your unpruned vine you must not gather. There should be a year of complete rest for the land.
However, you may eat the food that grows in the land during its sabbath; you, your male and female slaves, your hired worker, and the foreign settlers who are residing with you may eat it,
as well as the domestic and the wild animals in your land. Everything the land produces may be eaten.
“‘You will count off seven sabbath years, seven times seven years, and the days of the seven sabbath years will amount to 49 years.
You will then sound the horn loudly in the seventh month, on the tenth of the month; on the Day of Atonement, you should cause the sound of the horn to be heard in all your land.
You must sanctify the 50th year and proclaim liberty in the land to all its inhabitants. It will become a Jubilee for you, and each of you will return to his property and each of you should return to his family.
A Jubilee is what that 50th year will become for you. You will not sow seed or reap what grew on its own from leftover grain nor gather the grapes of unpruned vines.
For it is a Jubilee. It is to be holy to you. You may eat only what the land produces by itself.
“‘In this year of the Jubilee, each of you should return to his property.
If you sell anything to your fellow man or if you buy from him, do not exploit one another.
You should buy from your fellow man, taking into account the number of the years after the Jubilee, and he should sell to you according to the remaining years for crops.
If there are many years remaining, he may increase its purchase price, and when there are few years left, he should reduce its purchase price, because he is selling you the number of crops to be produced.
No one among you should exploit his fellow man, and you must be in fear of your God, for I am Jehovah your God.
By your carrying out my statutes and keeping my judicial decisions, you will dwell in security in the land.
The land will give its fruitage, and you will eat to satisfaction and dwell there in security.
“‘But if you should say: “What will we eat in the seventh year if we may not sow seed or gather our crops?”
I will command my blessing for you in the sixth year, and the land will yield a crop sufficient for three years.
Then you will sow seed in the eighth year and eat from the old crop until the ninth year. Until its crop arrives, you will eat from the old.
“‘The land should not be sold on a permanent basis, because the land is mine. For you are foreign residents and settlers from my standpoint.
Throughout the land of your possession, you should grant the right of buying back the land.
“‘If your brother becomes poor and has to sell some of his property, a repurchaser who is closely related to him must come and buy back what his brother sold.
If anyone has no repurchaser but he becomes prosperous and finds the means to repurchase it,
he should calculate its value for the years since he sold it and refund the difference to the man whom he sold it to. Then he may return to his property.
“‘But if he does not find the means to get it back from him, what he sold will remain with the purchaser until the Jubilee year; and it will revert to him in the Jubilee, and he will return to his property.
“‘Now if a man should sell a home in a walled city, his right of repurchase will also continue until the end of the year from the time of his completing the sale; his right of repurchase will be valid a whole year.
But if it is not bought back by the end of one full year, the house within the walled city will become the permanent property of its purchaser throughout his generations. It should not be released in the Jubilee.
However, the houses of settlements with no surrounding wall should be considered to be part of the field of the countryside. The right of repurchase should continue for it, and it should be released in the Jubilee.
“‘As for the houses of the Levites within their cities, the Levites will have the permanent right to repurchase them.
When the property of the Levites is not bought back, the house sold in the city belonging to them will also be released in the Jubilee, because the houses of the cities of the Levites are their property among the Israelites.
Moreover, the field of pasture ground surrounding their cities may not be sold, for it is their permanent possession.
“‘If your brother who is nearby becomes poor and cannot support himself, you must sustain him as you would a foreign resident and a settler, so that he may keep alive with you.
Do not take interest or make a profit from him. You must be in fear of your God, and your brother will keep alive with you.
You must not lend him your money on interest or give out your food for profit.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Caʹnaan, to prove myself your God.
“‘If your brother who lives nearby becomes poor and he has to sell himself to you, you must not force him to do slave labor.
He should be treated like a hired worker, like a settler. He should serve with you until the Jubilee year.
Then he will leave you, he and his children with him, and return to his family. He should return to the property of his forefathers.
For they are my slaves whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. They should not sell themselves the way a slave is sold.
You must not treat him cruelly, and you must be in fear of your God.
Your male and female slaves are to come from the nations around you, from them you may buy a male or a female slave.
Also from the sons of the foreign settlers who are residing with you, from them and from their families that are born to them in your land you may buy slaves, and they will become your possession.
You may pass them on as an inheritance to your sons after you to inherit as a permanent possession. You may use them as workers, but you must not subject your Israelite brothers to cruel treatment.
“‘But if a foreign resident or a settler among you becomes wealthy and your brother has become poor alongside him and must sell himself to the foreign resident or the settler who lives among you, or to a member of the family of the foreign resident,
he will continue to have the right of repurchase after he has sold himself. One of his brothers may buy him back,
or his uncle or the son of his uncle may buy him back, or any close relative, one of his family, may buy him back. “‘Or if he himself has become wealthy, he may also buy himself back.
He should calculate with his purchaser the time from the year he sold himself to him until the Jubilee year, and the money of his sale will correspond to the number of years. His workdays during that time will be assessed at the rate of a hired worker.
If there are many years remaining, he should pay his repurchase price in proportion to the years that are left.
But if only a few years remain until the Jubilee year, he should then calculate for himself and pay his repurchase price in proportion to the years remaining.
He should continue to serve him year by year as a hired worker; and you should see to it that he does not treat him cruelly.
However, if he cannot buy himself back on these terms, he will then go free in the year of Jubilee, he and his children with him.
“‘For the Israelites are my own slaves. They are my slaves whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“If a man develops on his skin a swelling, a scab, or a blotch and it could become the disease of leprosy on his skin, he must then be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons, the priests.
The priest will examine the infection on his skin. When the hair in the infection has turned white and the appearance of the infection is deeper than the skin, it is the disease of leprosy. The priest will examine it and declare him unclean.
But if the blotch on his skin is white and its appearance is not deeper than the skin and the hair has not turned white, the priest will then quarantine the infected person for seven days.
The priest will then examine him on the seventh day, and if it appears that the infection has stopped and has not spread on the skin, the priest will quarantine him for another seven days.
“The priest should examine him again on the seventh day, and if the infection has faded and has not spread in the skin, the priest will declare him clean; it was only a scab. The man will then wash his garments and be clean.
But if the scab has definitely spread on the skin after he appears before the priest to establish his purification, he will then appear again before the priest.
The priest will examine it, and if the scab has spread in the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is leprosy.
“If the disease of leprosy develops in a man, he must then be brought to the priest,
and the priest will examine him. If there is a white swelling on the skin and it has turned the hair white and there is an open sore in the swelling,
it is chronic leprosy on his skin, and the priest will declare him unclean. He should not quarantine him, for he is unclean.
Now if the leprosy breaks out all over the skin and the leprosy covers the person with the disease from head to foot, as far as the priest can see,
and the priest has examined him and sees that the leprosy has covered all his skin, he will then declare the infected person clean. All of it has turned white, and he is clean.
But whenever an open sore appears in it, he will be unclean.
When the priest sees the open sore, he will declare him unclean. The open sore is unclean. It is leprosy.
But if the open sore again turns white, he will then come to the priest.
The priest will examine him, and if the infection has turned white, the priest will then declare the infected person clean. He is clean.
“If a person develops a boil on his skin and it heals,
but in the place of the boil a white swelling or a reddish-white blotch has developed, he must then show himself to the priest.
The priest will examine it, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and its hair has turned white, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy that has broken out in the boil.
But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in it and it is not deeper than the skin and appears faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days.
And if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is a disease.
But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread, it is only the inflammation from the boil, and the priest will declare him clean.
“Or if someone has a scar from the fire and the raw flesh of the scar becomes a reddish-white blotch or a white one,
the priest will then examine it. If the hair in the blotch has turned white and it appears to be deeper than the skin, it is leprosy that has broken out in the scar, and the priest will declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy.
But if the priest examines it and sees that there is no white hair in the blotch and it is not deeper than the skin and it is faded, the priest will then quarantine him for seven days.
The priest will examine him on the seventh day, and if it has clearly spread on the skin, the priest will then declare him unclean. It is the disease of leprosy.
But if the blotch stays in one place and has not spread over the skin and it is faded, it is only a swelling of the scar, and the priest will declare him clean, because it is an inflammation of the scar.
“When a man or a woman develops an infection on the head or on the chin,
the priest will then examine the infection. If it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair is yellow and thin, the priest will then declare such one unclean; it is an infection of the scalp or the beard. It is leprosy of the head or of the chin.
But if the priest sees that the infection does not appear to be deeper than the skin and there is no black hair in it, the priest should quarantine the infected person for seven days.
The priest will examine the infection on the seventh day, and if the infected area has not spread and no yellow hair has developed in it and the appearance of the infected area is not deeper than the skin,
the person should have himself shaved, but he will not have the infected area shaved. Then the priest will quarantine the infected person for seven days.
“The priest will again examine the infected area on the seventh day, and if the infection of the scalp and beard has not spread on the skin and it does not appear deeper than the skin, the priest must then declare him clean, and he should wash his garments and be clean.
But if the infection clearly spreads on the skin after his purification,
the priest will examine him, and if the infection has spread on the skin, the priest does not need to look for yellow hair; that person is unclean.
But if the examination shows that the infection has not spread and black hair has grown on it, the infection has been healed. He is clean, and the priest will declare him clean.
“If a man or a woman develops blotches on the skin and the blotches are white,
the priest will examine them. If the skin blotches are faded white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin. That person is clean.
“If a man loses the hair of his head and becomes bald, he is clean.
If he loses the hair on the front of his head and becomes bald there, he is clean.
But if a reddish-white sore develops on the bald part of his scalp or on his forehead, it is leprosy breaking out on his scalp or on his forehead.
The priest will examine him, and if the swelling from the infection is reddish-white on the bald spot on top of his head or on his forehead and it looks like leprosy on his skin,
he is a leper. He is unclean, and the priest should declare him unclean because of the disease on his head.
As for the leper who has the disease, his garments should be torn and his head should be left ungroomed and he should cover over his mustache and call out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’
He will be unclean the whole time that he has the disease. Since he is unclean, he should live in isolation. His dwelling place will be outside the camp.
“If the disease of leprosy contaminates a garment, whether a woolen or a linen garment,
either in the warp or in the woof of the linen or of the wool, or in a skin or in anything made of skin,
and the yellowish-green or reddish stain from the disease contaminates the garment, a skin, the warp, the woof, or any article of skin, it is a contamination from leprosy, and it should be shown to the priest.
The priest will examine the disease, and he must quarantine the disease for seven days.
When he examines the disease on the seventh day and sees that it has spread in the garment, in the warp, in the woof, or in the skin (regardless of what the skin is used for), the disease is malignant leprosy, and it is unclean.
He should burn the garment or the warp or the woof in the wool or in the linen or any article of skin in which the disease has developed, for it is malignant leprosy. It should be burned in the fire.
“But if the priest examines it and the disease has not spread in the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin,
the priest will then command that they should wash the contaminated item, and he will quarantine it for another seven days.
The priest will then examine the contaminated item after it has been thoroughly washed. If the appearance of the contamination has not changed, even if the disease has not spread, it is unclean. You should burn it in the fire because it has been eaten away, either from its underside or from its outside.
“But if the priest has examined it and the contaminated part is faded after it has been thoroughly washed, he will then tear it out of the garment or the skin or the warp or the woof.
However, if it still appears in another part of the garment or in the warp or in the woof or in any article of skin, it is spreading, and you should burn any contaminated item in the fire.
But when the contamination disappears from the garment or the warp or the woof or any article of skin that you wash, it should then be washed a second time, and it will be clean.
“This is the law of the disease of leprosy in a garment of wool or of linen, or in the warp or in the woof, or in any article of skin, for declaring it clean or unclean.”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses: “Talk to the priests, Aaron’s sons, and say to them, ‘No one should defile himself for a dead person among his people.
But he may do so for a close blood relative, for his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, his brother,
and he may defile himself for his sister if she is a virgin who is near to him and has not yet married.
He may not defile himself and make himself profane for a woman who belongs to a husband of his people.
They should not make their heads bald or shave off the fringe of their beard or make cuts on their body.
They should be holy to their God, and they should not profane the name of their God, for they are presenting Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, the bread of their God, and they must be holy.
They should not marry a prostitute, a woman who has been defiled, or a woman divorced from her husband, because the priest is holy to his God.
You must sanctify him, because he is one presenting the bread of your God. He should be holy to you, because I, Jehovah, the one sanctifying you, am holy.
“‘Now if the daughter of a priest should profane herself by committing prostitution, she is profaning her father. She should be burned in the fire.
“‘The high priest of his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil is poured and who has been installed to wear the priestly garments, should not let his head go ungroomed or tear his garments.
He should not approach any dead person; he may not defile himself even for his father or his mother.
He should not go out from the sanctuary and should not profane the sanctuary of his God, for the sign of dedication, the anointing oil of his God, is upon him. I am Jehovah.
“‘He must take as a wife a woman who is a virgin.
He may not marry a widow, a divorced woman, one who has been defiled, or a prostitute; but he should take a virgin from his people as a wife.
He should not profane his offspring among his people, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying him.’”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Tell Aaron, ‘No man of your offspring throughout their generations who has a defect may approach to present the bread of his God.
If there is any man who has a defect, he may not approach: a man who is blind or lame or has a disfigured face or one limb too long,
a man with a fractured foot or a fractured hand,
a hunchback or a dwarf, or a man with an eye defect or eczema or ringworm or damaged testicles.
No man of the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect may approach to present Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Because he has a defect, he may not approach to present the bread of his God.
He may eat the bread of his God from the most holy things and from the holy things.
However, he may not come near the curtain, and he may not approach the altar, because there is a defect in him; and he should not profane my sanctuary, for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”
So Moses spoke to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites.
“‘If his offering is a communion sacrifice and if he is presenting it from the herd, whether a male or a female, he should present a sound animal before Jehovah.
He is to lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered at the entrance of the tent of meeting; and Aaron’s sons, the priests, will sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar.
He will present part of the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah: the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
Aaron’s sons will make it smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering that is placed on the wood that is over the fire; it is an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘If his offering is from the flock for a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, he will present a sound male or a female animal.
If he is presenting a young ram as his offering, then he will present it before Jehovah.
He will lay his hand on the head of his offering, and it will be slaughtered in front of the tent of meeting. Aaron’s sons will sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
He will present the fat from the communion sacrifice as an offering made by fire to Jehovah. He will remove the entire fat tail near the backbone, the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
And the priest will make it smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
“‘If his offering is a goat, then he will present it before Jehovah.
He will lay his hand on its head, and it will be slaughtered before the tent of meeting, and Aaron’s sons must sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
The part he will present as his offering made by fire to Jehovah is the fat that covers the intestines, all the fat that surrounds the intestines,
and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. He will also remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
The priest will make them smoke on the altar as food, an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma. All the fat belongs to Jehovah.
“‘It is a lasting statute for your generations, in all your dwelling places: You must not eat any fat or any blood at all.’”
On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel.
He said to Aaron: “Take for yourself a young calf for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, sound ones, and present them before Jehovah.
But you will say to the Israelites, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering and a calf and a young ram, each a year old, sound ones, for a burnt offering,
and a bull and a ram for communion sacrifices, to sacrifice them before Jehovah, and a grain offering mixed with oil, for today Jehovah will appear to you.’”
So they took what Moses had commanded before the tent of meeting. Then the whole assembly came forward and stood before Jehovah.
And Moses said: “This is what Jehovah has commanded you to do, so that the glory of Jehovah may appear to you.”
Then Moses said to Aaron: “Approach the altar and present your sin offering and your burnt offering, and make atonement in your own behalf and in behalf of your house; and present the offering of the people, and make atonement in their behalf, just as Jehovah has commanded.”
Aaron immediately approached the altar and slaughtered the calf of the sin offering that was for him.
Then Aaron’s sons presented the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, and he poured the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
He made the fat and the kidneys and the appendage of the liver from the sin offering smoke on the altar, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
And he burned the flesh and the skin with fire outside the camp.
Then he slaughtered the burnt offering, and Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it on all sides of the altar.
They handed him the pieces of the burnt offering along with the head, and he made them smoke on the altar.
Further, he washed the intestines and the shanks and made them smoke on the burnt offering on the altar.
He then presented the offering of the people and took the goat of the sin offering that was for the people and slaughtered it and made a sin offering with it like the first one.
And he presented the burnt offering and handled it according to the regular procedure.
He next presented the grain offering, filling his hand with some of it and making it smoke on the altar, in addition to the burnt offering of the morning.
After that he slaughtered the bull and the ram of the communion sacrifice that was for the people. Then Aaron’s sons handed him the blood, and he sprinkled it around on all sides of the altar.
As for the pieces of fat of the bull, the fat tail of the ram, the fat covering the internal organs, the kidneys, and the appendage of the liver,
they placed all those pieces of fat on the breasts, after which he made the pieces of fat smoke on the altar.
But the breasts and the right leg Aaron waved back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah, just as Moses had commanded.
Then Aaron raised his hands toward the people and blessed them and came down from making the sin offering and the burnt offering and the communion sacrifices.
Finally Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting and came out and blessed the people. Jehovah’s glory now appeared to all the people,
and fire came out from Jehovah and began consuming the burnt offering and the pieces of fat on the altar. When all the people saw it, they started shouting and they fell with their faces to the ground.
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Command the Israelites to bring to you pure, beaten olive oil for the lights, to keep the lamps lit constantly.
Outside the curtain of the Testimony in the tent of meeting, Aaron should arrange to keep the lamps lit from evening to morning before Jehovah constantly. It is a permanent statute for all your generations.
He should set the lamps in order on the lampstand of pure gold before Jehovah constantly.
“You will take fine flour and bake it into 12 ring-shaped loaves. Two tenths of an eʹphah should go into each loaf.
You will place them in two sets of layers, six to the layer set, on the table of pure gold before Jehovah.
You should put pure frankincense on each layer set, and it will serve as the bread for a token offering made by fire to Jehovah.
On each Sabbath day, he should regularly arrange it before Jehovah. It is a lasting covenant with the Israelites.
It will become Aaron’s and his sons’, and they will eat it in a holy place, because it is something most holy for him from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, as a lasting regulation.”
Now among the Israelites was a son of an Israelite woman and an Egyptian man, and a fight broke out between him and an Israelite man in the camp.
The son of the Israelite woman began to abuse the Name and to curse it. So they brought him to Moses. Incidentally, his mother was She·loʹmith, the daughter of Dibʹri of the tribe of Dan.
They placed him in custody until Jehovah’s decision was made clear to them.
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Bring the one who cursed to the outside of the camp, and all those who heard him must lay their hands on his head, and then the entire assembly must stone him.
And you should tell the Israelites, ‘If any man curses his God, he will answer for his sin.
So the abuser of Jehovah’s name should be put to death without fail. The entire assembly should stone him without fail. The foreign resident should be put to death the same as the native for his abusing the Name.
“‘If a man takes a human life, he should be put to death without fail.
Anyone who strikes and kills a domestic animal should make compensation for it, life for life.
If a man injures his fellow man, then what he has done should be done to him.
Fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, the same sort of injury he inflicted should be inflicted on him.
The man who strikes and kills an animal should make compensation for it, but the one who strikes and kills a man should be put to death.
“‘One judicial decision will apply for you, whether a foreign resident or a native, because I am Jehovah your God.’”
Moses then spoke to the Israelites, and they brought the one who uttered the curse to the outside of the camp, and they stoned him. Thus the Israelites did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man makes a special vow to offer the estimated value of a person to Jehovah,
the estimated value of a male from 20 to 60 years old will be 50 shekels of silver by the standard shekel of the holy place.
But if it is a female, the estimated value will be 30 shekels.
If the age is from 5 to 20 years old, the estimated value of the male will be 20 shekels and 10 shekels for the female.
If the age is from one month up to five years old, the estimated value of the male will be five shekels of silver and three shekels of silver for the female.
“‘If the age is 60 years and over, the estimated value will be 15 shekels for the male and 10 shekels for the female.
But if he is too poor to pay the estimated value, the person will stand before the priest, and the priest will set a value on him. The priest will make the valuation according to what the one making the vow can afford.
“‘If the vow involves an animal that is suitable for offering to Jehovah, whatever may be given to Jehovah will become something holy.
He may not replace it or exchange it with good for bad or with bad for good. But if he should exchange it with one animal for another animal, the original and what is exchanged for it will both become holy.
If it is an unclean animal that may not be presented as an offering to Jehovah, he will then stand the animal before the priest.
The priest will then set its value, as to whether it is good or bad. The value estimated by the priest will stand.
But if he ever wants to buy it back, he must then give a fifth of it in addition to the estimated value.
“‘Now if a man should sanctify his house as something holy to Jehovah, the priest will then set its value, whether it is good or bad. According to the value that the priest sets, that is what it will cost.
But if the one who sanctifies his house wants to buy it back, he must then give a fifth of the money of the estimated value in addition to it, and it will become his.
“‘If a man sanctifies to Jehovah some of the field that he possesses, the value will be estimated in proportion to the seed needed to sow it: a hoʹmer of barley seed will be 50 shekels of silver.
If he sanctifies his field from the year of Jubilee, the estimated value stands.
If he sanctifies his field after the Jubilee, the priest will calculate for him the price in proportion to the years that are left until the next year of Jubilee, and a deduction should be made from the estimated value.
But if the one who sanctified it should ever buy the field back, he must then give a fifth of the money of the estimated value in addition to it, and it will remain his.
Now if he should not buy the field back and the field is sold to another man, it may not be bought back again.
When the field is released in the Jubilee, it will become something holy to Jehovah, as a field that is devoted to him. It will become the property of the priests.
“‘If a man sanctifies to Jehovah a field he purchased that is not part of his hereditary property,
the priest will calculate for him the amount of the valuation up until the year of Jubilee, and he will give the estimated value on that day. It is something holy to Jehovah.
In the year of Jubilee, the field will return to the one he bought it from, to the one the land belongs to.
“‘Every value should be estimated by the standard shekel of the holy place. The shekel should amount to 20 geʹrahs.
“‘However, no one should sanctify the firstborn of the animals, since it is born as the firstborn for Jehovah. Whether bull or sheep, it already belongs to Jehovah.
If it is among the unclean animals and he redeems it according to the estimated value, he should give a fifth of it in addition to it. But if it is not bought back, it will be sold according to the estimated value.
“‘But no devoted thing that a man devotes unconditionally to Jehovah from his belongings may be sold or bought back, whether from mankind or animals or the field he possesses. Every devoted thing is something most holy to Jehovah.
Furthermore, no condemned person who is set apart for destruction may be redeemed. He should be put to death without fail.
“‘Every tenth part of the land, whether from the produce of the field or the fruit of the trees, belongs to Jehovah. It is something holy to Jehovah.
If a man ever wants to buy any of his tenth part back, he should give a fifth of it in addition to it.
As for every tenth part of the herd and flock, everything that passes under the shepherd’s staff, the tenth animal should become something holy to Jehovah.
He should not examine whether it is good or bad, neither should he exchange it. But if he would ever try to exchange it, both the original and what is exchanged for it should become something holy. It may not be bought back.’”
These are the commandments that Jehovah gave to Moses for the Israelites on Mount Siʹnai.
“‘Now if someone presents a grain offering to Jehovah, his offering must be fine flour, and he should pour oil on it and put frankincense on it.
Then he will bring it to the sons of Aaron, the priests, and the priest will take a handful of the fine flour and oil and all its frankincense, and he will make it smoke as a token offering on the altar, an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
Whatever is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire.
“‘If you present a grain offering that has been baked in the oven, it should be of fine flour, unleavened ring-shaped loaves mixed with oil or unleavened wafers spread with oil.
“‘If your offering is a grain offering from the griddle, it should be of fine, unleavened flour mixed with oil.
It should be broken into pieces, and you are to pour oil on it. It is a grain offering.
“‘If your offering is a grain offering prepared in a pan, it should be made of fine flour with oil.
You should bring the grain offering that was made of these to Jehovah, and it will be presented to the priest, who will bring it near to the altar.
And the priest will lift off some of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar as an offering made by fire of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
What is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons as something most holy of Jehovah’s offerings by fire.
“‘No grain offering that you present to Jehovah should be leavened, for you must not make any sourdough or honey smoke as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
“‘You may present them to Jehovah as an offering of the firstfruits, but they must not be brought to the altar as a pleasing aroma.
“‘Every grain offering you make is to be seasoned with salt; and you must not allow the salt of the covenant of your God to be missing from your grain offering. Along with every offering of yours, you will present salt.
“‘If you present the grain offering of the first ripe fruits to Jehovah, you should present new grain roasted with fire, coarsely crushed new kernels, as the grain offering of your first ripe fruits.
You are to put oil on it and place frankincense on it. It is a grain offering.
The priest will make it smoke as a token offering, that is, some of the coarse grain and oil along with all its frankincense, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Later Aaron’s sons Naʹdab and A·biʹhu each took his fire holder and put fire in it and placed incense on it. Then they began offering before Jehovah unauthorized fire, which he had not commanded them to do.
At this a fire came out from before Jehovah and consumed them, so that they died before Jehovah.
Then Moses said to Aaron: “This is what Jehovah has said, ‘I will be made holy among those near to me, and I will be glorified before all the people.’” And Aaron kept silent.
So Moses called Mishʹa·el and El·zaʹphan, the sons of Uzʹzi·el, Aaron’s uncle, and said to them: “Come here, carry your brothers from in front of the holy place to a place outside the camp.”
So they came forward and carried the men away in their robes to a place outside the camp, just as Moses had told them.
Moses then said to Aaron and his other sons El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar: “Do not let your heads go ungroomed or tear your garments, so that you may not die and that God may not become indignant against all the assembly. Your brothers of the whole house of Israel will weep over those whom Jehovah has killed by the fire.
You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting or you will die, for Jehovah’s anointing oil is upon you.” So they did according to Moses’ word.
Then Jehovah said to Aaron:
“Do not drink wine or other alcoholic beverages, you and your sons with you, when you come into the tent of meeting, so that you will not die. It is a permanent statute for your generations.
This is to distinguish between the holy thing and the profane and between the unclean thing and the clean,
and to teach the Israelites all the regulations that Jehovah has spoken to them through Moses.”
Then Moses spoke to Aaron and to El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, his sons who were left: “Take what was left of the grain offering from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire and eat it as unleavened bread near the altar, because it is something most holy.
You must eat it in a holy place, because it is your allowance and the allowance of your sons from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire, for this is what I have been commanded.
You will also eat the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the sacred portion in a clean place, you and your sons and your daughters with you, because these things have been given as your allowance and the allowance of your sons from the communion sacrifices of the Israelites.
They will bring the leg of the sacred portion and the breast of the wave offering along with the offerings of fat made by fire, in order to wave the wave offering back and forth before Jehovah; and it will serve as a permanent allowance for you and your sons with you, just as Jehovah has commanded.”
And Moses diligently searched for the goat of the sin offering, and he discovered that it had been burned up. So he grew indignant at El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar, Aaron’s sons who were left, and he said:
“Why did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place, since it is something most holy and he has given it to you so that you may answer for the error of the assembly and make atonement for them before Jehovah?
Look! Its blood has not been brought inside the holy place. You certainly should have eaten it in the holy place, just as I was commanded.”
Aaron replied to Moses: “Look! Today they presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before Jehovah, and yet these things happened to me. If I had eaten the sin offering today, would that have been pleasing to Jehovah?”
When Moses heard that, he was satisfied.
Jehovah spoke to Moses after the death of Aaron’s two sons who died for approaching Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Moses: “Tell Aaron your brother that he may not come at just any time into the holy place inside the curtain, in front of the cover on the Ark, so that he may not die, for I will appear over the cover in a cloud.
“This is what Aaron should bring when he comes into the holy place: a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering.
He should put on the holy linen robe, and the linen shorts should cover his body, and he should wrap himself with the linen sash and his head with the linen turban. They are holy garments. He will bathe himself in water and put them on.
“He should take from the assembly of the Israelites two young male goats for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.
“Aaron must then present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and he will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house.
“He will then take the two goats and make them stand before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Aaron will draw lots over the two goats, the one lot for Jehovah and the other lot for A·zaʹzel.
Aaron will present the goat that was designated by lot for Jehovah and make it a sin offering.
But the goat designated by lot for A·zaʹzel should be brought alive to stand before Jehovah in order to perform the atonement upon it, so that it may be sent away for A·zaʹzel into the wilderness.
“Aaron will present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make atonement in behalf of himself and his house; afterward he will slaughter the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself.
“He will then take the fire holder full of burning coals from the altar before Jehovah and two handfuls of fine perfumed incense, and he will bring them inside the curtain.
He will also put the incense on the fire before Jehovah, and the cloud of the incense will envelop the Ark cover, which is on the Testimony, so that he may not die.
“He will take some of the bull’s blood and spatter it with his finger in front of the cover on the east side, and he will spatter some of the blood with his finger seven times before the cover.
“He will then slaughter the goat of the sin offering, which is for the people, and bring its blood inside the curtain and do with its blood the same as he did with the bull’s blood; he is to spatter it toward the cover and before the cover.
“He must make atonement for the holy place concerning the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites and concerning their transgressions and their sins, and that is what he should do for the tent of meeting, which is located among them in the midst of their acts of uncleanness.
“No other man should be in the tent of meeting from the time he goes in to make atonement in the holy place until he comes out. He will make atonement in behalf of himself and his house and in behalf of the entire congregation of Israel.
“He will then come out to the altar, which is before Jehovah, and make atonement for it, and he will take some of the bull’s blood and some of the goat’s blood and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides.
He will also spatter some of the blood on it with his finger seven times and cleanse it and sanctify it from the acts of uncleanness of the Israelites.
“When he has finished making atonement for the holy place and the tent of meeting and the altar, he will also present the live goat.
Aaron will lay both his hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the errors of the Israelites and all their transgressions and all their sins, and he will put them on the head of the goat and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man designated to do this.
The goat will carry upon itself all their errors into a desert land, and he will send the goat away into the wilderness.
“Aaron will then enter into the tent of meeting and take off the linen garments that he put on when he went into the holy place, and he will lay them down there.
He must bathe himself in water in a holy place and put on his garments; then he will come out and offer up his burnt offering and the people’s burnt offering and make atonement in his own behalf and in behalf of the people.
He will make the fat of the sin offering smoke on the altar.
“The man who sent away the goat for A·zaʹzel should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.
“And the bull of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought into the holy place to make atonement, will be taken outside the camp, and their skins and their flesh and their dung will be burned in the fire.
The one who burns them should wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and after that he may come into the camp.
“It will serve as a lasting statute for you: In the seventh month, on the tenth of the month, you should afflict yourselves, and you must not do any work, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you.
On this day atonement will be made for you, to declare you clean. You will be clean from all your sins before Jehovah.
It is a sabbath of complete rest for you, and you should afflict yourselves. It is a lasting statute.
“The priest who is anointed and installed to serve as priest in place of his father will make atonement and put on the linen garments, the holy garments.
He will make atonement for the holy sanctuary, the tent of meeting, and the altar; and he will make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the congregation.
This will serve as a lasting statute for you, to make atonement for the Israelites concerning all their sins once each year.” So he did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
“‘If someone sins because he has heard a public call to testify and he is a witness or has seen or learned about it and he does not report it, then he will answer for his error.
“‘Or when a person touches anything unclean, whether the dead body of an unclean wild animal, an unclean domestic animal, or an unclean swarming creature, he is unclean and has become guilty even if he does not realize it.
Or in case someone without being aware of it touches human uncleanness—anything unclean that may make him unclean—and he comes to know it, then he becomes guilty.
“‘Or if someone rashly swears to do something—whether it is to do good or to do evil, no matter what it may be—and he was unaware of it, but then he realizes that he has sworn rashly, he becomes guilty.
“‘If he becomes guilty as respects one of these things, then he must confess in what way he has sinned.
He will also bring his guilt offering to Jehovah for the sin that he committed, namely, a female from the flock, either a female lamb or a young female goat, for a sin offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for his sin.
“‘If, though, he cannot afford a sheep, he must bring to Jehovah two turtledoves or two young pigeons as his guilt offering for the sin, one for a sin offering and one for a burnt offering.
He is to bring them to the priest, who will present first the one for the sin offering and nip off its head at the front of its neck, without severing it.
He will spatter some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, but the remainder of the blood will be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering.
He will handle the other one as a burnt offering according to the regular procedure; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.
“‘Now if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, he must bring as his offering for his sin a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour for a sin offering. He should not add oil to it or place frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
He will bring it to the priest, and the priest will take from it his handful as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. It is a sin offering.
The priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, any one of these sins, and it will be forgiven him. The remainder of the offering will become the priest’s, just like the grain offering.’”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“If someone behaves unfaithfully by unintentionally sinning against the holy things of Jehovah, he is to bring to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock as a guilt offering; its value in silver shekels is set according to the standard shekel of the holy place.
And he will make compensation for the sin he has committed against the holy place and he will also add a fifth of its value. He will give it to the priest, so that the priest may make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering, and it will be forgiven him.
“If someone sins by doing any of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done, even if he is not aware of it, he is still guilty and will answer for his error.
He should bring to the priest a sound ram from the flock according to the estimated value, for a guilt offering. Then the priest will make atonement for him for the unintentional mistake that he unknowingly committed, and it will be forgiven him.
It is a guilt offering. He has certainly become guilty of sinning against Jehovah.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“This is to be the law of the leper on the day his purification is established, when he is to be brought to the priest.
The priest will go outside the camp and examine him. If the leper has been cured of the leprosy,
the priest will command him to bring two live clean birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop for his cleansing.
The priest will command that the one bird be killed in an earthenware vessel over running water.
But he should take the living bird along with the cedarwood, the scarlet material, and the hyssop, and dip them together in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.
Then he will spatter it seven times on the one cleansing himself from the leprosy and declare him clean, and he will set the living bird free in the open field.
“The one cleansing himself must wash his garments and shave off all his hair and bathe in water, and he will be clean. Afterward, he may come into the camp, but he will dwell outside his tent for seven days.
On the seventh day, he should shave off all the hair on his head and his chin and his eyebrows. After he shaves off all his hair, he will wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and he will be clean.
“On the eighth day, he will take two sound young rams, one sound female lamb in its first year, three tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and one log measure of oil;
and the priest who declares him clean will present the man who is cleansing himself, along with the offerings, before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
The priest will take the one young ram and offer it as a guilt offering together with the log measure of oil, and he will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
Then he will slaughter the young ram in the place where the sin offering and the burnt offering are usually slaughtered, in a holy place, because, like the sin offering, the guilt offering belongs to the priest. It is something most holy.
“Then the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering, and the priest will put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
And the priest will take some of the log measure of oil and pour it into his own left palm.
The priest will then dip his right finger into the oil that is in his left palm and spatter some of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah.
Then the priest will put some of the remaining oil in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot over the blood of the guilt offering.
The priest will put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah.
“The priest will sacrifice the sin offering and make atonement for the one cleansing himself from his impurity, and afterward he will slaughter the burnt offering.
And the priest will offer up the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar, and the priest will make atonement for him, and he will be clean.
“However, if he is poor and does not have enough means, he will then take one young ram as a guilt offering for a wave offering, in order to make atonement for himself, along with one tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, a log measure of oil,
and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, according to his means. The one will serve as a sin offering, and the other as a burnt offering.
On the eighth day, he will bring them for establishing his purification to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah.
“The priest will take the young ram of the guilt offering and the log measure of oil, and the priest will wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
He will then slaughter the young ram of the guilt offering, and the priest will take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
The priest will pour some of the oil into his own left palm,
and he will then spatter with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left palm seven times before Jehovah.
And the priest will put some of the oil that is in his palm on the right earlobe of the one cleansing himself and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot on the same places that he put the blood of the guilt offering.
The priest will then put what is left over of the oil in his palm on the head of the one cleansing himself, in order to make atonement for him before Jehovah.
“He will offer up one of the turtledoves or one of the young pigeons, according to his means,
the one he can afford, as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering along with the grain offering; and the priest will make atonement for the one cleansing himself before Jehovah.
“This is the law for the one in whom the disease of leprosy was but who does not have the means when establishing his purification.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron:
“When you come into the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving you as a possession, and I contaminate a house in your land with the disease of leprosy,
the one to whom the house belongs should then come and tell the priest, ‘Some kind of contamination has appeared in my house.’
The priest will give orders to clear out the house before he comes to examine the contamination, in order that he may not declare everything that is in the house unclean; and after that the priest will come in to inspect the house.
He will examine the affected area, and if the walls of the house are contaminated with yellowish-green or reddish depressions and they appear to be deeper than the wall surface,
the priest will then go out of the house to the entryway of the house and quarantine the house for seven days.
“Then the priest will return on the seventh day and make an inspection. If the contamination has spread in the walls of the house,
the priest will then give orders, and the contaminated stones must be torn out and thrown outside the city into an unclean place.
Then he is to have the inside of the house thoroughly scraped, and the plaster and mortar that is removed should be discarded outside the city in an unclean place.
They will then insert other stones in the place of the stones they removed, and he should use different mortar and have the house plastered.
“If, though, the contamination returns and breaks out in the house after the stones were torn out and the house was scraped and replastered,
the priest will then go in and inspect it. If the contamination has spread in the house, it is malignant leprosy in the house. The house is unclean.
He will then have the house pulled down—its stones, its timbers, and all the plaster and mortar of the house—and carried outside the city to an unclean place.
But whoever enters the house any of the days it is quarantined will be unclean until the evening;
and whoever lies down in the house should wash his garments, and whoever eats in the house should wash his garments.
“However, if the priest comes and sees that the contamination has not spread in the house after the house was replastered, the priest will then declare the house clean, because the contamination has been healed.
In order to purify the house from uncleanness, he will take two birds, cedarwood, scarlet material, and hyssop.
He is to kill the one bird in an earthenware vessel over running water.
Then he will take the cedarwood, the hyssop, the scarlet material, and the live bird and dip them in the blood of the bird that was killed and in the running water, and he must spatter it toward the house seven times.
And he will purify the house from uncleanness with the blood of the bird, the running water, the live bird, the cedarwood, the hyssop, and the scarlet material.
He will then set the live bird free outside the city in the open field and make atonement for the house, and it will be clean.
“This is the law respecting any case of leprosy, infection of the scalp or the beard,
leprosy of the garment or the house,
and respecting swellings, scabs, and blotches,
in order to determine when something is unclean and when something is clean. This is the law about leprosy.”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Tell Aaron and his sons that they should be careful how they handle the holy things of the Israelites and not profane my holy name regarding the things they are sanctifying to me. I am Jehovah.
Say to them, ‘Throughout your generations, any of your offspring who, while he is unclean, comes near to the holy things that the Israelites sanctify to Jehovah, that person will be cut off from before me. I am Jehovah.
No man of Aaron’s offspring who has leprosy or a discharge may eat of the holy things until he becomes clean, neither the man who touches someone who became unclean by a dead person, nor a man who has a seminal emission,
nor a man who touches an unclean swarming creature or who touches a man who is unclean for any reason and who can make him unclean.
The person who touches any of these will be unclean until the evening and may not eat any of the holy things, but he should bathe himself in water.
When the sun has set, he will be clean, and afterward he may eat some of the holy things because it is his food.
Also, he should not eat any animal found dead or anything torn by wild animals and become unclean by it. I am Jehovah.
“‘They must keep their obligation to me, so that they may not incur sin because of it and have to die for it because they were profaning it. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.
“‘No unauthorized person may eat anything holy. No foreign guest of a priest or hired worker may eat anything holy.
But if a priest should purchase someone with his own money, that person may share in eating it. Slaves born in his house may also share in eating his food.
If the daughter of a priest should marry someone who is not a priest, she may not eat of the contribution of the holy things.
But if the daughter of a priest should become a widow or is divorced and she has no offspring and she returns to her father’s house as in her youth, she may eat some of her father’s food; but no unauthorized person may eat it.
“‘Now if a man eats a holy thing by mistake, he must add a fifth of its value and give the holy offering to the priest.
So they should not profane the holy things of the Israelites that they contribute to Jehovah
and cause themselves to incur punishment for their guilt because of eating their holy things; for I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying them.’”
Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
“Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and say to them, ‘When an Israelite man or a foreign resident in Israel presents a burnt offering to Jehovah to fulfill his vows or to make a voluntary offering,
he should present a sound male from the herd, the young rams, or the goats, in order to gain approval.
You must not present anything with a defect, for it will not serve to gain approval for you.
“‘If a man presents a communion sacrifice to Jehovah to pay a vow or as a voluntary offering, it should be a sound animal from the herd or the flock, in order to gain approval. No defect at all should be in it.
No offering should be blind, have a fracture, a cut, a wart, scabbiness, or ringworm; you must not present any of these to Jehovah or make such an offering on the altar for Jehovah.
You may present a bull or a sheep with a limb that is too long or too short as a voluntary offering, but it will not be accepted with approval as a vow offering.
You must not present to Jehovah one having the testicles damaged or crushed or pulled off or cut off, and you should not offer such animals in your land.
And you must not present any of these from the hand of a foreigner as the bread of your God, for they are corrupted and defective. They will not be accepted with approval for you.’”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“When a bull or a young ram or a goat is born, it will continue with its mother for seven days, but from the eighth day forward it will be accepted with approval as an offering, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
As for a bull or a sheep, you must not slaughter it and its young on the same day.
“If you sacrifice a thanksgiving sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it to gain approval for yourselves.
It should be eaten on that day. You must not leave any of it until morning. I am Jehovah.
“You must keep my commandments and carry them out. I am Jehovah.
You must not profane my holy name, and I must be sanctified in the midst of the Israelites. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you,
the one bringing you out of the land of Egypt to prove myself God to you. I am Jehovah.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man has a discharge from his genital organ, this discharge makes him unclean.
He is unclean from the discharge, whether the discharge continues to flow from his genitals or is obstructed, he is still unclean.
“‘Any bed that the one with the discharge lies on will be unclean, and anything he sits on will be unclean.
A man who touches his bed must wash his garments, and he should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
Anyone who sits on an article that the one having a discharge sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
Whoever touches the flesh of the one having a discharge should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
If the one who has a discharge spits on someone clean, that person must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
Any saddle that the one with the discharge rides on will be unclean.
Anyone touching anything that was under him will be unclean until the evening, and anyone who carries those items will wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
If the one with the discharge has not washed his hands in water and he touches someone, that person must then wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
An earthenware vessel that the one having a discharge touches should be smashed, and any wooden vessel should be washed with water.
“‘When the discharge stops and the person becomes clean from it, he will then count seven days for his purification, and he must wash his garments, bathe himself in running water, and he will be clean.
On the eighth day, he should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before Jehovah at the entrance of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest.
And the priest will offer them, the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah concerning his discharge.
“‘Now if a man has an emission of semen, he should bathe his whole body in water and be unclean until the evening.
He must wash with water any garment and any skin with semen on it, and it will be unclean until the evening.
“‘When a man lies with a woman and has an emission of semen, they should bathe in water and be unclean until the evening.
“‘If a woman has a discharge of blood from her body, she will continue in her menstrual impurity for seven days. Anyone touching her will be unclean until the evening.
Anything she lies down on in her menstrual impurity will be unclean, and everything she sits on will be unclean.
Anyone touching her bed should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
Anyone touching any article she sat on should wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
If she sat on the bed or on another article, his touching it will make him unclean until the evening.
And if a man lies down with her and her menstrual impurity comes on him, he will then be unclean for seven days, and any bed on which he lies down will be unclean.
“‘When a woman’s discharge of blood flows for many days when it is not the regular time of her menstruation, or if she should have a flow longer than her usual menstruation, she will be unclean during all the days of her discharge, as in the days of her menstrual impurity.
Any bed she lies on during the days of her discharge will become like the bed of her menstrual impurity, and any article she sits on will become unclean like the uncleanness of her menstrual impurity.
Anyone touching them will be unclean, and he must wash his garments, bathe in water, and be unclean until the evening.
“‘However, when she is clean from her discharge, she will count for herself seven days, and afterward she will be clean.
On the eighth day, she should take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, and she will bring them to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
The priest will make the one a sin offering and the other a burnt offering, and the priest will make atonement for her before Jehovah concerning her unclean discharge.
“‘Thus you must keep the Israelites separate from their uncleanness, so that they do not die in their uncleanness by defiling my tabernacle, which is in their midst.
“‘This is the law about the man having a discharge, the man who is unclean because of an emission of semen,
the woman during her menstrual impurity, any male or female who has a discharge flowing from the body, and a man who lies down with an unclean woman.’”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘If someone sins unintentionally by doing any of the things that Jehovah commanded should not be done:
“‘If the anointed priest sins and brings guilt on the people, then he must present a sound young bull to Jehovah as a sin offering for the sin he committed.
He will bring the bull to the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah and lay his hand on the bull’s head, and he is to slaughter the bull before Jehovah.
Then the anointed priest will take some of the bull’s blood and bring it into the tent of meeting;
and the priest will dip his finger in the blood and spatter some of the blood seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain of the holy place.
The priest will also put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of perfumed incense, which is before Jehovah in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the bull’s blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
“‘He will then remove all the fat of the bull of the sin offering, including the fat that covers the intestines and the fat that surrounds the intestines,
and the two kidneys with the fat on them that is near the loins. And he will remove the appendage of the liver along with the kidneys.
It will be the same as what is removed from a bull of the communion sacrifice. And the priest will make them smoke on the altar of burnt offering.
“‘But as for the skin of the bull and all its flesh along with its head, its shanks, its intestines, and its dung—
all the rest of the bull—he will have it taken to the outskirts of the camp to a clean place where the ashes are discarded, and he will burn it on wood in the fire. It should be burned where the ashes are discarded.
“‘Now if the entire assembly of Israel has become guilty by committing a sin unintentionally, but the congregation was unaware that they had done something that Jehovah commanded them not to do,
and then the sin becomes known, the congregation must present a young bull for a sin offering and bring it before the tent of meeting.
The elders of the assembly will lay their hands on the bull’s head before Jehovah, and the bull will be slaughtered before Jehovah.
“‘Then the anointed priest will bring some of the bull’s blood into the tent of meeting.
The priest is to dip his finger into the blood and spatter some of it seven times before Jehovah in front of the curtain.
He will then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before Jehovah, which is in the tent of meeting; and he will pour all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
He will remove all its fat and make it smoke on the altar.
He is to do to the bull just as he did to the other bull of the sin offering. That is how he will do it, and the priest will make atonement for them, and they will be forgiven.
He will have the bull taken to the outskirts of the camp and will burn it, just as he burned the first bull. It is a sin offering for the congregation.
“‘When a chieftain unintentionally sins by doing one of all the things that Jehovah his God commands should not be done and has become guilty,
or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed against the commandment, then he must bring a sound young male goat as his offering.
He will lay his hand on the head of the young goat and slaughter it in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a sin offering.
The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering.
He will make all its fat smoke on the altar like the fat of the communion sacrifice; and the priest will make atonement for him for his sin, and it will be forgiven him.
“‘If any one of the people of the land sins unintentionally and becomes guilty by doing one of the things that Jehovah commands should not be done,
or if he becomes aware of a sin that he has committed, then he should bring a sound young female goat as his offering for the sin he has committed.
He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter the sin offering in the same place as the burnt offering.
The priest will take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
He will remove all its fat, just as the fat is removed from the communion sacrifice, and the priest will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah; and the priest will make atonement for him, and it will be forgiven him.
“‘But if he offers a lamb as his sin offering, he should bring a sound female lamb.
He will lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it as a sin offering in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered.
The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and he will pour all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
He will remove all its fat the same way that the fat of the young ram of the communion sacrifice is removed, and the priest will make them smoke on the altar on top of Jehovah’s offerings made by fire; and the priest will make atonement for him for the sin that he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.
Jehovah went on speaking to Moses, saying:
“You are to say to the Israelites, ‘Any man of Israel and any foreigner who resides in Israel who gives any of his offspring to Moʹlech should be put to death without fail. The people of the land should stone him to death.
I myself will set my face against that man, and I will cut him off from among his people, because he has given some of his offspring to Moʹlech and has defiled my holy place and has profaned my holy name.
If the people of the land should deliberately close their eyes to what that man does when he gives his offspring to Moʹlech and they do not put him to death,
then I myself will certainly set my face against that man and his family. I will cut off that man from his people along with all who join him in prostituting themselves to Moʹlech.
“‘As for the person who turns to the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers so as to commit spiritual prostitution with them, I will certainly turn against that person and cut him off from his people.
“‘You must sanctify yourselves and become holy, because I am Jehovah your God.
And you must keep my statutes and carry them out. I am Jehovah, who is sanctifying you.
“‘If there is any man who curses his father or his mother, he should be put to death without fail. Since he has cursed his father or his mother, his own blood is upon him.
“‘Now regarding a man who commits adultery with another man’s wife: The one who commits adultery with the wife of his fellow man should be put to death without fail, the adulterer and the adulteress.
A man who lies down with his father’s wife has exposed his father to shame. Both of them should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
If a man lies down with his daughter-in-law, both of them should be put to death without fail. They have violated what is natural. Their own blood is upon them.
“‘If a man lies down with a male the same as one lies down with a woman, both of them have done a detestable thing. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
“‘If a man takes a woman and her mother, it is an obscene act. They should burn him and them in the fire, so that obscene conduct may not continue among you.
“‘If a man has intercourse with a beast, he should be put to death without fail, and you should kill the beast.
If a woman approaches any beast to have intercourse with it, you must kill the woman and the beast. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.
“‘If a man has sexual relations with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and he sees her nakedness and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace. They must be cut off before the eyes of the sons of their people. He has exposed his sister to shame. He should answer for his error.
“‘If a man lies down with a menstruating woman and has sexual relations with her, both he and she have exposed her flow of blood. Both of them must be cut off from among their people.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister or your father’s sister, because that would be exposing a blood relative to shame. They should answer for their error.
A man who lies down with his uncle’s wife has exposed his uncle to shame. They should answer for their sin. They should die childless.
If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is something abhorrent. He has exposed his brother to shame. They should become childless.
“‘You must keep all my statutes and all my judicial decisions and carry them out, so that the land where I am bringing you to dwell will not vomit you out.
You must not walk in the statutes of the nations that I am driving out from before you; for they have done all these things and I abhor them.
That is why I said to you: “You will take possession of their land, and I will give it to you as your possession, a land flowing with milk and honey. Jehovah your God I am, who has set you apart from the peoples.”
You must make a distinction between the clean animal and the unclean and between the unclean bird and the clean; you must not make yourselves loathsome by means of an animal or a bird or anything that creeps on the ground that I set apart for you to regard as unclean.
You must be holy to me, because I, Jehovah, am holy, and I am setting you apart from the peoples to become mine.
“‘Any man or woman who acts as a spirit medium or is a fortune-teller should be put to death without fail. The people should stone them to death. Their own blood is upon them.’”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘If a woman becomes pregnant and gives birth to a male, she will be unclean for seven days, just as she is in the days of the impurity when she is menstruating.
On the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin will be circumcised.
She will continue cleansing herself from the blood for the next 33 days. She should not touch any holy thing, and she should not come into the holy place until she fulfills the days of her purification.
“‘If she should give birth to a female, she will then be unclean for 14 days, just as she would be during her menstruation. She will continue cleansing herself from the blood for the next 66 days.
When the days of her purification for a son or a daughter are completed, she will bring a young ram in its first year for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering to the entrance of the tent of meeting, to the priest.
He will present it before Jehovah and make atonement for her, and she will be clean from her flow of blood. This is the law about the woman who gives birth to either a male or a female.
But if she cannot afford a sheep, she must then take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and one for a sin offering, and the priest will make atonement for her, and she will be clean.’”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘I am Jehovah your God.
You must not behave as they do in the land of Egypt, where you were dwelling, and you must not do what they do in the land of Caʹnaan, where I am bringing you. And you must not walk in their statutes.
You should carry out my judicial decisions, and you should keep my statutes and walk in them. I am Jehovah your God.
You must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions; anyone who does so will live by means of them. I am Jehovah.
“‘No man among you should approach any of his close relatives to have sexual relations. I am Jehovah.
You must not have sexual relations with your father, and you must not have sexual relations with your mother. She is your mother, and you must not have sexual relations with her.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s wife. It is exposing your father to shame.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your sister, either the daughter of your father or the daughter of your mother, whether she is born in the same household or born outside of it.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your son or the daughter of your daughter, because they are your own nakedness.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your father’s wife, the offspring of your father, because she is your sister.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your father’s sister. She is your father’s blood relative.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister, because she is your mother’s blood relative.
“‘You must not expose your father’s brother to shame by having sexual relations with his wife. She is your aunt.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law. She is your son’s wife, and you must not have relations with her.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with your brother’s wife, because it is exposing your brother to shame.
“‘You must not have sexual relations with a woman and her daughter. You must not take the daughter of her son and the daughter of her daughter in order to have relations. They are her close relatives; it is an obscene act.
“‘You must not take a woman in addition to her sister as a rival wife and have sexual relations with her while her sister is alive.
“‘You must not approach a woman during her menstrual impurity to have sexual relations with her.
“‘You must not have sexual intercourse with the wife of your fellow man, making yourself unclean.
“‘You must not allow any of your offspring to be offered to Moʹlech. You must not profane the name of your God in that way. I am Jehovah.
“‘You must not lie down with a male in the same way that you lie down with a woman. It is a detestable act.
“‘A man must not have sexual intercourse with an animal to become unclean by it; nor should a woman offer herself to an animal to have intercourse with it. It is a violation of what is natural.
“‘Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, for it is by all these things that the nations that I am driving out from before you have made themselves unclean.
Therefore, the land is unclean, and I will bring punishment on it for its error, and the land will vomit its inhabitants out.
But you yourselves must keep my statutes and my judicial decisions, and you must not do any of these detestable things, whether a native or a foreigner who is residing among you.
For all these detestable things were done by the men who lived in the land before you, and now the land is unclean.
Then the land will not have to vomit you out for defiling it in the same way that it will vomit out the nations that were before you.
If anyone does any of these detestable things, all those doing them must be cut off from among their people.
You must keep your obligation to me by not practicing any of the detestable customs that were carried on before you, so that you do not make yourselves unclean by them. I am Jehovah your God.’”
Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘The seasonal festivals of Jehovah that you should proclaim are holy conventions. These are my seasonal festivals:
“‘Six days work may be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of complete rest, a holy convention. You may not do any sort of work. It is to be a sabbath to Jehovah wherever you dwell.
“‘These are the seasonal festivals of Jehovah, holy conventions that you should proclaim at the times appointed for them:
In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, at twilight is the Passover to Jehovah.
“‘On the 15th day of this month is the Festival of Unleavened Bread to Jehovah. Seven days you should eat unleavened bread.
On the first day, you will observe a holy convention. You should not do any hard work.
But you are to present an offering made by fire to Jehovah for seven days. There will be a holy convention on the seventh day. You should not do any hard work.’”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you and you have reaped its harvest, you must bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest to the priest.
And he will wave the sheaf back and forth before Jehovah to gain approval for you. The priest should wave it on the day after the Sabbath.
On the day you have the sheaf waved, you must offer a sound young ram in its first year, as a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Its grain offering will be two tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with oil, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah, a pleasing aroma. Its drink offering will be a fourth of a hin of wine.
You must not eat any bread, roasted grain, or new grain until this day, until you bring the offering of your God. It is a lasting statute for all your generations wherever you dwell.
“‘You are to count seven sabbaths from the day after the Sabbath, from the day that you bring the sheaf of the wave offering. They should be complete weeks.
You will count off 50 days until the day after the seventh Sabbath, and then you should present a new grain offering to Jehovah.
You should bring from your dwelling places two loaves as a wave offering. These should be made of two tenths of an eʹphah of fine flour. They should be baked with leaven, as first ripe fruits to Jehovah.
And you should present along with the loaves seven sound male lambs, each a year old, and one young bull and two rams. They will serve as a burnt offering to Jehovah along with the corresponding grain offering and drink offerings, as an offering made by fire, of a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
And you must offer one young goat as a sin offering and two male lambs, each a year old, as a communion sacrifice.
The priest will wave them back and forth along with the loaves of the first ripe fruits, as a wave offering before Jehovah, together with the two male lambs. They should serve as something holy to Jehovah for the priest.
On this day you will make a proclamation for a holy convention for yourselves. You may not do any hard work. It is a lasting statute in all your dwelling places for all your generations.
“‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not reap the edge of your field completely and you should not pick up what is left from your harvest. You should leave it for the poor and for the foreign resident. I am Jehovah your God.’”
Jehovah went on speaking to Moses, saying:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘In the seventh month, on the first of the month, you should observe a complete rest, a memorial signaled by a trumpet blast, a holy convention.
You may not do any hard work, and you will present an offering made by fire to Jehovah.’”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“However, on the tenth of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. You should observe a holy convention, and you must afflict yourselves and present an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
You are not to do any sort of work on this particular day because it is a day of atonement to make atonement for you before Jehovah your God.
Anyone who will not afflict himself on this day will be cut off from his people.
And I will destroy from among his people every person who does any sort of work on this day.
You must not do any sort of work. It is a lasting statute for all your generations wherever you dwell.
It is a sabbath of complete rest for you, and you will afflict yourselves on the ninth of the month in the evening. You should observe your sabbath from evening to evening.”
Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘On the 15th day of this seventh month is the Festival of Booths for seven days to Jehovah.
There is to be a holy convention on the first day, and you should not do any hard work.
Seven days you must present an offering made by fire to Jehovah. On the eighth day, you should observe a holy convention, and you should present an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a solemn assembly. You may not do any hard work.
“‘These are the seasonal festivals of Jehovah that you should proclaim as holy conventions for presenting an offering made by fire to Jehovah: the burnt offering and the grain offering of the sacrifice and the drink offerings according to the daily schedule.
These are in addition to what is offered on Jehovah’s sabbaths, and your gifts, your vow offerings, and your voluntary offerings, which you should give to Jehovah.
However, on the 15th day of the seventh month, when you have gathered the produce of the land, you should celebrate the festival of Jehovah for seven days. On the first day is a complete rest and on the eighth day is a complete rest.
On the first day, you will take the fruit of majestic trees, the fronds of palm trees, the branches of leafy trees and poplars of the valley, and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God for seven days.
You will celebrate it as a festival to Jehovah for seven days in the year. As a lasting statute during all your generations, you should celebrate it in the seventh month.
You should dwell in the booths for seven days. All the natives in Israel should dwell in the booths,
so that your future generations may know that it was in the booths that I made the Israelites dwell when I was bringing them out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.’”
So Moses spoke of the seasonal festivals of Jehovah to the Israelites.
Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
“If someone sins and behaves unfaithfully toward Jehovah by deceiving his neighbor in connection with something entrusted to him, or something deposited with him, or he robs or defrauds his neighbor,
or he finds something lost and is deceptive about it, and if he swears falsely over any such sin he may commit, this is what he should do:
If he has sinned and is guilty, he must return what he stole, what he extorted, what he took by fraud, what was entrusted to him, or the lost thing that he found,
or anything about which he swore falsely, and he must make full compensation for it, and he will add to it a fifth of its value. He will give it to the owner on the day his guilt is proved.
And he will bring to the priest as his guilt offering to Jehovah a sound ram from the flock according to the assessed value, for a guilt offering.
The priest will make atonement for him before Jehovah, and he will be forgiven for anything he may have done resulting in his guilt.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Command Aaron and his sons and say, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering will remain on the hearth on the altar all night long until the morning, and the fire will be kept burning on the altar.
The priest will clothe himself with his official dress of linen, and he will put the linen shorts on over his flesh. Then he will remove the ashes of the burnt offering that the fire had consumed on the altar and place them beside the altar.
Then he will take off his garments and put on other garments and take the ashes to a clean place outside the camp.
The fire will be kept burning on the altar. It must not go out. The priest must burn wood on it each morning and arrange the burnt offering over it, and he will make the fat of the communion sacrifices smoke over it.
Fire will be kept constantly burning on the altar. It must not go out.
“‘Now this is the law of the grain offering: You sons of Aaron are to present it before Jehovah in front of the altar.
One of them will take a handful from the fine flour of the grain offering and some of its oil and all the frankincense that is on the grain offering, and he will make it smoke on the altar as a pleasing aroma for a token offering to Jehovah.
Aaron and his sons will eat what is left of it. It will be eaten as unleavened bread in a holy place. They will eat it in the courtyard of the tent of meeting.
It should not be baked with anything leavened. I have given it as their share out of my offerings made by fire. It is something most holy, like the sin offering and like the guilt offering.
Every male among the sons of Aaron will eat it. It is their permanent allowance throughout your generations from Jehovah’s offerings made by fire. Everything that touches them will become holy.’”
Jehovah spoke again to Moses:
“This is the offering that Aaron and his sons will present to Jehovah on the day he is anointed: the tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening.
It will be made with oil on a griddle. You will bring it well-mixed with oil and present it in pieces as a baked product of the grain offering as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
The anointed priest who succeeds him from among his sons will make it. It is a lasting regulation: As a whole offering it will be made to smoke to Jehovah.
Every grain offering of a priest should be a whole offering. It must not be eaten.”
Jehovah spoke again to Moses and said:
“Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered, the sin offering will also be slaughtered before Jehovah. It is a most holy thing.
The priest who offers it for sin will eat it. It will be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the tent of meeting.
“‘Everything that touches its flesh will become holy, and when anyone spatters some of its blood on his garment, you should wash what was spattered with blood in a holy place.
The earthenware vessel in which it was boiled is to be shattered. But if it was boiled in a copper vessel, then the vessel must be scoured and washed with water.
“‘Every male among the priests will eat it. It is something most holy.
However, no sin offering is to be eaten if some of its blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place. It is to be burned with fire.
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Take Aaron and his sons with him, the garments, the anointing oil, the bull of the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
and make all the assembly gather together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.”
Then Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him, and the assembly gathered together at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Moses now said to the assembly: “This is what Jehovah has commanded us to do.”
So Moses brought Aaron and his sons near and washed them with water.
After that he put the robe on him, wrapped him with the sash, clothed him with the sleeveless coat, and put the ephʹod on him and tied it with the woven belt of the ephʹod, binding it securely on him.
Next he placed the breastpiece on him and put the Uʹrim and the Thumʹmim in the breastpiece.
Then he placed the turban on his head, and he put on the front of the turban the shining plate of gold, the holy sign of dedication, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Moses then took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it and sanctified them.
After that he spattered some of it seven times on the altar and anointed the altar and all its utensils and the basin and its stand in order to sanctify them.
Finally he poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him in order to sanctify him.
Moses then brought Aaron’s sons near and clothed them with robes and wrapped them with sashes and put headgear on them, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then he brought the bull of the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull of the sin offering.
Moses slaughtered it and took the blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides, and he purified the altar from sin, but the rest of the blood he poured at the base of the altar, in order to sanctify it to make atonement on it.
After that he took all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and Moses made them smoke on the altar.
Then he had the rest of the bull, its skin, its flesh, and its dung, burned with fire outside the camp, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
He now brought the ram of the burnt offering near, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram.
Moses then slaughtered it and sprinkled the blood on all sides of the altar.
He cut the ram into its pieces, and Moses made the head, the pieces, and the suet smoke.
He washed the intestines and the shanks with water, and Moses made the entire ram smoke on the altar. It was a burnt offering as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then he brought the second ram, the ram of the installation, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the ram’s head.
Moses slaughtered it and took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe and on the thumb of his right hand and on the big toe of his right foot.
Next Moses brought Aaron’s sons forward and put some of the blood on their right earlobe and on the thumb of their right hand and on the big toe of their right foot; but Moses sprinkled the rest of the blood on all sides of the altar.
Then he took the fat, the fat tail, all the fat that was on the intestines, the appendage of the liver, the two kidneys and their fat, and the right leg.
He took out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before Jehovah one unleavened ring-shaped loaf, one ring-shaped loaf of oiled bread, and one wafer. He then placed them on the pieces of fat and the right leg.
After that he put all of them on the palms of Aaron and the palms of his sons and began to wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah.
Then Moses took them from their hands and made them smoke on the altar on top of the burnt offering. They were an installation sacrifice as a pleasing aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Moses then took the breast and waved it back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. From the installation ram it became the portion for Moses, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
And Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood that was on the altar and spattered it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and the garments of his sons who were with him. Thus he sanctified Aaron and his garments and his sons and their garments.
Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons: “Boil the flesh at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and you will eat it there with the bread that is in the installation basket, just as I was commanded, ‘Aaron and his sons will eat it.’
What is left over of the flesh and the bread you will burn with fire.
You must not go out from the entrance of the tent of meeting for seven days, until the days for completing your installation are over, because it will take seven days to install you as priests.
Jehovah commanded that we do what we have done today in order to make atonement for you.
You will stay at the entrance of the tent of meeting day and night for seven days and carry out your obligation to Jehovah, so that you may not die; for so I have been commanded.”
And Aaron and his sons did all the things that Jehovah had commanded by means of Moses.
Jehovah now said to Moses:
“Speak to the Israelites and take from them one rod for each paternal house, from the chieftains of each paternal house, 12 rods in all. Write the name of each one on his rod.
You should write Aaron’s name on Leʹvi’s rod, because there is one rod for the head of each paternal house.
Deposit the rods in the tent of meeting before the Testimony, where I regularly present myself to you.
And the rod of the man whom I choose will bud, and I will put a stop to the murmuring of the Israelites against me, which they are also murmuring against you.”
So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and all their chieftains gave him rods—a rod for each chieftain of a paternal house, 12 rods—and Aaron’s rod was among their rods.
Then Moses deposited the rods before Jehovah in the tent of the Testimony.
On the next day, when Moses went into the tent of the Testimony, look! Aaron’s rod for the house of Leʹvi had budded and was bringing forth buds and blossoming flowers and bearing ripe almonds.
Moses then brought out all the rods from before Jehovah to all the people of Israel. They looked at them, and each man took his own rod.
Jehovah then said to Moses: “Put Aaron’s rod back before the Testimony as something to be kept for a sign to the sons of rebelliousness, so that their murmurings against me may cease and so that they may not die.”
Moses immediately did just as Jehovah had commanded him. He did just so.
The Israelites then said to Moses: “Now we will die, we will surely perish, we are all going to perish!
Anyone who even comes close to Jehovah’s tabernacle will die! Must we end up dying that way?”
Jehovah then told Moses:
“Take vengeance for the Israelites on the Midʹi·an·ites. Afterward you will be gathered to your people.”
So Moses spoke to the people, saying: “Equip men from among you for battle against Midʹi·an and to execute Jehovah’s vengeance on Midʹi·an.
You should send 1,000 of each tribe of all the tribes of Israel into the army.”
So from the thousands of Israel, 1,000 were assigned from each tribe, 12,000 equipped for battle.
Then Moses sent them out, 1,000 from each tribe to the army, along with Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest for the army, who had the holy utensils and the signal trumpets in his hand.
They waged war against Midʹi·an, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses, and they killed every male.
Along with the others slain, they killed the kings of Midʹi·an, namely, Eʹvi, Reʹkem, Zur, Hur, and Reʹba, the five kings of Midʹi·an. They also killed Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor with the sword.
But the Israelites carried off captive the women and children of Midʹi·an. They also plundered all their domestic animals, all their livestock, and all their possessions.
And all their cities in which they had settled and all their encampments they burned with fire.
And they took all the spoil and all the plunder, both humans and animals.
Then they brought the captives, the plunder, and the spoil to Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest and to the assembly of the Israelites, to the camp in the desert plains of Moʹab near the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
Then Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest and all the chieftains of the assembly went out to meet them outside the camp.
But Moses grew indignant at the appointed men of the combat forces, the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds who were coming in from the military expedition.
Moses said to them: “Have you preserved all the females alive?
Look! They are the ones who by Baʹlaam’s word induced the Israelites to commit unfaithfulness toward Jehovah over the affair of Peʹor, so that the scourge came upon the assembly of Jehovah.
Now you should kill every male among the children and kill every woman who has had sexual relations with a man.
But you may keep alive all the young girls who have not had sexual relations with a man.
And you should camp outside the camp seven days. Every one of you who has killed someone and every one of you who has touched someone slain should purify himself on the third day and on the seventh day, you and your captives.
And you should purify from sin every garment, every article of skin, everything made of goat hair, and every article of wood.”
El·e·aʹzar the priest then said to the men of the army who had gone into the battle: “This is the statute of the law that Jehovah commanded Moses,
‘Only the gold, the silver, the copper, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
everything that can be processed with fire, you should pass through the fire, and it will be clean. However, it should also be purified by the water for cleansing. Everything that cannot be processed with fire, you should pass through the water.
And you should wash your garments on the seventh day and be clean, and then you may come into the camp.’”
Jehovah then said this to Moses:
“Take an inventory of the plunder, counting the captives both of humans and animals; do this together with El·e·aʹzar the priest and the heads of the paternal houses of the assembly.
Divide what was plundered into two parts to be shared between those in the army who took part in the battle and all the rest of the assembly.
As a tax for Jehovah, you should take from the soldiers who went out into the battle one soul out of every 500, of the people, the herd, the donkeys, and the flock.
You should take it from their half and give it to El·e·aʹzar the priest as Jehovah’s contribution.
From the half given to the Israelites, you should take one out of 50, of the people, the herd, the donkeys, the flock, and every sort of domestic animal, and give them to the Levites, who care for the responsibilities connected with Jehovah’s tabernacle.”
So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
The spoils, the rest of the plunder that the people of the expedition had taken, amounted to 675,000 of the flock,
72,000 of the herd,
and 61,000 donkeys.
The women who had not had sexual relations with a man amounted to 32,000 women.
The half that was the share of those who went out into the battle amounted to 337,500 of the flock.
The tax for Jehovah from the flock amounted to 675.
And there were 36,000 of the herd, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 72.
And there were 30,500 donkeys, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 61.
And there were 16,000 humans, and the tax on them for Jehovah was 32 persons.
Then Moses gave the tax as Jehovah’s contribution to El·e·aʹzar the priest, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
From the half belonging to the Israelites, which Moses had divided off from the portion that belonged to the men who waged war,
that half of the flock amounted to 337,500,
and of the herd, 36,000,
and of the donkeys, 30,500,
and of the people, 16,000.
Then Moses took from the half belonging to the Israelites one out of 50, of the people and of the animals, and gave them to the Levites, who cared for the responsibility of Jehovah’s tabernacle, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then the appointed men who were of the thousands of the army, the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds, approached Moses,
and they said to Moses: “Your servants have taken the count of the men of war who are under our command, and not one has been reported missing from us.
So let us each present what he has found as Jehovah’s offering, articles of gold, ankle chains, bracelets, signet rings, earrings, and other jewelry, in order to make atonement for ourselves before Jehovah.”
So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest accepted the gold from them, all the jewelry.
All the gold of the contribution that they made to Jehovah amounted to 16,750 shekels, from the chiefs of the thousands and the chiefs of the hundreds.
The men of the army had each taken plunder for himself.
Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest accepted the gold from the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds and brought it into the tent of meeting as a reminder for the people of Israel before Jehovah.
Jehovah spoke again to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“This is a statute of the law that Jehovah has commanded, ‘Tell the Israelites that they should take for you a sound red cow in which there is no defect and upon which no yoke has come.
You are to give it to El·e·aʹzar the priest, and he will lead it outside the camp, and it will be slaughtered before him.
Then El·e·aʹzar the priest will take some of its blood with his finger and spatter its blood seven times straight toward the front of the tent of meeting.
The cow will then be burned before his eyes. Its skin and its flesh and its blood together with its dung will be burned.
And the priest will take cedarwood, hyssop, and scarlet material and throw them into the fire where the cow is being burned.
The priest will then wash his garments and bathe himself in water, and afterward he may come into the camp; but the priest will be unclean until the evening.
“‘The one who burned the cow will wash his garments in water and bathe himself in water, and he will be unclean until the evening.
“‘A clean man will gather up the ashes of the cow and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and they should be kept by the assembly of the Israelites to prepare water that will be used for cleansing. It is a sin offering.
The one gathering the ashes of the cow will wash his garments and be unclean until the evening. “‘This will serve the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst as a lasting statute.
Anyone touching any dead person will be unclean for seven days.
Such one should purify himself with the water on the third day, and on the seventh day he will be clean. But if he does not purify himself on the third day, on the seventh day he will not be clean.
Everyone who touches the corpse of any dead person and does not purify himself has defiled Jehovah’s tabernacle, and that person must be cut off from Israel. Because the water for cleansing has not been sprinkled on him, he continues unclean. His uncleanness remains upon him.
“‘This is the law that applies when a man dies in a tent: Everyone who enters the tent and everyone who was already in the tent will be unclean for seven days.
Every opened container with no lid tied on it is unclean.
Everyone in the open field who touches someone killed with the sword or a corpse or the bone of a man or a burial place will be unclean for seven days.
They should take for the unclean one some of the ashes of the sin offering that was burned and pour running water on them in a container.
Then a clean man will take hyssop and dip it into the water and spatter it on the tent and on all the containers and on the people who were there and on the one who touched the bone or the slain one or the corpse or the burial place.
The clean person will spatter it on the unclean one on the third day and on the seventh day, and he will purify him from sin on the seventh day; then he should wash his garments and bathe in water, and he will become clean in the evening.
“‘But the man who is unclean and who will not purify himself, that person must be cut off from the congregation, because he has defiled Jehovah’s sanctuary. The water for cleansing was not sprinkled on him, so he is unclean.
“‘This will serve as a lasting statute for them: The one spattering the water for cleansing should wash his garments, and the one touching the water for cleansing will be unclean until the evening.
Anything the unclean one touches will be unclean, and the person who touches it will be unclean until the evening.’”
These were the stages of the journey of the people of Israel when they went out of the land of Egypt by their companies under the direction of Moses and Aaron.
Moses kept recording the departure places by the stages of their journey at the order of Jehovah, and these were their stages from one departure place to another:
They departed from Ramʹe·ses in the first month, on the 15th day of the month. On the very day after the Passover, the Israelites went out with confidence before the eyes of all the Egyptians.
Meanwhile, the Egyptians were burying all the firstborn whom Jehovah had struck down among them, for Jehovah had executed judgments on their gods.
So the Israelites departed from Ramʹe·ses and camped at Sucʹcoth.
Then they departed from Sucʹcoth and camped at Eʹtham, which is on the edge of the wilderness.
Next they departed from Eʹtham and turned back toward Pi·ha·hiʹroth, which is in view of Baʹal-zeʹphon, and they camped before Migʹdol.
After that they departed from Pi·ha·hiʹroth and passed through the midst of the sea to the wilderness and kept marching a three-day journey in the wilderness of Eʹtham and camped at Maʹrah.
Then they departed from Maʹrah and came to Eʹlim. Now in Eʹlim there were 12 springs of water and 70 palm trees, so they camped there.
Next they departed from Eʹlim and camped by the Red Sea.
After that they departed from the Red Sea and camped in the wilderness of Sin.
Then they departed from the wilderness of Sin and camped at Dophʹkah.
Later they departed from Dophʹkah and camped at Aʹlush.
They next departed from Aʹlush and camped at Rephʹi·dim, where there was no water for the people to drink.
After that they departed from Rephʹi·dim and camped in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
They departed from the wilderness of Siʹnai and camped at Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah.
Then they departed from Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah and camped at Ha·zeʹroth.
After that they departed from Ha·zeʹroth and camped at Rithʹmah.
Next they departed from Rithʹmah and camped at Rimʹmon-peʹrez.
Then they departed from Rimʹmon-peʹrez and camped at Libʹnah.
They departed from Libʹnah and camped at Risʹsah.
Next they departed from Risʹsah and camped at Ke·he·laʹthah.
Then they departed from Ke·he·laʹthah and camped at Mount Sheʹpher.
After that they departed from Mount Sheʹpher and camped at Har·aʹdah.
Then they departed from Har·aʹdah and camped at Mak·heʹloth.
Next they departed from Mak·heʹloth and camped at Taʹhath.
After that they departed from Taʹhath and camped at Teʹrah.
Then they departed from Teʹrah and camped at Mithʹkah.
Later they departed from Mithʹkah and camped at Hash·moʹnah.
Next they departed from Hash·moʹnah and camped at Mo·seʹroth.
Then they departed from Mo·seʹroth and camped at Benʹe-jaʹa·kan.
And they departed from Benʹe-jaʹa·kan and camped at Hor-hag·gidʹgad.
Next they departed from Hor-hag·gidʹgad and camped at Jotʹba·thah.
Later they departed from Jotʹba·thah and camped at A·broʹnah.
Then they departed from A·broʹnah and camped at Eʹzi·on-geʹber.
After that they departed from Eʹzi·on-geʹber and camped in the wilderness of Zin, that is, Kaʹdesh.
Later they departed from Kaʹdesh and camped at Mount Hor, on the frontier of the land of Eʹdom.
And Aaron the priest went up into Mount Hor at the order of Jehovah and died there in the 40th year after the Israelites left the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first of the month.
Aaron was 123 years old at his death on Mount Hor.
Now the king of Aʹrad, the Caʹnaan·ite who was dwelling in the Negʹeb in the land of Caʹnaan, heard about the coming of the Israelites.
In time they departed from Mount Hor and camped at Zal·moʹnah.
After that they departed from Zal·moʹnah and camped at Puʹnon.
Next they departed from Puʹnon and camped at Oʹboth.
Then they departed from Oʹboth and camped at Iʹye-abʹa·rim, on the border of Moʹab.
Later they departed from Iʹyim and camped at Diʹbon-gad.
After that they departed from Diʹbon-gad and camped at Alʹmon-dib·la·thaʹim.
Then they departed from Alʹmon-dib·la·thaʹim and camped in the mountains of Abʹa·rim before Neʹbo.
Finally they departed from the mountains of Abʹa·rim and camped on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
They continued camping along the Jordan, from Beth-jeshʹi·moth as far as Aʹbel-shitʹtim, on the desert plains of Moʹab.
Jehovah spoke to Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘You are crossing the Jordan into the land of Caʹnaan.
You must drive away all the inhabitants of the land from before you and destroy all their carvings of stone and all their metal statues, and you should demolish all their sacred high places.
And you will take possession of the land and dwell in it, because I will certainly give you the land as a possession.
You must apportion the land by lot as a possession among your families. To the larger group you should increase his inheritance, and to the smaller group you should reduce his inheritance. Everyone’s inheritance will be where his lot falls. You will receive your property as an inheritance by the tribes of your fathers.
“‘If, though, you do not drive the inhabitants of the land away from before you, those whom you allow to remain will be as irritants in your eyes and thorns in your sides, and they will harass you in the land where you will dwell.
And I will do to you what I intended to do to them.’”
Now the people began to complain bitterly before Jehovah. When Jehovah heard it, his anger flared, and a fire from Jehovah began to blaze against them and to consume some on the outskirts of the camp.
When the people began to cry out to Moses, he made supplication to Jehovah, and the fire died out.
So that place was given the name Tabʹe·rah, because a fire from Jehovah had blazed against them.
The mixed crowd who were in their midst then expressed selfish longing, and the Israelites too began to weep again and say: “Who will give us meat to eat?
How fondly we remember the fish that we used to eat without cost in Egypt, also the cucumbers, the watermelons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic!
But now we are withering away. We see nothing at all except this manna.”
Incidentally, the manna was like coriander seed, and it looked like bdellium gum.
The people would spread out and pick it up and grind it in hand mills or pound it in a mortar. Then they would boil it in cooking pots or make it into round loaves, and it tasted like an oiled sweet cake.
When the dew descended on the camp by night, the manna would also descend on it.
Moses heard the people weeping, family after family, each man at the entrance of his tent. And Jehovah became very angry, and Moses was also very displeased.
Then Moses said to Jehovah: “Why have you afflicted your servant? Why have I not found favor in your eyes, so that you put the burden of all this people on me?
Did I conceive all this people? Did I give birth to them, so that you should tell me, ‘Carry them in your bosom, just as an attendant carries the nursing child,’ to the land that you swore to give to their forefathers?
From where will I get meat to give to all this people? For they keep weeping before me, saying, ‘Give us meat to eat!’
I am not able to bear all this people by myself; it is too much for me.
If this is how you are going to treat me, please kill me right now. If I have found favor in your eyes, do not make me see any more calamity.”
Jehovah replied to Moses: “Gather for me 70 men from the elders of Israel, men whom you recognize as elders and officials of the people, and take them to the tent of meeting, and have them stand there with you.
I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take away some of the spirit that is on you and place it on them, and they will help you in bearing the burden of the people so that you may not have to bear it alone.
You should say to the people, ‘Sanctify yourselves for tomorrow, for you will certainly eat meat, because you have wept in Jehovah’s hearing and have said: “Who will give us meat to eat? It was better for us in Egypt.” Jehovah will certainly give you meat, and you will eat.
You will eat, not one day nor 2 days nor 5 days nor 10 days nor 20 days,
but for a whole month of days, until it comes out of your nostrils and it has become loathsome to you, for you rejected Jehovah, who is in your midst, and you were weeping before him, saying: “Why is it that we have come out of Egypt?”’”
Then Moses said: “The people I am among number 600,000 men on foot, and yet you yourself have said, ‘Meat I will give them, and they will eat enough for a whole month of days’!
If whole flocks and herds were slaughtered, would it be enough for them? Or if all the fish of the sea were caught, would it be enough for them?”
Jehovah then said to Moses: “Is the hand of Jehovah too short? Now you will see whether what I say will happen to you or not.”
So Moses went out and spoke the words of Jehovah to the people. And he gathered 70 men from the elders of the people and had them stand around the tent.
Then Jehovah came down in a cloud and spoke to him and took away some of the spirit that was on him and put it on each of the 70 elders. And as soon as the spirit settled down on them, they began to behave as prophets, but they did not do it again.
There were two of the men still in the camp. Their names were Elʹdad and Meʹdad. And the spirit began to settle down on them, as they were among those whose names had been written down, but they had not gone out to the tent. So they began to behave as prophets in the camp.
And a young man ran and reported to Moses: “Elʹdad and Meʹdad are behaving as prophets in the camp!”
Then Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses from his youth, responded and said: “My lord Moses, restrain them!”
But Moses said to him: “Are you jealous for me? No, I wish that all of Jehovah’s people were prophets and that Jehovah would put his spirit on them!”
Later Moses returned to the camp along with the elders of Israel.
Then a wind from Jehovah sprang up and began driving quail from the sea and causing them to fall around the camp, about a day’s journey on this side and a day’s journey on the other side, all around the camp, and they were about two cubits deep on the ground.
So all that day and all night and all the next day, the people stayed up and gathered the quail. No one gathered less than ten hoʹmers, and they kept spreading them all around the camp for themselves.
But while the meat was still between their teeth, before it could be chewed, Jehovah’s anger blazed against the people, and Jehovah began striking the people with a very great slaughter.
So they gave that place the name Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah, because there they buried the people who showed selfish craving.
From Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah the people departed for Ha·zeʹroth, and they remained at Ha·zeʹroth.
After the scourge, Jehovah said to Moses and El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest:
“Take a census of the whole assembly of the Israelites from 20 years of age and up, by their paternal houses, counting all those who can serve in the army in Israel.”
So Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest spoke with them in the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying:
“Take a census of them from the age of 20 years and up, just as Jehovah commanded Moses.” Now the sons of Israel who went out of the land of Egypt were:
Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn; Reuʹben’s sons were: of Haʹnoch, the family of the Haʹnoch·ites; of Palʹlu, the family of the Palʹlu·ites;
of Hezʹron, the family of the Hezʹron·ites; of Carʹmi, the family of the Carʹmites.
These were the families of the Reuʹben·ites, and their registered ones amounted to 43,730.
The son of Palʹlu was E·liʹab.
And the sons of E·liʹab were Nemʹu·el, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram. This Daʹthan and A·biʹram were chosen ones of the assembly who fought against Moses and Aaron along with Korʹah’s group when they fought against Jehovah.
Then the earth opened and swallowed them up. As for Korʹah, he died with his supporters when the fire consumed 250 men. And they became a warning example.
However, the sons of Korʹah did not die.
The sons of Simʹe·on by their families were: of Nemʹu·el, the family of the Nemʹu·el·ites; of Jaʹmin, the family of the Jaʹmin·ites; of Jaʹchin, the family of the Jaʹchin·ites;
of Zeʹrah, the family of the Zeʹrah·ites; of Shaʹul, the family of the Sha·uʹlites.
These were the families of the Simʹe·on·ites: 22,200.
The sons of Gad by their families were: of Zeʹphon, the family of the Zeʹphon·ites; of Hagʹgi, the family of the Hagʹgites; of Shuʹni, the family of the Shuʹnites;
of Ozʹni, the family of the Ozʹnites; of Eʹri, the family of the Eʹrites;
of Arʹod, the family of the Arʹod·ites; of A·reʹli, the family of the A·reʹlites.
These were the families of the sons of Gad, and their registered ones were 40,500.
The sons of Judah were Er and Oʹnan. However, Er and Oʹnan died in the land of Caʹnaan.
And the sons of Judah by their families were: of Sheʹlah, the family of the She·laʹnites; of Peʹrez, the family of the Perʹe·zites; of Zeʹrah, the family of the Zeʹrah·ites.
And the sons of Peʹrez were: of Hezʹron, the family of the Hezʹron·ites; of Haʹmul, the family of the Ha·muʹlites.
These were the families of Judah, and their registered ones were 76,500.
The sons of Isʹsa·char by their families were: of Toʹla, the family of the Toʹla·ites; of Puʹvah, the family of the Puʹnites;
of Jaʹshub, the family of the Jashʹu·bites; of Shimʹron, the family of the Shimʹron·ites.
These were the families of Isʹsa·char, and their registered ones were 64,300.
The sons of Zebʹu·lun by their families were: of Seʹred, the family of the Serʹe·dites; of Eʹlon, the family of the Eʹlon·ites; of Jahʹle·el, the family of the Jahʹle·el·ites.
These were the families of the Ze·buʹlu·nites, and their registered ones were 60,500.
The sons of Joseph by their families were: Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im.
The sons of Ma·nasʹseh were: of Maʹchir, the family of the Maʹchir·ites; and Maʹchir became father to Gilʹe·ad; of Gilʹe·ad, the family of the Gilʹe·ad·ites.
These were the sons of Gilʹe·ad: of Ieʹzer, the family of the Ieʹzer·ites; of Heʹlek, the family of the Heʹlek·ites;
of Asʹri·el, the family of the Asʹri·el·ites; of Sheʹchem, the family of the Sheʹchem·ites;
of She·miʹda, the family of the She·miʹda·ites; of Heʹpher, the family of the Heʹpher·ites.
Now Ze·loʹphe·had the son of Heʹpher had no sons, only daughters, and the names of the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had were Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah.
These were the families of Ma·nasʹseh, and their registered ones were 52,700.
These were the sons of Eʹphra·im by their families: of Shuʹthe·lah, the family of the Shuʹthel·aʹhites; of Beʹcher, the family of the Beʹcher·ites; of Taʹhan, the family of the Taʹhan·ites.
And these were the sons of Shuʹthe·lah: of Eʹran, the family of the Eʹran·ites.
These were the families of the sons of Eʹphra·im, and their registered ones were 32,500. These were the sons of Joseph by their families.
The sons of Benjamin by their families were: of Beʹla, the family of the Beʹla·ites; of Ashʹbel, the family of the Ashʹbel·ites; of A·hiʹram, the family of the A·hiʹram·ites;
of She·phuʹpham, the family of the Shuʹpham·ites; of Huʹpham, the family of the Huʹpham·ites.
The sons of Beʹla were Ard and Naʹa·man: of Ard, the family of the Ardʹites; of Naʹa·man, the family of the Naʹa·mites.
These were the sons of Benjamin by their families, and their registered ones were 45,600.
These were the sons of Dan by their families: of Shuʹham, the family of the Shuʹham·ites. These were the families of Dan by their families.
All the families of the Shuʹham·ites, of their registered ones, were 64,400.
The sons of Ashʹer by their families were: of Imʹnah, the family of the Imʹnites; of Ishʹvi, the family of the Ishʹvites; of Be·riʹah, the family of the Be·riʹites;
of the sons of Be·riʹah: of Heʹber, the family of the Heʹber·ites; of Malʹchi·el, the family of the Malʹchi·el·ites.
The name of Ashʹer’s daughter was Seʹrah.
These were the families of the sons of Ashʹer, and their registered ones were 53,400.
The sons of Naphʹta·li by their families were: of Jahʹze·el, the family of the Jahʹze·el·ites; of Guʹni, the family of the Guʹnites;
of Jeʹzer, the family of the Jeʹzer·ites; of Shilʹlem, the family of the Shilʹlem·ites.
These were the families of Naphʹta·li by their families, and their registered ones were 45,400.
This is the total of those registered of the Israelites: 601,730.
After that Jehovah said to Moses:
“Among these the land should be divided as an inheritance according to the list of the names.
For the larger groups, you should increase the inheritance, and for the smaller groups, you should reduce the inheritance. Each group’s inheritance should be given in proportion to the number of those registered.
However, the land should be apportioned by lot. They should receive their inheritance according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
Each inheritance will be determined by lot and apportioned among the larger and the smaller groups.”
Now these were the registered ones of the Levites by their families: of Gerʹshon, the family of the Gerʹshon·ites; of Koʹhath, the family of the Koʹhath·ites; of Me·rarʹi, the family of the Me·rarʹites.
These were the families of the Levites: the family of the Libʹnites, the family of the Hebʹron·ites, the family of the Mahʹlites, the family of the Muʹshites, the family of the Korʹah·ites. Koʹhath became father to Amʹram.
And the name of Amʹram’s wife was Jochʹe·bed, Leʹvi’s daughter, whom his wife bore to Leʹvi in Egypt. And to Amʹram she bore Aaron and Moses and their sister Mirʹi·am.
Then to Aaron there were born Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.
But Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died for presenting unauthorized fire before Jehovah.
The total of those registered was 23,000, all males from a month old and up. For they were not registered among the Israelites, because no inheritance was to be given to them among the Israelites.
These were the ones registered by Moses and El·e·aʹzar the priest when they registered the Israelites in the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
But among them there was no one who had been registered by Moses and Aaron the priest in the census of the Israelites taken in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
For Jehovah had said concerning them: “They will die without fail in the wilderness.” So there was not a man left of them except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh and Joshua the son of Nun.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year of their coming out of the land of Egypt. He said:
“Take a census of the whole assembly of the Israelites individually according to their families, according to their paternal houses, according to the count of the names of all the males.
You and Aaron are to register by their companies all those from 20 years old and up who can serve in the army in Israel.
“Take with you one man from each tribe; each one is to be a head of his paternal house.
These are the names of the men who will stand with you: of Reuʹben, E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur;
of Simʹe·on, She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai;
of Judah, Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab;
of Isʹsa·char, Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar;
of Zebʹu·lun, E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon;
of the sons of Joseph: from Eʹphra·im, E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud; from Ma·nasʹseh, Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur;
of Benjamin, Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni;
of Dan, A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai;
of Ashʹer, Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran;
of Gad, E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel;
of Naphʹta·li, A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
These are the ones summoned from the assembly. They are the chieftains of the tribes of their fathers, the heads of the thousands of Israel.”
So Moses and Aaron took these men who had been designated by name.
They gathered all the assembly on the first day of the second month, so that they might be registered individually by name, by family, and by their paternal houses, from 20 years old and up,
just as Jehovah had commanded Moses. So he registered them in the wilderness of Siʹnai.
The sons of Reuʹben, the descendants of Israel’s firstborn, were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted individually,
and the number registered of the tribe of Reuʹben was 46,500.
The descendants of Simʹe·on were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted individually,
and the number registered of the tribe of Simʹe·on was 59,300.
The descendants of Gad were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Gad was 45,650.
The descendants of Judah were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Judah was 74,600.
The descendants of Isʹsa·char were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Isʹsa·char was 54,400.
The descendants of Zebʹu·lun were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun was 57,400.
The descendants of Joseph through Eʹphra·im were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Eʹphra·im was 40,500.
The descendants of Ma·nasʹseh were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh was 32,200.
The descendants of Benjamin were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Benjamin was 35,400.
The descendants of Dan were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Dan was 62,700.
The descendants of Ashʹer were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Ashʹer was 41,500.
The descendants of Naphʹta·li were listed by name, by family, and by their paternal houses. All the males from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army were counted,
and the number registered of the tribe of Naphʹta·li was 53,400.
These were registered by Moses together with Aaron and the 12 chieftains of Israel, each representing his paternal house.
All the Israelites from 20 years old and up who could serve in the army in Israel were registered by their paternal house,
and the total number registered was 603,550.
But the Levites were not registered in among them by the tribe of their fathers.
So Jehovah told Moses:
“Only the tribe of Leʹvi you are not to register, and you should not include the number of them along with the other Israelites.
You should appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the Testimony and over all its utensils and over everything that belongs to it. They will carry the tabernacle and all its utensils, and they will minister at it, and they are to camp around the tabernacle.
Whenever the tabernacle is to be moved, the Levites should take it down; and when the tabernacle is to be reassembled, the Levites should set it up; and any unauthorized person who comes near should be put to death.
“Each Israelite should set up his tent in his assigned camp, each man according to his three-tribe division by their companies.
And the Levites should encamp around the tabernacle of the Testimony, so that no indignation may arise against the assembly of the Israelites; and the Levites must be responsible for the care of the tabernacle of the Testimony.”
The people of Israel did all that Jehovah had commanded Moses. They did just so.
The family heads of the descendants of Gilʹe·ad the son of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh of the families of the sons of Joseph approached and spoke before Moses and the chieftains, the family heads of the Israelites.
They said: “Jehovah commanded my lord to distribute the land by lot as an inheritance to the Israelites; and my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of our brother Ze·loʹphe·had to his daughters.
If they marry men from another Israelite tribe, the women’s inheritance will also be withdrawn from the inheritance of our fathers and be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they would then belong, so that it would be withdrawn from the lot of our inheritance.
Now when the Jubilee takes place for the people of Israel, the women’s inheritance will also be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they then belong, so that their inheritance would be withdrawn from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.”
Then Moses commanded the Israelites at the order of Jehovah: “What the tribe of the sons of Joseph is saying is correct.
This is the word that Jehovah has commanded for the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had: ‘They may marry whomever they wish. However, they should marry someone from a family of the tribe of their father.
No inheritance of the Israelites should circulate from tribe to tribe, for the Israelites should hold on to the inheritance of the tribe of their forefathers.
And every daughter who possesses an inheritance among the tribes of Israel should become a wife of a descendant of her father’s tribe, so that the Israelites may keep possession of the inheritance of their forefathers.
No inheritance should circulate from one tribe to another tribe, for the tribes of Israel should hold on to their own inheritance.’”
The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
So Mahʹlah, Tirʹzah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Noah, the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, married the sons of their father’s brothers.
They became wives of men from the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph so that their inheritance would remain in the tribe of their father’s family.
These are the commandments and the judicial decisions that Jehovah gave to the Israelites through Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho.
On the day that Moses finished setting up the tabernacle, he anointed it and sanctified it, together with all its furnishings, the altar, and all its utensils. When he had anointed and sanctified these things,
the chieftains of Israel, the heads of their paternal houses, made an offering. These chieftains of the tribes who presided over the registration
brought before Jehovah their offering of six covered wagons and 12 oxen, a wagon for two chieftains and a bull for each one; and they presented them before the tabernacle.
Jehovah said to Moses:
“Accept these things from them, as they will be used for the service of the tent of meeting, and you should give them to the Levites, to each one as needed for his duties.”
So Moses accepted the wagons and the cattle and gave them to the Levites.
He gave two wagons and four oxen to the sons of Gerʹshon, according to what was needed for their duties;
and he gave four wagons and eight oxen to the sons of Me·rarʹi, according to what was needed for their duties, under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.
But he did not give any to the sons of Koʹhath because their duties involved the service of the holy place, and they carried the holy things on their shoulders.
Now the chieftains made their presentation at the inauguration of the altar on the day it was anointed. When the chieftains presented their offering before the altar,
Jehovah said to Moses: “One chieftain each day, on successive days, will present his offering for the inauguration of the altar.”
The one who presented his offering on the first day was Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab of the tribe of Judah.
His offering was one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab.
On the second day, Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar, the chieftain of Isʹsa·char, made a presentation.
He presented as his offering one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.
On the third day, the chieftain for the sons of Zebʹu·lun, E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.
On the fourth day, the chieftain for the sons of Reuʹben, E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur.
On the fifth day, the chieftain for the sons of Simʹe·on, She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.
On the sixth day, the chieftain for the sons of Gad, E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel.
On the seventh day, the chieftain for the sons of Eʹphra·im, E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud.
On the eighth day, the chieftain for the sons of Ma·nasʹseh, Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year, for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.
On the ninth day, the chieftain for the sons of Benjamin, Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.
On the tenth day, the chieftain for the sons of Dan, A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai.
On the 11th day, the chieftain for the sons of Ashʹer, Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.
On the 12th day, the chieftain for the sons of Naphʹta·li, A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan,
made his offering of one silver dish weighing 130 shekels and one silver bowl weighing 70 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
one gold cup weighing 10 shekels, full of incense;
one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb in its first year for a burnt offering;
one young goat for a sin offering;
and for a communion sacrifice, two cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs each a year old. This was the offering of A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
This was the inauguration offering of the altar from the chieftains of Israel when it was anointed: 12 silver dishes, 12 silver bowls, 12 gold cups;
each silver dish weighing 130 shekels and each bowl weighing 70 shekels, all the silver of the vessels amounting to 2,400 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place;
the 12 gold cups full of incense each weighed 10 shekels by the standard shekel of the holy place, all the gold of the cups amounting to 120 shekels.
All the cattle for the burnt offering were 12 bulls, 12 rams, 12 male lambs each a year old and their grain offerings, and 12 young goats for a sin offering;
and all the cattle of the communion sacrifice amounted to 24 bulls, 60 rams, 60 male goats, and 60 male lambs each a year old. This was the inauguration offering of the altar after it was anointed.
Whenever Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with God, he would hear the voice conversing with him from above the cover of the ark of the Testimony, from between the two cherubs; and God would speak to him.
When Israel was dwelling in Shitʹtim, the people started to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moʹab.
The women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people began to eat and to bow down to their gods.
So Israel joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor, and Jehovah became enraged with Israel.
Jehovah said to Moses: “Take all the leaders of these people and hang them up before Jehovah in broad daylight, that the burning anger of Jehovah may turn back from Israel.”
Then Moses said to the judges of Israel: “Each one of you should kill his men who joined in worship of the Baʹal of Peʹor.”
But just then, there came one of the Israelites bringing near to his brothers a Midʹi·an·ite woman before the eyes of Moses and of all the assembly of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
When Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he immediately rose up from the midst of the assembly and took a spear in his hand.
Then he went after the man of Israel into the tent and pierced both of them through, the man of Israel and the woman through her genital parts. At that the scourge on the Israelites was halted.
Those who died from the scourge amounted to 24,000.
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest has turned my wrath away from the people of Israel because he tolerated no rivalry at all toward me among them. So I have not exterminated the Israelites in my insistence on exclusive devotion.
Therefore, say, ‘I am giving him my covenant of peace.
And it will serve as the covenant of a lasting priesthood for him and his offspring after him, because he tolerated no rivalry toward his God and he made atonement for the people of Israel.’”
Incidentally, the name of the Israelite man who was put to death along with the Midʹi·an·i·tess was Zimʹri the son of Saʹlu, a chieftain of a paternal house of the Simʹe·on·ites.
The name of the Midʹi·an·ite woman who was put to death was Cozʹbi the daughter of Zur; he was a leader of the clans of a paternal house in Midʹi·an.
Jehovah later said to Moses:
“Harass the Midʹi·an·ites and strike them down,
because they have been harassing you with their cunning dealings against you in the affair of Peʹor and of Cozʹbi the daughter of a chieftain of Midʹi·an, their sister who was put to death in the day of the scourge over the affair of Peʹor.”
Jehovah now spoke to Moses, saying:
“Send out men to spy out the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving to the Israelites. You are to send out one man from each ancestral tribe, each one a chieftain among them.”
So Moses sent them out from the wilderness of Paʹran at the order of Jehovah. All the men were heads of the Israelites.
These are their names: of the tribe of Reuʹben, Sham·muʹa the son of Zacʹcur;
of the tribe of Simʹe·on, Shaʹphat the son of Hoʹri;
of the tribe of Judah, Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh;
of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, Iʹgal the son of Joseph;
of the tribe of Eʹphra·im, Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun;
of the tribe of Benjamin, Palʹti the son of Raʹphu;
of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun, Gadʹdi·el the son of Soʹdi;
of the tribe of Joseph, for the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Gadʹdi the son of Suʹsi;
of the tribe of Dan, Amʹmi·el the son of Ge·malʹli;
of the tribe of Ashʹer, Seʹthur the son of Miʹcha·el;
of the tribe of Naphʹta·li, Nahʹbi the son of Vophʹsi;
of the tribe of Gad, Geuʹel the son of Maʹchi.
These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses gave the name Joshua to Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun.
When Moses was sending them to spy out the land of Caʹnaan, he said to them: “Go up there into the Negʹeb, and then go up into the mountainous region.
You must see what kind of land it is and whether the people who are dwelling in it are strong or weak, few or many,
and whether the land is good or bad and whether the cities they are dwelling in are encampments or fortifications.
And find out whether the land is rich or poor and whether there are trees in it or not. You must be courageous and take some of the fruitage of the land.” Now it was the season of the first ripe grapes.
So they went up and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin to Reʹhob to Leʹbo-haʹmath.
When they went up into the Negʹeb, they came to Hebʹron, where A·hiʹman, Sheʹshai, and Talʹmai, the Anʹa·kim, were living. Incidentally, Hebʹron had been built seven years before Zoʹan of Egypt.
When they came to the Valley of Eshʹcol, there they cut down a branch with one cluster of grapes, which two of the men had to carry on a bar, as well as some of the pomegranates and figs.
They called that place the Valley of Eshʹcol because of the cluster that the Israelites cut down from there.
At the end of 40 days, they returned from spying out the land.
So they came back to Moses and Aaron and all the assembly of the Israelites in the wilderness of Paʹran, at Kaʹdesh. They brought back a report to all the assembly and showed them the fruitage of the land.
This is what they reported to Moses: “We entered the land into which you sent us, and it is indeed flowing with milk and honey, and this is its fruitage.
Nevertheless, the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the fortified cities are very great. We also saw the Anʹa·kim there.
The A·malʹek·ites are dwelling in the land of the Negʹeb, and the Hitʹtites, the Jebʹu·sites, and the Amʹor·ites are dwelling in the mountainous region, and the Caʹnaan·ites are dwelling by the sea and along the Jordan.”
Then Caʹleb tried to calm the people as they stood before Moses by saying: “Let us go up immediately, and we are sure to take possession of it, because we can surely conquer it.”
But the men who went up with him said: “We are not able to go up against the people, because they are stronger than we are.”
And they kept on giving the Israelites a bad report about the land that they had spied out, saying: “The land that we passed through to spy out is a land that devours its inhabitants, and all the people whom we saw in it are men of extraordinary size.
And there we saw the Nephʹi·lim, the sons of Aʹnak, who are from the Nephʹi·lim, and in comparison we seemed like grasshoppers, both to us and to them.”
When the Caʹnaan·ite king of Aʹrad, who dwelled in the Negʹeb, heard that Israel had come by the way of Athʹa·rim, he attacked Israel and carried away some of them as captives.
So Israel made this vow to Jehovah: “If you give this people into my hand, I will without fail devote their cities to destruction.”
So Jehovah listened to Israel’s voice and gave the Caʹnaan·ites over to them, and they devoted them and their cities to destruction. Therefore, they named the place Horʹmah.
As they continued their journey from Mount Hor by the way of the Red Sea in order to go around the land of Eʹdom, the people became weary of the journey.
And the people kept speaking against God and Moses, saying: “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? There is no food and no water, and we have come to hate this contemptible bread.”
So Jehovah sent poisonous serpents among the people, and they kept biting the people, so that many Israelites died.
So the people came to Moses and said: “We have sinned by speaking against Jehovah and against you. Intercede with Jehovah so that he may remove the serpents from us.” And Moses interceded on behalf of the people.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Make a replica of a poisonous snake and put it on a pole. Then when anyone has been bitten, he will have to look at it in order to keep alive.”
Moses at once made a serpent of copper and put it on the pole, and whenever a serpent had bitten a man and he looked at the copper serpent, he survived.
After that the Israelites departed and camped in Oʹboth.
Then they departed from Oʹboth and camped in Iʹye-abʹa·rim, in the wilderness that faces Moʹab, toward the east.
From there they departed and camped by the Valley of Zeʹred.
From there they departed and camped in the region of the Arʹnon, which is in the wilderness that extends from the border of the Amʹor·ites, for the Arʹnon is the boundary of Moʹab, between Moʹab and the Amʹor·ites.
That is why the book of the Wars of Jehovah speaks of “Vaʹheb in Suʹphah and the valleys of Arʹnon,
and the descent of the valleys, which extends toward the settlement of Ar and adjoins the border of Moʹab.”
Next they went on to Beʹer. This is the well about which Jehovah said to Moses: “Gather the people, and let me give them water.”
At that time, Israel sang this song: “Spring up, O well!—Respond to it!
The well that princes dug, that nobles of the people excavated,With a commander’s staff and with their own staffs.” Then they went from the wilderness on to Matʹta·nah,
from Matʹta·nah on to Na·halʹi·el, and from Na·halʹi·el on to Baʹmoth.
They went from Baʹmoth on to the valley that is in the territory of Moʹab, on top of Pisʹgah, which overlooks Je·shiʹmon.
Israel now sent messengers to Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, saying:
“Let us pass through your land. We will not turn aside into a field or a vineyard. We will not drink water from any well. We will march on the King’s Road until we pass through your territory.”
But Siʹhon did not allow Israel to pass through his territory. Instead, Siʹhon gathered all his people and went out against Israel in the wilderness and came to Jaʹhaz and began fighting with Israel.
But Israel defeated him with the sword and took possession of his land from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok, near the Amʹmon·ites, because Jaʹzer borders the territory of the Amʹmon·ites.
So Israel took all these cities, and they began dwelling in all the cities of the Amʹor·ites, in Heshʹbon and all its dependent towns.
For Heshʹbon was the city of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites, who had fought with the king of Moʹab and taken all his land from him as far as the Arʹnon.
That is what gave rise to the taunting proverbial saying: “Come to Heshʹbon. Let the city of Siʹhon be built and firmly established.
For a fire came out of Heshʹbon, a flame from the town of Siʹhon. It has consumed Ar of Moʹab, the lords of the high places of the Arʹnon.
Woe to you, Moʹab! You will be destroyed, O people of Cheʹmosh! He makes his sons fugitives and his daughters captives of Siʹhon, the king of the Amʹor·ites.
Let us shoot at them;Heshʹbon will be destroyed as far as Diʹbon;Let us desolate it as far as Noʹphah;Fire will spread as far as Medʹe·ba.”
So Israel began to dwell in the land of the Amʹor·ites.
Moses then sent some men to spy on Jaʹzer. They captured its dependent towns and drove out the Amʹor·ites who were there.
After that they turned and went up by way of Baʹshan. And Og the king of Baʹshan came out with all his people to meet them in battle at Edʹre·i.
Jehovah said to Moses: “Do not be afraid of him, for I will give him and all his people and his land into your hand, and you will do to him just as you did to Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon.”
So they kept striking him down, along with his sons and all his people, until none of his people survived, and they took possession of his land.
Now these were the family lines of Aaron and Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses on Mount Siʹnai.
These were the names of Aaron’s sons: the firstborn Naʹdab, and A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.
These were the names of Aaron’s sons, the anointed priests who had been installed to serve as priests.
However, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died before Jehovah when they offered unauthorized fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of Siʹnai, and they did not have any sons. But El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar continued to serve as priests along with Aaron their father.
Jehovah then said to Moses:
“Bring the tribe of Leʹvi forward, and stand them before Aaron the priest, and they will minister to him.
They are to fulfill their responsibilities toward him and toward all the assembly before the tent of meeting by carrying out their service in connection with the tabernacle.
They are to take care of all the utensils of the tent of meeting and to carry out their responsibilities toward the Israelites by taking care of the services related to the tabernacle.
You are to give the Levites to Aaron and his sons. They are given ones, given to him from the Israelites.
You should appoint Aaron and his sons, and they are to carry out their priestly duties, and any unauthorized person who comes near should be put to death.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“As for me, look! I take the Levites from among the Israelites in place of all the firstborn of the Israelites, and the Levites will become mine.
For every firstborn is mine. In the day that I struck every firstborn in the land of Egypt, I sanctified to myself every firstborn in Israel from man to beast. They are to become mine. I am Jehovah.”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai, saying:
“Register the sons of Leʹvi by their paternal houses and by their families. You should register every male from a month old and up.”
So Moses registered them at the order of Jehovah, just as he had been commanded.
These were the names of the sons of Leʹvi: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.
Now these were the names of the sons of Gerʹshon by their families: Libʹni and Shimʹe·i.
The sons of Koʹhath by their families were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el.
The sons of Me·rarʹi by their families were Mahʹli and Muʹshi. These were the families of the Levites by their paternal houses.
From Gerʹshon came the family of the Libʹnites and the family of the Shimʹe·ites. These were the families of the Gerʹshon·ites.
The number of all their males a month old and up who were registered was 7,500.
The families of the Gerʹshon·ites were encamped behind the tabernacle toward the west.
The chieftain of the paternal house of the Gerʹshon·ites was E·liʹa·saph the son of Laʹel.
The responsibility of the sons of Gerʹshon in the tent of meeting was to care for the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, the screen of the entrance of the tent of meeting,
the hanging curtains of the courtyard, the screen of the entrance of the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and the altar, its tent cords, and all the service connected with these.
From Koʹhath came the family of the Amʹram·ites, the family of the Izʹhar·ites, the family of the Hebʹron·ites, and the family of the Uz·ziʹel·ites. These were the families of the Koʹhath·ites.
The number of all the males from a month old and up was 8,600; they were responsible for taking care of the holy place.
The families of the sons of Koʹhath camped on the south side of the tabernacle.
The chieftain of the paternal house of the families of the Koʹhath·ites was E·li·zaʹphan the son of Uzʹzi·el.
Their responsibility was to care for the Ark, the table, the lampstand, the altars, the utensils used to minister in the holy place, the screen, and all the service connected with these.
The head chieftain of the Levites was El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest, who had the oversight of those taking care of the responsibilities of the holy place.
From Me·rarʹi came the family of the Mahʹlites and the family of the Muʹshites. These were the families of Me·rarʹi.
The number of all the males from a month old and up who were registered was 6,200.
The chieftain of the paternal house of the families of Me·rarʹi was Zuʹri·el the son of Abʹi·ha·il. They were encamped on the north side of the tabernacle.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were responsible for overseeing the panel frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its socket pedestals, all its utensils, and all the service connected with these,
as well as the pillars that were all around the courtyard and their socket pedestals, their tent pins, and their tent cords.
Those camping in front of the tabernacle toward the east, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrise, were Moses and Aaron and his sons. They were responsible for taking care of the sanctuary as their obligation in behalf of the Israelites. Any unauthorized person coming near would be put to death.
All the Levite males from a month old and up, whom Moses and Aaron registered by their families at the order of Jehovah, were 22,000.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Register all the firstborn males of the Israelites from a month old and up, count them, and make a list of their names.
You must take the Levites for me—I am Jehovah—in place of all the firstborn of the Israelites, and take the domestic animals of the Levites in place of all the firstborn of the domestic animals of the Israelites.”
Moses then registered all the firstborn among the Israelites, just as Jehovah had commanded him.
The number of all the firstborn males who were registered by name from a month old and up was 22,273.
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Take the Levites in place of all the firstborn among the Israelites, and take the domestic animals of the Levites in place of their domestic animals, and the Levites must become mine. I am Jehovah.
As the ransom price of the 273 of the firstborn of the Israelites who are in excess of the Levites,
you are to take five shekels for each individual, according to the standard shekel of the holy place. A shekel is 20 geʹrahs.
You are to give the money to Aaron and his sons as the ransom price of those who are in excess of them.”
So Moses took the money of the redemption price from those who were in excess of the ransom price of the Levites.
He took the money from the firstborn of the Israelites, 1,365 shekels, according to the standard shekel of the holy place.
Then Moses gave the money of the ransom price to Aaron and his sons according to the word of Jehovah, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of Israel, saying: “This is the word that Jehovah has commanded:
If a man makes a vow to Jehovah or swears an oath to impose on himself a vow of abstinence, he must not violate his word. He should do everything he vowed he would do.
“And if a woman makes a vow to Jehovah or she imposes a vow of abstinence on herself when she is young and living in the house of her father
and her father hears her vow or her abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself and her father offers no objection, all her vows will stand, and every abstinence vow that she has imposed on herself will stand.
But if her father forbids her when he hears that she has imposed vows or abstinence vows on herself, it will not stand. Jehovah will forgive her because her father forbade her.
“However, if she should marry a husband while under her vow or the rash promise that she has imposed on herself
and her husband hears of it and offers no objection on the day he hears of it, her vows or her abstinence vows that she has imposed on herself will stand.
But if her husband forbids her on the day he hears of it, he may annul the vow or the rash promise that she imposed on herself, and Jehovah will forgive her.
“But if a widow or a divorced woman makes a vow, everything that she has imposed on herself will be binding on her.
“However, if a woman imposed the vow or the abstinence vow on herself while in the house of her husband
and her husband heard it and has not objected or disapproved, all her vows or any abstinence vow that she imposed on herself will stand.
But if on the day he heard them her husband completely annulled whatever vows or abstinence vow she swore to, they will not stand. Her husband annulled them, and Jehovah will forgive her.
Regarding any vow or any oath involving an abstinence vow to practice self-denial, her husband should establish it or her husband should annul it.
But if her husband offers no objection at all from day to day, he also establishes all her vows or all her abstinence vows that are upon her. He establishes them because he did not object on the day he heard her make them.
But if he annuls them later, sometime after the day he heard them, he will bear the consequences of her guilt.
“These are the regulations that Jehovah commanded Moses relating to a husband and his wife, and relating to a father and his young daughter living in his house.”
Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Siʹnai in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying:
“The Israelites should prepare the Passover sacrifice at its appointed time.
On the 14th day of this month at twilight, you should prepare it at its appointed time. According to all its statutes and all its set procedures, you should prepare it.”
So Moses told the Israelites to prepare the Passover sacrifice.
Then they prepared the Passover sacrifice in the first month, on the 14th day of the month at twilight, in the wilderness of Siʹnai. According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did.
Now there were men who had become unclean by touching a dead body, so that they were not able to prepare the Passover sacrifice on that day. So those men presented themselves before Moses and Aaron on that day
and said to him: “We are unclean because of touching a dead body. Why should we be kept from presenting the offering to Jehovah at its appointed time among the Israelites?”
At this Moses said to them: “Wait there, and let me hear what Jehovah may command regarding you.”
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘Although any man among you or of your future generations should become unclean by touching a dead body or should be off on a distant journey, he must still prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah.
They should prepare it in the second month, on the 14th day at twilight. They should eat it together with unleavened bread and bitter greens.
They must not let any of it remain until morning, and they should not break any bone in it. They should prepare it according to every statute regarding the Passover.
But if a man was clean or was not off on a journey and neglected to prepare the Passover sacrifice, that person must then be cut off from his people, because he did not present the offering of Jehovah at its appointed time. That man will answer for his sin.
“‘And if a foreign resident is residing with you, he should also prepare the Passover sacrifice to Jehovah. He should do so according to the statute of the Passover and its set procedure. There should exist one statute for you, both for the foreign resident and for the native of the land.’”
Now on the day the tabernacle was set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, the tent of the Testimony, but in the evening what appeared to be fire remained over the tabernacle until morning.
That is what continued to take place: The cloud would cover it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.
Whenever the cloud lifted from the tent, the Israelites would promptly depart, and in the place where the cloud would remain, there is where the Israelites would encamp.
At the order of Jehovah the Israelites would depart, and at the order of Jehovah they would encamp. As long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle, they would remain encamped.
When the cloud would stay over the tabernacle for many days, the Israelites would obey Jehovah and not depart.
Sometimes the cloud would remain for a few days over the tabernacle. At the order of Jehovah they would remain encamped, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart.
Sometimes the cloud would remain only from evening until morning, and when the cloud lifted in the morning, they would depart. Whether it was day or night when the cloud lifted, they would depart.
Whether it was two days, a month, or longer, as long as the cloud stayed over the tabernacle, the Israelites remained encamped and would not depart. But when it lifted, they would depart.
At the order of Jehovah they would encamp, and at the order of Jehovah they would depart. They kept their obligation to Jehovah at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
When Baʹlaam saw that it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, he did not go away again to search for omens of doom, but he turned his face to the wilderness.
When Baʹlaam raised his eyes and saw Israel encamped by his tribes, then the spirit of God came upon him.
He then spoke this proverbial saying: “The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor,And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened,
The saying of the one hearing the word of God,Who saw a vision of the Almighty,Who has bowed down with his eyes uncovered:
How beautiful are your tents, O Jacob,Your tabernacles, O Israel!
Like the valleys they have extended a long way,Like gardens by the river,Like aloes that Jehovah has planted,Like cedars by the waters.
Water keeps trickling from his two leather buckets,And his seed is sown by many waters. His king also will be greater than Aʹgag,And his kingdom will be exalted.
God is bringing him out of Egypt;He is like the horns of a wild bull for them. He will consume the nations, his oppressors,And their bones he will gnaw, and he will shatter them with his arrows.
He has crouched down, he has lain down like the lion,And like a lion, who dares rouse him? Those blessing you are blessed,And those cursing you are cursed.”
Then Baʹlak became furious with Baʹlaam. Baʹlak scornfully clapped his hands together and said to Baʹlaam: “It was to put a curse on my enemies that I called you, but now you have done nothing but bless them these three times.
Now go home immediately. I intended to honor you greatly, but look! Jehovah has deprived you of honor.”
Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Did I not say to the messengers you sent,
‘If Baʹlak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not of my own will do anything beyond the order of Jehovah, whether good or bad. I will only speak what Jehovah will tell me’?
And now I am going away to my people. Come and let me advise you what this people will do to your people in the future.”
So he spoke this proverbial saying: “The saying of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor,And the saying of a man whose eyes have been opened,
The saying of the one hearing the word of God,And the one having the knowledge of the Most High,A vision of the Almighty he sawWhile bowing down with his eyes uncovered:
I will see him, but not now;I will behold him, but not soon. A star will come out of Jacob,And a scepter will rise out of Israel. And he will certainly break apart the forehead of MoʹabAnd the skull of all the sons of tumult.
And Eʹdom will become a possession,Yes, Seʹir the possession of his enemies,While Israel is displaying his courage.
And out of Jacob one will be subduing,And he will destroy any survivor from the city.”
When he saw Amʹa·lek, he continued his proverbial saying: “Amʹa·lek was the first of the nations,But in the end he will perish.”
When he saw the Kenʹites, he continued his proverbial saying: “Secure is your dwelling, and set on the crag is your abode.
But someone will burn Kaʹin down. How long before As·syrʹi·a carries you away captive?”
And he continued his proverbial saying: “Woe! Who will survive when God does this?
Ships will come from the coast of Kitʹtim,And they will afflict As·syrʹi·a,And they will afflict Eʹber. But he too will utterly perish.”
Then Baʹlaam got up and went and returned to his place. Baʹlak also went his own way.
Then the daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had, the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, of the families of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, approached. The names of his daughters were Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah.
They stood before Moses, El·e·aʹzar the priest, the chieftains, and all the assembly at the entrance of the tent of meeting and said:
“Our father died in the wilderness, but he was not among the group who banded together against Jehovah, the supporters of Korʹah, but he died for his own sin and he did not have any sons.
Why should the name of our father be lost from his family because he had no son? Give us a possession among our father’s brothers.”
So Moses presented their case before Jehovah.
Jehovah then said this to Moses:
“The daughters of Ze·loʹphe·had are correct. You should by all means give them the possession as an inheritance among their father’s brothers and transfer their father’s inheritance to them.
And tell the Israelites, ‘If a man dies without having a son, you must then cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.
And if he has no daughter, you will give his inheritance to his brothers.
And if he has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to his father’s brothers.
And if his father has no brothers, you will give his inheritance to the closest blood relative in his family, and he will take possession of it. This will serve as a statute by judicial decision for the Israelites, just as Jehovah has commanded Moses.’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, and view the land that I will give the Israelites.
When you have seen it, you will also be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother was,
because when the assembly was quarreling with me in the wilderness of Zin, you rebelled against my order to sanctify me before them by means of the waters. These are the waters of Merʹi·bah at Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin.”
Then Moses said to Jehovah:
“Let Jehovah, the God of the spirit of all people, appoint over the assembly a man
who will go out and come in before them and who will lead them out and bring them in, so that Jehovah’s assembly may not become like sheep that have no shepherd.”
So Jehovah said to Moses: “Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom there is spirit, and lay your hand on him.
Then stand him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly, and you must commission him before their eyes.
You are to confer some of your authority on him, so that all the assembly of the Israelites may listen to him.
He will stand before El·e·aʹzar the priest, who will inquire in his behalf by the judgment of the Uʹrim before Jehovah. At his order they will go out and at his order they will come in, he and all the Israelites with him and all the assembly.”
So Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded him. He took Joshua and stood him before El·e·aʹzar the priest and before all the assembly,
and he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as Jehovah had spoken through Moses.
Jehovah now spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“The Israelites should encamp where their three-tribe division is assigned, each man near the banner of his paternal house. They should camp facing the tent of meeting, all around it.
“Those camping on the east side, toward the sunrise, will be the three-tribe division of the encampment of Judah by their companies; the chieftain for the sons of Judah is Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab.
Those registered in his army are 74,600.
Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Isʹsa·char; the chieftain for the sons of Isʹsa·char is Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.
Those registered in his army are 54,400.
Next is the tribe of Zebʹu·lun; the chieftain for the sons of Zebʹu·lun is E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.
Those registered in his army are 57,400.
“All those registered in the armies of the camp of Judah are 186,400. They should break camp first.
“The three-tribe division of the encampment of Reuʹben by their companies will be toward the south; the chieftain for the sons of Reuʹben is E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur.
Those registered in his army are 46,500.
Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Simʹe·on; the chieftain for the sons of Simʹe·on is She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.
Those registered in his army are 59,300.
Next is the tribe of Gad; the chieftain for the sons of Gad is E·liʹa·saph the son of Reuʹel.
Those registered in his army are 45,650.
“All those registered in the armies of the camp of Reuʹben are 151,450, and they should break camp second.
“When the tent of meeting is moved, the camp of the Levites should be in the middle of the other camps. “They should travel in the same order as they encamp, with each in his place, according to their three-tribe divisions.
“The three-tribe division of the encampment of Eʹphra·im by their companies will be toward the west; the chieftain for the sons of Eʹphra·im is E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud.
Those registered in his army are 40,500.
Next to him will be the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh; the chieftain for the sons of Ma·nasʹseh is Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.
Those registered in his army are 32,200.
Next is the tribe of Benjamin; the chieftain for the sons of Benjamin is Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.
Those registered in his army are 35,400.
“All those registered in the armies of the camp of Eʹphra·im are 108,100, and they should break camp third.
“The three-tribe division of the encampment of Dan by their companies will be toward the north; the chieftain for the sons of Dan is A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai.
Those registered in his army are 62,700.
Camping alongside him will be the tribe of Ashʹer; the chieftain for the sons of Ashʹer is Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.
Those registered in his army are 41,500.
Next is the tribe of Naphʹta·li; the chieftain for the sons of Naphʹta·li is A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
Those registered in his army are 53,400.
“All those registered in the camp of Dan are 157,600. They should break camp last, according to their three-tribe divisions.”
These were the Israelites who were registered according to their paternal houses; the total of those in the camps registered for the army was 603,550.
But the Levites did not get registered along with the other Israelites, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
The Israelites did everything that Jehovah had commanded Moses. This is how they encamped by their three-tribe divisions and how they broke camp, each by family and according to their paternal houses.
Jehovah then said to Moses:
“Make two trumpets for yourself; make them of hammered silver, and use them to summon the assembly and to break up the camps.
When both of them are blown, the whole assembly must be summoned to you at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
If just one is blown, only the chieftains, the heads of the thousands of Israel, will be summoned to you.
“When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast, the camps of those to the east should depart.
When you sound a fluctuating trumpet blast a second time, the camps of those to the south should depart. They should sound the trumpet blasts in this way each time one of them departs.
“Now when calling the congregation together, you should blow the trumpets, but not with fluctuating blasts.
Aaron’s sons, the priests, should blow the trumpets, and the use of them will serve as a lasting statute for you throughout your generations.
“If you should go to war in your land against an oppressor who is harassing you, you should sound a war call on the trumpets, and you will be remembered by Jehovah your God and be saved from your enemies.
“Also, on your joyous occasions—your festivals and at the beginning of your months—you are to sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings and your communion sacrifices; they will serve as a reminder for you before your God. I am Jehovah your God.”
Now in the second year, in the second month, on the 20th day of the month, the cloud lifted from over the tabernacle of the Testimony.
So the Israelites began to pull away from the wilderness of Siʹnai in the order established for their departure, and the cloud settled in the wilderness of Paʹran.
This was the first time they departed following the order of Jehovah through Moses.
So the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Judah departed first by their companies, and Nahʹshon the son of Am·minʹa·dab was over its company.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char was Ne·thanʹel the son of Zuʹar.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun was E·liʹab the son of Heʹlon.
When the tabernacle was taken down, the sons of Gerʹshon and the sons of Me·rarʹi, who carried the tabernacle, departed.
Then the three-tribe division of the camp of Reuʹben departed by their companies, and E·liʹzur the son of Shedʹe·ur was over its company.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on was She·luʹmi·el the son of Zu·ri·shadʹdai.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Gad was E·liʹa·saph the son of Deuʹel.
Then the Koʹhath·ites, who carried the sanctuary items, departed. The tabernacle was to be set up by the time they arrived.
Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Eʹphra·im departed by their companies, and E·lishʹa·ma the son of Am·miʹhud was over its company.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh was Ga·maʹli·el the son of Pe·dahʹzur.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abʹi·dan the son of Gid·e·oʹni.
Then the three-tribe division of the camp of the sons of Dan departed by their companies, forming the rear guard for all the camps, and A·hi·eʹzer the son of Am·mi·shadʹdai was over its company.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer was Paʹgi·el the son of Ochʹran.
Over the company of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li was A·hiʹra the son of Eʹnan.
This was the order of departure that the Israelites and their companies followed when they would depart.
Then Moses said to Hoʹbab the son of Reuʹel the Midʹi·an·ite, the father-in-law of Moses: “We are setting out for the place about which Jehovah said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Do come with us, and we will treat you well, because Jehovah has promised good things for Israel.”
But he said to him: “I will not go. I will return to my own country and to my relatives.”
At this he said: “Please do not leave us, for you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and you can serve as our guide.
And if you do come with us, whatever goodness Jehovah shows to us, we will surely show to you.”
So they began marching from the mountain of Jehovah for a journey of three days, and the ark of Jehovah’s covenant traveled before them for the three-day journey to search out a resting-place for them.
And Jehovah’s cloud was over them by day when they set out from the encampment.
Whenever the Ark was moved, Moses would say: “Rise up, O Jehovah, and let your enemies be scattered, and let those who hate you flee from before you.”
And when it would rest, he would say: “Do return, O Jehovah, to the countless thousands of Israel.”
Then Korʹah the son of Izʹhar, the son of Koʹhath, the son of Leʹvi, got up together with Daʹthan and A·biʹram the sons of E·liʹab, and On the son of Peʹleth, of the sons of Reuʹben.
They rose up against Moses along with 250 Israelite men, chieftains of the assembly, chosen ones of the congregation, prominent men.
So they gathered together against Moses and Aaron and said to them: “We have had enough of you! The whole assembly is holy, all of them, and Jehovah is in their midst. Why, then, should you exalt yourselves above the congregation of Jehovah?”
When Moses heard this, he at once fell facedown.
Then he said to Korʹah and to all his supporters: “In the morning Jehovah will make known who belongs to him and who is holy and who should approach him, and whomever he may choose will approach him.
Do this: Take fire holders, Korʹah and all your supporters,
and put fire in them and place incense on them before Jehovah tomorrow, and the man whom Jehovah will choose, he is the holy one. You sons of Leʹvi have gone far enough!”
Moses then said to Korʹah: “Listen, please, you sons of Leʹvi.
Does it seem to you such a little thing that the God of Israel has separated you from the assembly of Israel and allowed you to approach him in order to perform the service of Jehovah’s tabernacle and to stand before the assembly to minister to them,
and that he brought you near to him along with all your brothers, the sons of Leʹvi? Must you also try to secure the priesthood?
For this reason, you and all your supporters who are gathering together are against Jehovah. As for Aaron, who is he that you should murmur against him?”
Moses later sent for Daʹthan and A·biʹram the sons of E·liʹab, but they said: “We are not going to come!
Is it so little a thing that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to put us to death in the wilderness? Now do you also want to make yourself an absolute ruler over us?
As it is, you have not brought us into any land flowing with milk and honey or given us an inheritance of field and vineyard. Would you bore out the eyes of those men? We are not going to come!”
So Moses became very angry and said to Jehovah: “Do not turn to look at their grain offering. Not one donkey have I taken away from them, nor have I harmed one of them.”
Then Moses said to Korʹah: “Present yourself with all your supporters before Jehovah tomorrow, you and they and Aaron.
Each one should take his fire holder and put incense on it, and each will present his fire holder before Jehovah, 250 fire holders, together with you and Aaron, each with his fire holder.”
So each of them took his fire holder, and they put fire and incense on them and stood at the entrance of the tent of meeting together with Moses and Aaron.
When Korʹah had gathered his supporters against them at the entrance of the tent of meeting, Jehovah’s glory appeared to all the assembly.
Jehovah now told Moses and Aaron:
“Separate yourselves from among this group, so that I may exterminate them in an instant.”
At this, they fell with their faces to the ground and said: “O God, the God of the spirit of all people, will one man’s sin cause you to become indignant against the entire assembly?”
Jehovah then said to Moses:
“Speak to the assembly and tell them, ‘Get away from around the tents of Korʹah, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram!’”
Then Moses got up and went to Daʹthan and A·biʹram, and the elders of Israel went with him.
He told the assembly: “Move away, please, from the tents of these wicked men and do not touch anything that belongs to them, so that you may not be swept away in all their sin.”
They immediately moved away from the tents of Korʹah, Daʹthan, and A·biʹram, from every side, and Daʹthan and A·biʹram came out, taking their stand at the entrance of their tents, together with their wives, their sons, and their little children.
Then Moses said: “By this you will know that Jehovah has sent me to do all these things, that it is not of my own heart:
If these people die a natural death as all men do and if their punishment is the same as that of all mankind, then Jehovah has not sent me.
But if Jehovah does something extraordinary with them and the ground opens and swallows them and everything that belongs to them and they go down alive into the Grave, you will certainly know that these men have treated Jehovah disrespectfully.”
As soon as he finished speaking all these words, the ground beneath them split apart.
And the earth opened and swallowed them up, along with their households and everyone who belonged to Korʹah and all their goods.
So they and all who belonged to them went down alive into the Grave, and the earth covered them over, so that they perished from the midst of the congregation.
All the Israelites who were around them fled at their screaming, for they said: “We are afraid that the earth may swallow us up!”
Then a fire came out from Jehovah and consumed the 250 men offering the incense.
Jehovah now said to Moses:
“Tell El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest to take the fire holders out of the fire, for they are holy. Also tell him to scatter the fire some distance away.
The fire holders of the men who sinned at the cost of their lives should be made into thin metal plates to overlay the altar, because they presented them before Jehovah, and they became holy. They should serve as a sign to the Israelites.”
So El·e·aʹzar the priest took the copper fire holders that had been presented by those who were burned up, and beat them to overlay the altar,
just as Jehovah had told him through Moses. It was a reminder for the Israelites that no unauthorized person who is not of the offspring of Aaron should approach to burn incense before Jehovah and that no one should become like Korʹah and his supporters.
On the very next day, the whole assembly of the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, saying: “You two have put Jehovah’s people to death.”
When the assembly had gathered together against Moses and Aaron, they then turned toward the tent of meeting, and look! the cloud covered it, and Jehovah’s glory began to appear.
Moses and Aaron went before the tent of meeting,
and Jehovah said to Moses:
“You men, remove yourselves from among this assembly, so that I may exterminate them in an instant.” At this they fell with their faces to the ground.
Moses then said to Aaron: “Take the fire holder and put fire from the altar in it and put incense on it and go quickly to the assembly and make atonement for them, because indignation has gone out from Jehovah. The plague has started!”
Aaron at once took it, just as Moses had said, and ran into the midst of the congregation, and look! the plague had started among the people. So he put the incense on the fire holder and began making atonement for the people.
He kept standing between the dead and the living, and the scourge eventually stopped.
Those who died from the scourge amounted to 14,700, besides those dead on account of Korʹah.
When at last Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance of the tent of meeting, the scourge had been stopped.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Command the Israelites to send out of the camp every leprous person and everyone having a discharge and everyone unclean by a dead person.
Whether a male or a female, you should send them out. You should send them outside the camp, so that they may not contaminate the camps of those in whose midst I am dwelling.”
Therefore, the Israelites did so and sent them outside the camp. Just as Jehovah told Moses, so the Israelites did.
Jehovah continued speaking to Moses, saying:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘If a man or a woman commits any of the sins of mankind and acts unfaithfully toward Jehovah, that person has become guilty.
He must confess the sin that he has committed and return the full amount as compensation for his guilt and also add a fifth of its value; he is to give it to the one he wronged.
But if the victim does not have a close relative to receive the compensation, it should be returned to Jehovah and will belong to the priest, apart from the ram of atonement with which he will make atonement for him.
“‘Every holy contribution from the Israelites that is presented to the priest should become his.
The holy things of each person will remain his own. Whatever each one gives to the priest, that will belong to the priest.’”
Jehovah went on to speak to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘This is what should be done if a man’s wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him
and another man has sexual relations with her, but it was unknown to her husband and remains undiscovered, so that she has defiled herself but there is no witness against her and she has not been caught:
Whether the husband becomes jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has defiled herself, or whether he is jealous and suspicious of his wife’s faithfulness when she has not defiled herself,
the man must bring his wife to the priest, along with an offering for her, a tenth of an eʹphah of barley flour. He must not pour oil on it nor put frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering of jealousy, a grain offering bringing guilt to mind.
“‘The priest will bring her forward and make her stand before Jehovah.
The priest will take holy water in an earthenware vessel, and the priest will take some of the dust from the floor of the tabernacle and put it in the water.
And the priest will make the woman stand before Jehovah and unbind the woman’s hair and put in her palms the grain offering for a reminder, that is, the grain offering of jealousy, and the priest will have in his hand the bitter water that brings a curse.
“‘The priest will then make her swear, saying to the woman: “If no other man had sexual relations with you while you were under your husband’s authority and you have not gone astray and become defiled, may you be free of the effect of this bitter water that brings a curse.
But if you have gone astray while under your husband’s authority by defiling yourself, and you have had sexual relations with another man besides your husband—”
The priest will then make the woman swear an oath that includes a curse, and the priest will say to the woman: “May Jehovah make you an object for cursing and for an oath among your people, as Jehovah makes your thigh fall away and causes your abdomen to swell.
This water that brings a curse will enter into your intestines to cause your abdomen to swell and make your thigh fall away.” To this the woman should say: “Amen! Amen!”
“‘Then the priest should write these curses in the book and wash them off into the bitter water.
He will then make the woman drink the bitter water that brings a curse, and the water that brings a curse will enter into her and produce bitterness.
And the priest should take the grain offering of jealousy from the woman’s hand and wave the grain offering back and forth before Jehovah, and he will bring it near the altar.
The priest will take a handful of the grain offering as a token offering and make it smoke on the altar, and afterward he will make the woman drink the water.
When he makes her drink the water, if she has defiled herself and committed an act of unfaithfulness toward her husband, the water that brings a curse will then enter into her and become something bitter, and her abdomen will swell, and her thigh will fall away, and the woman will become an object of cursing among her people.
However, if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, she will then be free from such punishment, and she will be able to conceive and produce offspring.
“‘This is the law about jealousy, when a woman may go astray and defile herself while under her husband’s authority,
or in the case of a man who becomes jealous and suspects his wife of unfaithfulness; he should make his wife stand before Jehovah, and the priest must carry out toward her all this law.
The man will be free from guilt, but his wife will answer for her guilt.’”
Then all the assembly raised their voice, and the people continued crying out and weeping all through that night.
All the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, and the whole assembly spoke against them, saying: “If only we had died in the land of Egypt, or if only we had died in this wilderness!
Why is Jehovah bringing us to this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and children will become plunder. Is it not better for us to return to Egypt?”
They were even saying to one another: “Let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt!”
At this Moses and Aaron fell with their faces to the ground before the whole assembled congregation of the Israelites.
Joshua the son of Nun and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, who were among those who spied out the land, ripped their garments apart,
and they said this to all the assembly of the Israelites: “The land that we passed through to spy out is a very, very good land.
If Jehovah is pleased with us, he will certainly bring us into this land and give it to us, a land that is flowing with milk and honey.
But you must not rebel against Jehovah, and you must not fear the people of the land, for we will devour them. Their protection has been removed from them, and Jehovah is with us. Do not fear them.”
However, all the assembly talked of stoning them. But Jehovah’s glory appeared on the tent of meeting to all the people of Israel.
Then Jehovah said to Moses: “How much longer will this people treat me without respect, and how much longer will they not put faith in me in spite of all the signs that I performed among them?
Let me strike them with pestilence and drive them away, and let me make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are.”
But Moses said to Jehovah: “Then the Egyptians, from whose midst you brought this people out by your power, will hear,
and they will speak about it to the inhabitants of this land. These also have heard that you, Jehovah, are among this people and have appeared to them face-to-face. You are Jehovah, and your cloud is standing over them, and you are going before them in the pillar of cloud by day and in the pillar of fire by night.
If you put this people to death all at once, the nations who have heard of your fame would say this:
‘Jehovah was not able to bring this people into the land he swore to give them, so he slaughtered them in the wilderness.’
Please, now, Jehovah, let your power be great, as you promised when you said:
‘Jehovah, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, pardoning error and transgression, but he will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation.’
Forgive, please, the error of this people according to your great loyal love, just as you have pardoned this people from Egypt until now.”
Then Jehovah said: “I forgive them according to your word.
But on the other hand, as surely as I live, all the earth will be filled with the glory of Jehovah.
However, not one of the men who have seen my glory and my signs that I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness and yet have kept testing me these ten times and have not listened to my voice
will ever see the land about which I swore to their fathers. No, not one of those treating me without respect will see it.
But because my servant Caʹleb had a different spirit and kept following after me wholeheartedly, I will certainly bring him into the land where he went, and his offspring will take possession of it.
Since the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites are dwelling in the valley, you should turn back tomorrow and set off for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.”
Jehovah then said to Moses and Aaron:
“How much longer will this evil assembly keep up this murmuring against me? I have heard what the Israelites are murmuring against me.
Say to them, ‘“As surely as I live,” declares Jehovah, “I will do to you just what I have heard you speak!
In this wilderness your corpses will fall, yes, the whole number of you from 20 years old and up who were registered, all of you who have murmured against me.
None of you will enter into the land that I swore to have you reside in except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh and Joshua the son of Nun.
“‘“And I will bring in your children, who you said would become plunder, and they will get to know the land that you have rejected.
But your own corpses will fall in this wilderness.
Now your sons will become shepherds in the wilderness 40 years, and they will have to answer for your acts of unfaithfulness until the last one of your corpses falls in the wilderness.
According to the number of the days that you spied out the land, 40 days, a day for a year, a day for a year, you will answer for your errors 40 years, for you will know what it means to oppose me.
“‘“I, Jehovah, have spoken. This is what I will do to all this evil assembly, those who have gathered together against me: In this wilderness they will come to their end, and here they will die.
The men whom Moses sent to spy out the land and who caused the whole assembly to murmur against him when they returned with a bad report about the land,
yes, the men who brought back the bad report about the land will be struck down and die before Jehovah.
But Joshua the son of Nun and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, who were among those who went to spy out the land, will certainly keep living.”’”
When Moses spoke these words to all the Israelites, the people began to mourn a great deal.
Moreover, they got up early in the morning and tried to go up to the top of the mountain, saying: “Here we are ready to go up to the place that Jehovah spoke about, for we have sinned.”
But Moses said: “Why are you going beyond the order of Jehovah? This will not succeed.
Do not go up, for Jehovah is not with you; and you will be defeated by your enemies.
For the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites are there to face you, and you will fall by the sword. Because you turned away from following Jehovah, Jehovah will not be with you.”
However, they presumptuously went toward the top of the mountain, but the ark of Jehovah’s covenant and Moses did not move away from the middle of the camp.
Then the A·malʹek·ites and the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in that mountain came down and struck them, scattering them as far as Horʹmah.
Jehovah next said to Moses:
“Command the Israelites and tell them, ‘You should take care that you present to me my offering, my bread. My offerings by fire as a pleasing aroma to me must be made at their appointed times.’
“And say to them, ‘This is the offering made by fire that you will present to Jehovah: two sound year-old male lambs a day as a burnt offering regularly.
The one male lamb you will offer in the morning, and the other male lamb you will offer at twilight,
together with a tenth of an eʹphah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of beaten oil as a grain offering.
It is a regular burnt offering, which was established at Mount Siʹnai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah,
along with its drink offering, a fourth of a hin for each male lamb. Pour out the alcoholic drink in the holy place as a drink offering to Jehovah.
And you will offer the other male lamb at twilight. With the same grain offering as that made in the morning and with its same drink offering, you will present it as an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘However, on the Sabbath day, the offering should be two sound year-old male lambs and two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, together with its drink offering.
This is the burnt offering for the Sabbath, along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
“‘At the start of each month you will present as a burnt offering to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven sound male lambs each a year old,
and three tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each bull and two tenth measures of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for the one ram,
and a tenth measure of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each male lamb, as a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And their drink offerings should be half a hin of wine for a bull and a third of a hin for the ram and a fourth of a hin for a male lamb. This is the monthly burnt offering each month throughout the year.
Also, one young goat should be offered as a sin offering to Jehovah in addition to the regular burnt offering together with its drink offering.
“‘In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, will be Jehovah’s Passover.
And on the 15th day of this month, there will be a festival. Unleavened bread will be eaten for seven days.
On the first day there will be a holy convention. You must not do any hard work.
And you will present as a burnt offering made by fire to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old. You should offer sound animals.
You should offer them with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for a bull and two tenth measures for the ram.
You will offer a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
as well as one goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you.
Aside from the morning burnt offering, which is for the regular burnt offering, you will offer these.
You will offer these in the same manner each day for seven days as food, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah. It should be offered along with the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
On the seventh day you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work.
“‘On the day of the first ripe fruits, when you present a new grain offering to Jehovah, you should hold a holy convention in your feast of weeks. You must not do any hard work.
You will present as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old,
and as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for each bull, two tenth measures for the one ram,
a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
as well as one young goat to make atonement for you.
You will offer them in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering. They should be sound animals, along with their drink offerings.
Then the Israelites departed and camped on the desert plains of Moʹab across the Jordan from Jerʹi·cho.
Now Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor saw all that Israel had done to the Amʹor·ites,
and Moʹab became very frightened of the people, because they were so many; indeed, Moʹab felt sick with fear because of the Israelites.
So Moʹab said to the elders of Midʹi·an: “Now this congregation will devour all our surroundings, just as a bull devours the grass in the field.” Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor was king of Moʹab at that time.
He sent messengers to Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor at Peʹthor, which is by the River in his native land. He summoned him, saying: “Look! A people has come out of Egypt. Look! They have covered the face of the earth, and they are dwelling right in front of me.
Now, please, come and curse this people for me, for they are mightier than I am. Perhaps I can defeat them and drive them out of the land, for I well know that the one whom you bless is blessed and the one whom you curse is cursed.”
So the elders of Moʹab and the elders of Midʹi·an traveled with the fee for divination in their hands and went to Baʹlaam and conveyed to him Baʹlak’s message.
At that he said to them: “Spend the night here, and I will bring back to you whatever word Jehovah speaks to me.” So the princes of Moʹab stayed with Baʹlaam.
Then God came to Baʹlaam and said: “Who are these men with you?”
Baʹlaam said to the true God: “Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab, has sent me a message, saying,
‘Look! The people who are coming out of Egypt are covering the face of the earth. Now come and put a curse on them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.’”
But God said to Baʹlaam: “You must not go with them. You must not curse the people, for they are blessed.”
Baʹlaam got up in the morning and said to the princes of Baʹlak: “Go to your land, for Jehovah has refused to let me go with you.”
So the princes of Moʹab departed and returned to Baʹlak and said: “Baʹlaam has refused to come with us.”
However, Baʹlak again sent princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first group.
They came to Baʹlaam and said to him: “This is what Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor has said, ‘Please do not let anything hinder you from coming to me,
for I will honor you greatly and I will do anything you tell me to do. So come, please, and curse this people for me.’”
But Baʹlaam answered the servants of Baʹlak: “If Baʹlak were to give me his own house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything beyond the order of Jehovah my God, whether small or great.
But please stay here tonight also, so that I may learn what else Jehovah will tell me.”
Then God came to Baʹlaam by night and said to him: “If these men have come to summon you, go along with them. But you may speak only the words that I tell you to say.”
So Baʹlaam got up in the morning and saddled his donkey and went with the princes of Moʹab.
But God’s anger blazed because he was going, and Jehovah’s angel stationed himself in the road to resist him. Now Baʹlaam was riding on his donkey, and two of his attendants were with him.
And when the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, it tried to turn off the road into the field. But Baʹlaam began to beat the donkey to make it return to the road.
Then Jehovah’s angel stood in a narrow path between two vineyards, with stone walls on both sides.
When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it began to squeeze itself against the wall and it jammed Baʹlaam’s foot against the wall, and Baʹlaam began beating it again.
Jehovah’s angel now passed by again and stood in a narrow place where there was no way to turn to the right or to the left.
When the donkey saw Jehovah’s angel, it lay down under Baʹlaam, so Baʹlaam became furious and kept beating the donkey with his staff.
Finally Jehovah caused the donkey to speak, and it said to Baʹlaam: “What have I done to you to make you beat me these three times?”
Baʹlaam replied to the donkey: “It is because you have made a fool of me. If only I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you!”
Then the donkey said to Baʹlaam: “Am I not your donkey that you have ridden on all your life until today? Have I ever treated you this way before?” He replied: “No!”
Then Jehovah uncovered Baʹlaam’s eyes, and he saw Jehovah’s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand. At once he bowed low and prostrated himself on his face.
Then Jehovah’s angel said to him: “Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? Look! I myself came out to offer resistance, because your way is in defiance of my will.
The donkey saw me and tried to turn away from me these three times. Supposing it had not turned away from me! By now I would have killed you and let the donkey live.”
Baʹlaam said to Jehovah’s angel: “I have sinned, because I did not know that it was you standing in the road to meet me. And now if it is bad in your eyes, I will go back.”
But Jehovah’s angel said to Baʹlaam: “Go with the men, but you may speak only the words that I tell you.” So Baʹlaam continued going with the princes of Baʹlak.
When Baʹlak heard that Baʹlaam had come, he immediately went out to meet him at the city of Moʹab, which is on the bank of the Arʹnon on the border of the territory.
Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Did I not send for you? Why did you not come to me? Did you think I am not able to honor you greatly?”
Baʹlaam replied to Baʹlak: “Well, I have come to you now. But will I be allowed to say anything? I can only speak words that God puts in my mouth.”
So Baʹlaam went with Baʹlak, and they came to Kirʹi·ath-huʹzoth.
Baʹlak sacrificed cattle and sheep and sent some to Baʹlaam and the princes who were with him.
In the morning Baʹlak took Baʹlaam and brought him up to Baʹmoth-baʹal; from there he could see all the people.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When you eventually come into the land that I am giving you to dwell in
and you make an offering by fire to Jehovah from the herd or from the flock—whether a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or a voluntary offering or an offering during your seasonal festivals, in order to make a pleasing aroma to Jehovah—
the one presenting his offering must also present to Jehovah a grain offering of fine flour, a tenth of an eʹphah, mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil.
You should also offer wine as a drink offering, a fourth of a hin, together with the burnt offering or for the sacrifice of each male lamb.
Or for a ram, you should make a grain offering of two tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil.
And you should present wine as a drink offering, a third of a hin, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘But if you should offer a male of the herd as a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or communion sacrifices to Jehovah,
you should also present together with the male of the herd a grain offering of three tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil.
You should also present wine as a drink offering, half a hin, as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
This is what should be done for each bull or for each ram or for each of the male lambs or of the goats.
Whatever may be the number that you offer, that is what you should do for each one, according to their number.
This is how every native-born Israelite should present an offering made by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
“‘If a foreigner who is residing with you or one who has been in your midst for many of your generations should also make an offering by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, he should do just as you do.
You who are of the congregation and the foreigner who is residing with you will have one statute. It will be a lasting statute for all your generations. The foreign resident should be the same as you before Jehovah.
There should be one law and one judicial decision for you and for the foreigner who is residing with you.’”
Jehovah went on to say to Moses:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘When you come into the land where I am bringing you
and you eat any of the bread of the land, you should make a contribution to Jehovah.
You should make a contribution of the firstfruits of your coarse meal as ring-shaped loaves. Like the contribution of a threshing floor is the way you should contribute it.
Some of the firstfruits of your coarse meal you should give as a contribution to Jehovah throughout your generations.
“‘Now if you make a mistake and fail to observe all these commandments that Jehovah has spoken to Moses,
all that Jehovah has commanded you through Moses from the day that Jehovah commanded and onward for your generations,
and if it was done by mistake and without the knowledge of the assembly, the whole assembly must offer one young bull as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, together with its grain offering and its drink offering according to the regular procedure, and one young goat as a sin offering.
The priest will make atonement for the whole assembly of the Israelites, and it will be forgiven them, because it was a mistake, and they brought as their offering an offering made by fire to Jehovah and their sin offering before Jehovah for their mistake.
It will be forgiven the whole assembly of the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, because it was by mistake on the part of all the people.
“‘If any person should sin by mistake, then he must present a female goat in its first year for a sin offering.
And the priest will make atonement for the person who made a mistake by an unintentional sin before Jehovah, so as to make atonement for it, and it will be forgiven him.
As for the native-born among the Israelites and the foreigner who is residing in their midst, there should be one law for you in the matter of doing something unintentionally.
“‘But the person who does something deliberately, whether he is native-born or a foreign resident, is blaspheming Jehovah and must be cut off from among his people.
Because he has despised Jehovah’s word and broken his commandment, that person should be cut off without fail. His own error is upon him.’”
While the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man collecting pieces of wood on the Sabbath day.
Those who found him collecting wood brought him up to Moses and Aaron and the whole assembly.
They committed him into custody because it had not been specified what should be done to him.
And Jehovah said to Moses: “The man should be put to death without fail, and the whole assembly should stone him outside the camp.”
So the whole assembly brought him outside the camp and stoned him so that he died, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Jehovah went on to say this to Moses:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them that they must make for themselves fringed edges on the skirts of their garments throughout their generations, and they are to put a blue string above the fringed edge of the skirt.
‘You must have this fringed edge so that you will see it and remember all the commandments of Jehovah and observe them. You must not follow your own hearts and eyes, which are leading you to spiritual prostitution.
This will help you remember, and you will observe all my commandments and be holy to your God.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt in order to prove myself your God. I am Jehovah your God.’”
Now the sons of Reuʹben and the sons of Gad had very large quantities of livestock, and they saw that the lands of Jaʹzer and Gilʹe·ad were a good region for livestock.
So the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben approached Moses, El·e·aʹzar the priest, and the chieftains of the assembly and said:
“Atʹa·roth, Diʹbon, Jaʹzer, Nimʹrah, Heshʹbon, E·le·aʹleh, Seʹbam, Neʹbo, and Beʹon,
the land that Jehovah defeated before the assembly of Israel, is a good land for livestock, and your servants have much livestock.”
They continued: “If we have found favor in your eyes, let this be the land given to your servants as a possession. Do not make us cross the Jordan.”
Then Moses said to the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben: “Are your brothers to go to war while you yourselves keep dwelling here?
Why should you discourage the people of Israel from crossing into the land that Jehovah is certain to give them?
That is what your fathers did when I sent them from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to see the land.
When they went up to the Valley of Eshʹcol and saw the land, they discouraged the people of Israel from going into the land that Jehovah was to give them.
Jehovah’s anger blazed on that day so that he swore:
‘The men who came up out of Egypt from 20 years old and up will not see the land of which I have sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, because they have not followed me wholeheartedly—
except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite and Joshua the son of Nun, because they have followed Jehovah wholeheartedly.’
So Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel and he made them wander about in the wilderness for 40 years, until all the generation that was doing evil in the eyes of Jehovah came to its end.
Now here you have risen in the place of your fathers as a brood of sinful men who increase the burning anger of Jehovah against Israel.
If you turn back from following him, he will certainly leave them again in the wilderness, and you will bring ruin to all this people.”
They later approached him and said: “Let us build here stone pens for our livestock and cities for our children.
But we will continue ready for battle and will go before the Israelites until we have brought them to their place, while our children will dwell in the fortified cities, safe from the inhabitants of the land.
We will not return to our houses until each of the Israelites has received his land as an inheritance.
For we will not receive an inheritance with them on the other side of the Jordan and beyond, because we have received our inheritance on the east side of the Jordan.”
Moses replied to them: “If you will do this: Take up arms before Jehovah for the war;
and if every one of you takes up arms and crosses the Jordan before Jehovah as he drives away his enemies from before him
until the land is subdued before Jehovah, afterward you may return and be free from guilt before Jehovah and Israel. Then this land will become your possession before Jehovah.
But if you do not do this, you will have sinned against Jehovah. In that case, know that your sin will catch up with you.
So you may build cities for your children and pens for your flocks, but you must do what you have promised.”
The sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben said this to Moses: “Your servants will do just as my lord is commanding.
Our children, our wives, our livestock, and all our domestic animals will stay there in the cities of Gilʹe·ad,
but your servants will cross over, every man armed for battle to wage war before Jehovah, just as my lord is speaking.”
So Moses gave a command concerning them to El·e·aʹzar the priest, to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel.
Moses said to them: “If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben cross over the Jordan with you, every man armed for the war before Jehovah, and the land is subdued before you, you will then give them the land of Gilʹe·ad as a possession.
But if they do not take up arms and cross over with you, they will then settle among you in the land of Caʹnaan.”
To this the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuʹben answered: “What Jehovah has spoken to your servants is what we will do.
We will take up arms and cross over before Jehovah to the land of Caʹnaan, but the possession we are to inherit will be on this side of the Jordan.”
So Moses gave to them—to the sons of Gad, the sons of Reuʹben, and to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph—the kingdom of Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites and the kingdom of Og the king of Baʹshan, the land belonging to its cities in those territories, and the cities of the surrounding land.
And the sons of Gad built Diʹbon, Atʹa·roth, A·roʹer,
Atʹroth-shoʹphan, Jaʹzer, Jogʹbe·hah,
Beth-nimʹrah, and Beth-haʹran, fortified cities, and they built stone pens for the flocks.
And the sons of Reuʹben built Heshʹbon, E·le·aʹleh, Kir·i·a·thaʹim,
Neʹbo, and Baʹal-meʹon—their names being changed—and Sibʹmah; and they began to rename the cities that they rebuilt.
The sons of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh marched against Gilʹe·ad and captured it and drove away the Amʹor·ites who were in it.
So Moses gave Gilʹe·ad to Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, and he began dwelling in it.
And Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh marched against them and captured their tent villages, and he began to call them Havʹvoth-jaʹir.
And Noʹbah marched against and captured Keʹnath and its dependent towns, and he began to call it Noʹbah by his own name.
Jehovah now spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“A census should be taken of the sons of Koʹhath from among the sons of Leʹvi, by their families and by their paternal houses,
all those from 30 to 50 years old who are in the group assigned to work in the tent of meeting.
“This is the service of the sons of Koʹhath in the tent of meeting. It is something most holy:
Aaron and his sons will come in when the camp is departing and take down the screening curtain and cover the ark of the Testimony with it.
They will put a sealskin covering over it and spread out a solid blue cloth over it and put its carrying poles in place.
“They will also spread out a blue cloth over the table of showbread, and they will put on it the dishes, the cups, the bowls, and the pitchers of the drink offering; the regular offering of bread should remain on it.
They will spread out a scarlet cloth over them and cover it with a sealskin covering and put its carrying poles in place.
Then they will take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand for the light, along with its lamps, its snuffers, its fire holders, and all its containers for oil that are used to maintain it.
They will wrap it and all its utensils in a sealskin covering and put it on a carrying bar.
And they will spread out a blue cloth over the golden altar, cover it with a sealskin covering, and put its carrying poles in place.
They will then take all the utensils of the ministry with which they regularly minister in the holy place and put them in a blue cloth and cover them with a sealskin covering and put them on a carrying bar.
“They should remove the ashes from the altar and spread out a cloth of purple wool over it.
They will put on it all its utensils that are used when they minister at the altar: the fire holders, the forks, the shovels, and the bowls, all the utensils of the altar; and they are to spread a sealskin covering over it and put its carrying poles in place.
“Aaron and his sons must finish covering the holy place and all the utensils of the holy place when the camp is departing. Then the sons of Koʹhath will come in to carry them, but they must not touch the holy place or they will die. These things are the responsibility of the sons of Koʹhath in connection with the tent of meeting.
“El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest is responsible for overseeing the oil of the lighting, the perfumed incense, the regular grain offering, and the anointing oil. He has oversight of the entire tabernacle and all that is in it, including the holy place and its utensils.”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses and Aaron, saying:
“Do not let the tribe of the families of the Koʹhath·ites be cut off from among the Levites.
But do this for them that they may remain alive and not die because of approaching the most holy things. Aaron and his sons will go in and assign each of them to his service and what he is to carry.
They must not come in and see the holy things even for an instant, or they will die.”
Then Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying:
“A census should be taken of the sons of Gerʹshon by their paternal houses and their families.
You are to register all those from 30 to 50 years old who are in the group assigned to serve in the tent of meeting.
This is what the families of the Gerʹshon·ites are assigned to care for and to carry:
They will carry the tent cloths of the tabernacle, the tent of meeting, its covering and the sealskin covering that is on top over it, the screen of the entrance of the tent of meeting,
the hanging curtains of the courtyard, the screen of the entrance of the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and the altar, their tent cords and all their utensils and everything used in its service. This is their assignment.
All the service and the loads of the Gerʹshon·ites should be overseen by Aaron and his sons; you will assign all these loads as their responsibility.
This is the service that the families of the Gerʹshon·ites are to carry out in the tent of meeting, and their responsibilities are under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.
“As for the sons of Me·rarʹi, you will register them by family and by their paternal house.
From 30 to 50 years old you will register them, all who are in the group assigned to the service of the tent of meeting.
This is what they are responsible for carrying in connection with their service at the tent of meeting: the panel frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its socket pedestals;
the pillars of the surrounding courtyard, their socket pedestals, their tent pins, and their tent cords together with all their equipment and all the service connected with these. You will assign to them by name the equipment they are responsible for carrying.
This is how the families of the sons of Me·rarʹi are to serve at the tent of meeting, under the direction of Ithʹa·mar the son of Aaron the priest.”
Moses and Aaron and the chieftains of the assembly then registered the sons of the Koʹhath·ites by their families and by their paternal house,
all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service of the tent of meeting.
The total of those registered by their families was 2,750.
These were registered from the families of the Koʹhath·ites, all those who were serving at the tent of meeting. Moses and Aaron registered them at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
The sons of Gerʹshon were registered by their families and by their paternal house,
all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service at the tent of meeting.
The total of those registered by their families and by their paternal house was 2,630.
This was the registration of the families of the sons of Gerʹshon, all those who were serving at the tent of meeting. Moses and Aaron had them registered at the order of Jehovah.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were registered by their families and by their paternal house,
all those from 30 to 50 years old who were in the group assigned to the service at the tent of meeting.
The total of those registered of them by their families was 3,200.
This was the registration of the families of the sons of Me·rarʹi, whom Moses and Aaron registered at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
Moses and Aaron and the chieftains of Israel registered all these Levites by their families and by their paternal houses;
they were from 30 to 50 years old, and all were assigned to serve and carry loads in connection with the tent of meeting.
The total of those registered was 8,580.
They were registered at the order of Jehovah through Moses, each according to his assigned service and his load; they were registered just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
In the first month, the entire assembly of the Israelites came into the wilderness of Zin, and the people began dwelling in Kaʹdesh. It was there that Mirʹi·am died and was buried.
Now there was no water for the assembly, and they gathered together against Moses and Aaron.
The people were quarreling with Moses, saying: “If only we had died when our brothers died before Jehovah!
Why have you brought Jehovah’s congregation into this wilderness for us and our livestock to die here?
And why have you led us up out of Egypt to bring us into this evil place? It is no place for seed and figs and vines and pomegranates, and there is no water to drink.”
Then Moses and Aaron came from before the congregation to the entrance of the tent of meeting and fell with their faces to the ground, and Jehovah’s glory began to appear to them.
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Take the rod and call the assembly together, you and Aaron your brother, and speak to the crag before their eyes that it may give its water, and you will bring out water for them from the crag and give the assembly and their livestock something to drink.”
So Moses took the rod from before Jehovah, just as He had commanded him.
Then Moses and Aaron called the congregation together before the crag, and he said to them: “Hear, now, you rebels! Must we bring out water for you from this crag?”
With that Moses lifted his hand up and struck the crag twice with his rod, and much water began to pour out, and the assembly and their livestock began to drink.
Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron: “Because you did not show faith in me and sanctify me before the eyes of the people of Israel, you will not bring this congregation into the land that I will give them.”
These are the waters of Merʹi·bah, where the Israelites quarreled with Jehovah, so that he was sanctified among them.
Then Moses sent messengers from Kaʹdesh to the king of Eʹdom: “This is what your brother Israel says, ‘You well know all the hardship that we have experienced.
Our fathers went to Egypt, and we dwelled in Egypt many years, and the Egyptians mistreated us and our fathers.
Finally we cried out to Jehovah, and he heard us and sent an angel and brought us out of Egypt, and here we are in Kaʹdesh, a city on the border of your territory.
Please let us pass through your land. We will not pass through any field or vineyard, and we will not drink the water of any well. We will march on the King’s Road without turning to the right or the left until we pass through your territory.’”
However, Eʹdom said to him: “You may not pass through our territory. If you do, I will come out with the sword to meet you.”
In turn the Israelites said to him: “By the highway we will go up, and if we and our livestock drink your water, we will pay for it. We want nothing more than to pass through on foot.”
Still he said: “You may not pass through.” With that Eʹdom came out to encounter him with many people and a strong army.
So Eʹdom refused to allow Israel to pass through his territory; therefore, Israel turned away from him.
The people of Israel, the entire assembly, departed from Kaʹdesh and came to Mount Hor.
Then Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor by the border of the land of Eʹdom:
“Aaron will be gathered to his people. He will not enter the land that I will give to the Israelites, because you both rebelled against my order regarding the waters of Merʹi·bah.
Take Aaron and his son El·e·aʹzar and bring them up into Mount Hor.
Remove Aaron’s garments and clothe El·e·aʹzar his son with them, and Aaron will die there.”
So Moses did just as Jehovah had commanded, and they climbed Mount Hor before the eyes of all the assembly.
Then Moses removed Aaron’s garments and clothed El·e·aʹzar his son with them. After that Aaron died there on the top of the mountain. And Moses and El·e·aʹzar came down from the mountain.
When all the assembly saw that Aaron had died, the entire house of Israel wept for Aaron for 30 days.
Now Mirʹi·am and Aaron began to speak against Moses because of the Cushʹite wife he had married, for he had taken a Cushʹite wife.
They were saying: “Is it only by Moses that Jehovah has spoken? Has he not also spoken through us?” And Jehovah was listening.
Now the man Moses was by far the meekest of all the men on the face of the earth.
Jehovah suddenly said to Moses and Aaron and Mirʹi·am: “Go out, the three of you, to the tent of meeting.” So the three of them went out.
And Jehovah came down in the pillar of cloud and stood at the entrance of the tent and called Aaron and Mirʹi·am. Both of them went forward.
He then said: “Hear my words, please. If there was a prophet of Jehovah among you, I would make myself known to him in a vision, and I would speak to him in a dream.
But it is not that way with my servant Moses! He is being entrusted with all my house.
Face-to-face I speak to him, openly, not by riddles; and the appearance of Jehovah is what he sees. Why, then, did you not fear to speak against my servant, against Moses?”
So Jehovah’s anger burned against them, and he departed from them.
The cloud moved away from over the tent, and look! Mirʹi·am was struck with leprosy as white as snow. Then Aaron turned toward Mirʹi·am, and he saw that she was struck with leprosy.
Immediately Aaron said to Moses: “I beg you, my lord! Please do not hold this sin against us! We have acted foolishly in what we have done.
Please, do not let her continue like someone dead, whose flesh is half eaten away at birth!”
And Moses began to cry out to Jehovah, saying: “O God, please heal her! Please!”
Jehovah replied to Moses: “If her father would spit directly in her face, would she not be humiliated for seven days? Let her be quarantined for seven days outside the camp, and afterward she may be brought back in.”
So Mirʹi·am was quarantined outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not break camp until Mirʹi·am was brought back in.
Then the people departed from Ha·zeʹroth and began camping in the wilderness of Paʹran.
Jehovah then said to Aaron: “You and your sons and your paternal house with you will be answerable for any error against the sanctuary, and you and your sons with you will be answerable for any error against your priesthood.
Also bring near your brothers of the tribe of Leʹvi, your ancestral tribe, so that they may join you and minister to you and your sons before the tent of the Testimony.
They are to fulfill their responsibilities to you and to the entire tent. However, they must not come near the utensils of the holy place and the altar, so that neither they nor you may die.
They will join you and carry out their responsibilities regarding the tent of meeting and all the service of the tent, and no unauthorized person may come near to you.
You must carry out your responsibility toward the holy place and the altar, so that no further indignation may come against the people of Israel.
I myself have taken your brothers, the Levites, from among the Israelites as a gift for you. They are given to Jehovah to care for the service of the tent of meeting.
You and your sons are responsible for your priestly duties pertaining to the altar and what is inside the curtain, and you are to render this service. I have given the service of the priesthood as a gift to you, and any unauthorized person who approaches should be put to death.”
Jehovah spoke further to Aaron: “I myself put you in charge of the contributions made to me. I have given to you and to your sons a portion of all the holy things contributed by the Israelites as a permanent allowance.
This will be yours out of the most holy offerings made by fire: every offering they make, including their grain offerings and their sin offerings and their guilt offerings that they bring to me. It is something most holy for you and for your sons.
In a most holy place you should eat it. Every male may eat it. It will be something holy to you.
This also belongs to you: the gifts they contribute together with all the wave offerings of the Israelites. I have given them to you and your sons and your daughters with you as a permanent allowance. Everyone clean in your house may eat it.
“All the best of the oil and all the best of the new wine and the grain, their firstfruits, which they give to Jehovah, I give them to you.
The first ripe fruits of everything from their land, which they will bring to Jehovah, will become yours. Everyone clean in your house may eat it.
“Every devoted thing in Israel should become yours.
“Every firstborn of all living things, which they will present to Jehovah, whether man or animal, should become yours. However, you should without fail redeem the firstborn of mankind, and the firstborn of the unclean animals you should redeem.
You should redeem it with the redemption price when it is a month old and up, by the estimated value of five silver shekels, according to the standard shekel of the holy place. It is 20 geʹrahs.
Only the firstborn bull or firstborn male lamb or firstborn goat you should not redeem. They are something holy. You should sprinkle their blood on the altar, and their fat you should make smoke as an offering made by fire for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah.
And their flesh should become yours. Like the breast of the wave offering and like the right leg, it should become yours.
All the holy contributions that the Israelites will contribute to Jehovah, I have given to you and your sons and your daughters with you as a permanent allowance. It is a lasting covenant of salt before Jehovah for you and your offspring with you.”
Jehovah went on to say to Aaron: “In their land you will not have an inheritance, and no portion of land among them will become yours. I am your portion and your inheritance in the midst of the Israelites.
“Now see that I have given to the sons of Leʹvi every tenth part in Israel as an inheritance in return for the service they are carrying out, the service of the tent of meeting.
No longer may the people of Israel approach the tent of meeting, or else they will incur sin and die.
The Levites themselves are to carry out the service of the tent of meeting, and they are the ones who will answer for their error. It is a lasting statute during all your generations that they should not take possession of an inheritance among the Israelites.
For I have given to the Levites as an inheritance the tenth part contributed by the people of Israel, which they will contribute to Jehovah. That is why I have said to them, ‘In the midst of the Israelites, they should not take possession of an inheritance.’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“You should tell the Levites, ‘You will receive from the Israelites the tenth part that I have given to you from them for your inheritance, and you should contribute from it a tenth part of the tenth part as a contribution to Jehovah.
And it will be considered your contribution, as though it were the grain of the threshing floor or the full production of the winepress or oil press.
In this way you will also give a contribution to Jehovah from all the tenth parts that you receive from the Israelites, and from them you are to give the contribution for Jehovah to Aaron the priest.
You will make every sort of contribution to Jehovah from the very best of all the gifts given to you as something holy.’
“And you must say to them, ‘When you contribute the best of them, then it will be considered for the Levites as the produce of the threshing floor and as the produce of the winepress or oil press.
You and your household may eat it in any place, because it is your wages in return for your service at the tent of meeting.
You will not incur sin in this as long as you contribute the best from them, and you must not profane the holy things of the Israelites, or you will die.’”
Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build on this spot seven altars, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.”
Baʹlak immediately did just as Baʹlaam had said. And Baʹlak and Baʹlaam offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
Baʹlaam then said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering, and I will go. Perhaps Jehovah will get in touch with me. Whatever he reveals to me, I will tell you.” So he went to a barren hill.
Then God got in touch with Baʹlaam, who said to Him: “I set the seven altars in rows, and I offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.”
Jehovah put this word in the mouth of Baʹlaam: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.”
So he returned and saw that Baʹlak and all the princes of Moʹab were standing by his burnt offering.
Then he spoke this proverbial saying: “Baʹlak the king of Moʹab has brought me from Aʹram,From the mountains of the east: ‘Do come to curse Jacob for me. Yes, come to denounce Israel.’
How could I put a curse on those whom God has not cursed? And how could I denounce those whom Jehovah has not denounced?
From the top of the rocks I see them,And from the hills I see them. As a people they dwell there alone;They do not count themselves among the nations.
Who can number the dust particles of JacobOr count even the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the upright,And let my end be like theirs.”
Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “What have you done to me? I brought you to put a curse on my enemies, and here you have done nothing but bless them.”
He answered: “Must I not speak whatever Jehovah puts in my mouth?”
Baʹlak said to him: “Please come with me to another place from which you can see them. You will see only a part of them; you will not see them all. Put a curse on them for me from there.”
So he took him to the field of Zoʹphim, to the top of Pisʹgah, and built seven altars and offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
So Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Stay here by your burnt offering while I get in touch with Him over there.”
And Jehovah got in touch with Baʹlaam and put this word in his mouth: “Return to Baʹlak, and this is what you are to say.”
So he came to him and saw that he was waiting by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moʹab were with him. Baʹlak asked him: “What has Jehovah said?”
Then he spoke this proverbial saying: “Get up, Baʹlak, and listen. Hear me, O son of Zipʹpor.
God is not a mere man who tells lies,Nor a son of man who changes his mind. When he says something, will he not do it? When he speaks, will he not carry it out?
Look! I have been taken to bless;Now He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
He does not tolerate any magical power against Jacob,And he does not allow any trouble against Israel. Jehovah his God is with them,And he is loudly hailed as king among them.
God is bringing them out of Egypt. He is like the horns of a wild bull for them.
For there are no omens of doom against Jacob,Nor any divination against Israel. At this time it may be said about Jacob and Israel: ‘Look at what God has done!’
Here is a people who will rise up like a lion,And like the lion, it will raise itself up. It will not lie down until it eats preyAnd drinks the blood of the slain ones.”
Baʹlak then said to Baʹlaam: “If on the one hand you cannot put any curse on him, then on the other hand you should not bless him either.”
Baʹlaam answered Baʹlak: “Did I not say to you, ‘I will do all that Jehovah says’?”
Baʹlak said to Baʹlaam: “Please come and let me take you to yet another place. Perhaps it will be right in the eyes of the true God for you to put a curse on him for me from there.”
So Baʹlak took Baʹlaam to the top of Peʹor, which looks toward Je·shiʹmon.
Then Baʹlaam said to Baʹlak: “Build seven altars on this spot, and prepare seven bulls and seven rams for me.”
So Baʹlak did just as Baʹlaam had said, and he offered up a bull and a ram on each altar.
Jehovah went on to speak to Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab by the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, saying:
“Instruct the Israelites that they are to give the Levites cities to inhabit out of the inheritance they will possess, and they should give the Levites the pastures around the cities.
They will inhabit the cities, and the pastures will be for their livestock, their goods, and all their other animals.
The pastures of the cities that you will give the Levites will extend for 1,000 cubits from the wall all around the city.
You should measure outside the city 2,000 cubits on the east side, 2,000 cubits on the south side, 2,000 cubits on the west side, and 2,000 cubits on the north side, with the city in the middle. These will be the pastures of their cities.
“The cities that you will give to the Levites will be 6 cities of refuge, which you will give for the manslayer to flee to, as well as 42 other cities.
You are to give to the Levites a total of 48 cities, together with their pastures.
The cities you give them will be from the possession of the Israelites. From the larger group you will take many, and from the smaller group you will take few. Each group will give some of its cities to the Levites in proportion to the inheritance that it receives.”
Jehovah continued to speak to Moses, saying:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘You are crossing the Jordan to the land of Caʹnaan.
You should choose cities convenient for yourselves to serve as cities of refuge, where the manslayer who unintentionally kills someone should flee.
These cities will serve as a refuge for you from the blood avenger, so that the manslayer will not die until he stands trial before the assembly.
The six cities of refuge that you provide will serve this purpose.
You will provide three cities on this side of the Jordan and three cities in the land of Caʹnaan to serve as cities of refuge.
These six cities will serve as a refuge for the Israelites, for the foreign resident, and for the settler among them, for anyone to flee there who unintentionally kills someone.
“‘But if he struck him with an iron instrument and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail.
And if he struck him with a stone that could cause death and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail.
And if he struck him with a wooden instrument that could cause death and he dies, he is a murderer. The murderer should be put to death without fail.
“‘The avenger of blood is the one who will put the murderer to death. When he encounters him, he himself will put him to death.
If death resulted because he pushed him out of hatred or threw something at him with malicious intent,
or out of hatred he struck him with his hand, and he died, the one who struck him will be put to death without fail. He is a murderer. The avenger of blood will put the murderer to death when he encounters him.
“‘But if it was unexpectedly and not out of hatred that he pushed him or threw any article at him without malicious intent,
or if he did not see him and caused a stone to fall on him and he was not an enemy or seeking his injury, and the person died,
the assembly should then judge between the one who struck him and the avenger of blood, in harmony with these judgments.
The assembly should then save the manslayer from the hand of the avenger of blood and return him to his city of refuge to which he had fled, and he must dwell in it until the death of the high priest who was anointed with the holy oil.
“‘But if the manslayer goes out of the boundary of his city of refuge to which he fled
and the avenger of blood finds him outside the boundary of his city of refuge and slays the manslayer, he has no bloodguilt.
For he must dwell in his city of refuge until the high priest’s death. But after the high priest’s death, the manslayer may return to the land that he owns.
These things will serve for you as a statute for judgment throughout your generations in all your dwelling places.
“‘Whoever kills a person should be put to death as a murderer on the testimony of witnesses; but no one will be put to death on the testimony of just one witness.
You must take no ransom for the life of a murderer who is deserving to die, for he should be put to death without fail.
And you must not take a ransom for one who has fled to his city of refuge, allowing him to resume dwelling in his land before the death of the high priest.
“‘You must not pollute the land in which you live, for blood pollutes the land, and there may be no atonement for the blood that has been spilled on the land except by the blood of the one who spilled it.
You must not defile the land in which you dwell, in which I am residing; for I, Jehovah, am residing in the midst of the people of Israel.’”
And Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“Give these instructions to the Israelites: ‘When you go into the land of Caʹnaan, this is the land that will fall to you as an inheritance, the land of Caʹnaan according to its boundaries.
“‘Your southern border will extend from the wilderness of Zin alongside Eʹdom, and your south boundary on the east will be from the extremity of the Salt Sea.
Your boundary will change direction to pass south of the ascent of A·krabʹbim and continue to Zin, and its end will be south of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a. Then it will extend to Haʹzar-adʹdar and continue to Azʹmon.
The boundary will change direction at Azʹmon to the Wadi of Egypt, and its end will be at the Sea.
“‘Your western boundary will be the Great Sea and the coast. This will become your western boundary.
“‘Now this will be your northern boundary: From the Great Sea you will mark your boundary out to Mount Hor.
From Mount Hor you will mark out the boundary to Leʹbo-haʹmath, and the end of the boundary will be at Zeʹdad.
And the boundary will extend to Ziphʹron, and its end will be Haʹzar-eʹnan. This will become your northern boundary.
“‘Then you should mark as your boundary on the east from Haʹzar-eʹnan to Sheʹpham.
The boundary will extend from Sheʹpham to Ribʹlah to the east of Aʹin, and the border will go down and cross the eastern slope of the Sea of Chinʹne·reth.
The border will extend to the Jordan, and its end will be the Salt Sea. This will be your land and the boundaries surrounding it.’”
So Moses instructed the Israelites, saying: “This is the land that you will apportion as your possession by lot, just as Jehovah has commanded to give to the nine and a half tribes.
For the tribe of the Reuʹben·ites by their paternal house, the tribe of the Gadʹites by their paternal house, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have already taken their inheritance.
The two and a half tribes have already taken their inheritance east of the region of the Jordan by Jerʹi·cho, toward the sunrising.”
Jehovah spoke further to Moses, saying:
“These are the names of the men who will divide the land for you to possess: El·e·aʹzar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun.
And you will take one chieftain out of each tribe to divide the land as your inheritance.
These are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh;
of the tribe of the sons of Simʹe·on, She·muʹel the son of Am·miʹhud;
of the tribe of Benjamin, E·liʹdad the son of Chisʹlon;
of the tribe of the sons of Dan, a chieftain, Bukʹki the son of Jogʹli;
of the sons of Joseph from the tribe of the sons of Ma·nasʹseh, a chieftain, Hanʹni·el the son of Eʹphod;
from the tribe of the sons of Eʹphra·im, a chieftain, Kem·uʹel the son of Shiphʹtan;
of the tribe of the sons of Zebʹu·lun, a chieftain, E·li·zaʹphan the son of Parʹnach;
of the tribe of the sons of Isʹsa·char, a chieftain, Palʹti·el the son of Azʹzan;
of the tribe of the sons of Ashʹer, a chieftain, A·hiʹhud the son of She·loʹmi;
of the tribe of the sons of Naphʹta·li, a chieftain, Ped·ahʹel the son of Am·miʹhud.”
These are the ones whom Jehovah commanded to distribute the land to the Israelites in the land of Caʹnaan.
Jehovah spoke further to Moses and said:
“Speak to the Israelites and tell them, ‘If a man or a woman takes a special vow to live as a Nazʹi·rite to Jehovah,
he should keep away from wine and other alcoholic beverages. He should not drink the vinegar of wine or the vinegar of anything alcoholic. He should not drink any liquid made from grapes, nor eat grapes, whether fresh or dried.
All the days of his Naziriteship he should not eat anything made from the grapevine, from the unripe grapes to the skins.
“‘All the days of the vow of his Naziriteship no razor should pass over his head. He is to remain holy by letting the hair of his head grow until the days of his being set apart to Jehovah are completed.
He should not approach a dead person during all the days he remains separated to Jehovah.
Even if his father or his mother or his brother or his sister should die, he may not defile himself, because the sign of his Naziriteship to his God is upon his head.
“‘He is holy to Jehovah all the days of his Naziriteship.
But if someone should suddenly die alongside him and he defiles the hair symbolizing his separation to God, he must shave his head on the day he establishes his purification. He should shave it on the seventh day.
And on the eighth day, he should bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
The priest will prepare one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering and make atonement for him for his sin in connection with the dead person. Then he must sanctify his head on that day.
And he must separate himself again to Jehovah for the days of his Naziriteship, and he will bring a young ram in its first year as a guilt offering. However, the former days will go uncounted because he defiled his Naziriteship.
“‘Now this is the law about the Nazʹi·rite: When he completes the days of his Naziriteship, he will be brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting.
There he must present his offering to Jehovah: one sound young ram in its first year as a burnt offering, one sound female lamb in its first year as a sin offering, one sound ram as a communion sacrifice,
a basket of unleavened ring-shaped loaves of fine flour mixed with oil, unleavened wafers smeared with oil, and their grain offering and their drink offerings.
The priest will present them before Jehovah and will offer up his sin offering and his burnt offering.
He will offer the ram as a communion sacrifice to Jehovah along with the basket of unleavened loaves, and the priest will present its grain offering and its drink offering.
“‘The Nazʹi·rite must then shave the uncut hair of his head at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and he will take the hair of his head grown during his Naziriteship and put it on the fire that is under the communion sacrifice.
And the priest must take a boiled shoulder from the ram, one unleavened ring-shaped loaf from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and put them on the palms of the Nazʹi·rite after he has had the sign of his Naziriteship shaved off.
And the priest must wave them back and forth as a wave offering before Jehovah. It is something holy for the priest, along with the breast of the wave offering and the leg of the contribution. Afterward, the Nazʹi·rite may drink wine.
“‘This is the law about the Nazʹi·rite who makes a vow: If he vows and can afford to make an offering to Jehovah that is beyond the requirements of his Naziriteship, he must then carry out his vow out of regard for the law of his Naziriteship.’”
Then Jehovah said to Moses:
“Tell Aaron and his sons, ‘This is the way you should bless the people of Israel. Say to them:
“May Jehovah bless you and safeguard you.
May Jehovah make his face shine upon you, and may he favor you.
May Jehovah lift up his face toward you and grant you peace.”’
And they must place my name upon the people of Israel, that I may bless them.”
“‘And in the seventh month, on the first of the month, you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work. It is a day on which you should sound the trumpet.
You will offer as a burnt offering for a pleasing aroma to Jehovah one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenths of an eʹphah measure for the bull, two tenth measures for the ram,
and one tenth measure for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
and one young male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you.
This is in addition to the monthly burnt offering and its grain offering and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings, according to the regular procedure for them, as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
“‘And on the tenth of this seventh month, you should hold a holy convention, and you must afflict yourselves. You must not do any work.
And you will present as a burnt offering to Jehovah, as a pleasing aroma, one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound.
And as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for the bull, two tenth measures for the one ram,
a tenth measure respectively for each male lamb of the seven male lambs,
as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the sin offering of atonement and the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings.
“‘And on the 15th day of the seventh month, you should hold a holy convention. You must not do any hard work, and you must celebrate a festival to Jehovah seven days.
And you will present as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, 13 young bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound.
And as their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, three tenth measures for each bull of the 13 bulls, two tenth measures for each ram of the 2 rams,
and a tenth measure for each male lamb of the 14 male lambs,
as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.
“‘And on the second day, 12 young bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering, together with their drink offerings.
“‘And on the third day, 11 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.
“‘And on the fourth day, 10 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one young goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.
“‘And on the fifth day, 9 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.
“‘And on the sixth day, 8 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offerings.
“‘And on the seventh day, 7 bulls, 2 rams, and 14 male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure for them,
as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.
“‘On the eighth day, you should hold a solemn assembly. You should not do any hard work.
You will present as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to Jehovah, one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs each a year old, all of them sound,
and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bull, the ram, and the male lambs by their number according to the regular procedure,
as well as one goat as a sin offering, aside from the regular burnt offering and its grain offering and its drink offering.
“‘These you will offer to Jehovah at your seasonal festivals, in addition to your vow offerings and your voluntary offerings as your burnt offerings and your grain offerings and your drink offerings and your communion sacrifices.’”
Moses told the Israelites everything that Jehovah had commanded him.
Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying:
“Speak to Aaron and tell him, ‘When you light up the lamps, the seven lamps should shine on the area in front of the lampstand.’”
So Aaron did this: He lit up its lamps for the area in front of the lampstand, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
This is how the lampstand was made: It was hammered work of gold; from its stem to its blossoms, it was hammered work. The lampstand was made according to the vision that Jehovah had shown Moses.
Jehovah spoke again to Moses, saying:
“Take the Levites from among the Israelites, and cleanse them.
This is how you should cleanse them: Sprinkle sin-cleansing water on them, and they must shave their whole body with a razor, wash their garments, and cleanse themselves.
Then they will take a young bull and its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and you will take another young bull for a sin offering.
And you are to present the Levites before the tent of meeting and gather all the assembly of the Israelites.
When you present the Levites before Jehovah, the Israelites are to lay their hands on the Levites.
And Aaron must offer the Levites before Jehovah as a wave offering from the Israelites, and they will carry out the service of Jehovah.
“Then the Levites will lay their hands on the heads of the bulls and offer the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to Jehovah to make atonement for the Levites.
And you will have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons and offer them as a wave offering to Jehovah.
You must separate the Levites from among the Israelites, and the Levites will become mine.
Afterward, the Levites will come in to serve at the tent of meeting. This is how you should cleanse them and offer them as a wave offering.
For they are given ones, given to me from among the Israelites. In place of all those who are firstborn of the Israelites, I will take them for myself.
For every firstborn among the Israelites is mine, both man and animal. I sanctified them to myself on the day I struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt.
I will take the Levites in place of all the firstborn among the Israelites.
I will give the Levites as given ones to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites, to carry out the service in behalf of the Israelites at the tent of meeting and to make atonement for the Israelites, so that no plague may occur among the Israelites because the people of Israel come near the holy place.”
Moses and Aaron and all the assembly of the Israelites did this with the Levites. In accord with all that Jehovah had commanded Moses regarding the Levites, that is what the Israelites did with them.
So the Levites purified themselves and washed their garments, after which Aaron offered them as a wave offering before Jehovah. Then Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them.
Thereafter, the Levites went in to carry out their service at the tent of meeting before Aaron and his sons. Just as Jehovah had commanded Moses respecting the Levites, so they did with them.
Jehovah now spoke to Moses, saying:
“This applies to the Levites: From 25 years old and up, a man will join the company of those in the service of the tent of meeting.
But after the age of 50 years, he will retire from the service company and not serve any longer.
He may minister to his brothers who are taking care of the responsibilities at the tent of meeting, but he must not perform the service there. This is what you are to do regarding the Levites and their responsibilities.”
“You must not sacrifice to Jehovah your God a bull or a sheep that has a defect or anything wrong with it, for it would be detestable to Jehovah your God.
“Suppose a man or a woman is found among you, in any of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, who is practicing what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah your God and violating his covenant,
and he goes astray and worships other gods and he bows down to them or to the sun or the moon or all the army of the heavens, a thing that I have not commanded.
When it is reported to you or you hear about it, then you should investigate the matter thoroughly. If it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done in Israel,
you must bring the man or the woman who has done this evil thing out to the city gates, and the man or the woman must be stoned to death.
On the testimony of two witnesses or of three witnesses the one who is to die should be put to death. He must not be put to death on the testimony of one witness.
The hand of the witnesses should be the first to come against him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward. You must remove what is bad from your midst.
“If a case arises in one of your cities that is too difficult for you to judge, whether it is a case involving bloodshed or a legal claim that has been raised or a violent deed that has been committed or other matters of dispute, you should rise up and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses.
Go to the Levitical priests and to the judge serving in those days, and make your inquiry, and they will hand down the decision to you.
Then you must act according to the decision that they hand down to you from the place that Jehovah chooses. Be careful to do according to all that they instruct you.
You must act according to the law that they show you and according to the decision that they declare to you. Do not deviate from the decision that they will hand down to you, either to the right or to the left.
The man who acts presumptuously by not listening to the priest who is ministering to Jehovah your God or to the judge must die. You must remove what is bad from Israel.
All the people will then hear and become afraid, and they will not act presumptuously anymore.
“When you enter the land that Jehovah your God is giving you and you have taken possession of it and are living in it, and you say, ‘Let me appoint a king over myself like all the nations around me,’
in that case, you should without fail appoint a king whom Jehovah your God chooses. You should appoint a king from among your brothers. You are forbidden to appoint over yourself a foreigner who is not your brother.
However, he should not acquire many horses for himself or make the people go back to Egypt in order to obtain more horses, since Jehovah told you, ‘You must never go back again by this way.’
Neither should he take many wives for himself, so that his heart may not go astray; nor should he acquire vast amounts of silver and gold for himself.
When he takes his seat on the throne of his kingdom, he must write for himself in a book a copy of this Law, taken from the one kept by the Levitical priests.
“It is to remain with him, and he must read from it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God and observe all the words of this Law and these regulations by carrying them out.
Thus his heart will not exalt itself above his brothers, and he will not deviate from the commandment, either to the right or to the left, so that he may remain a long time over his kingdom, he and his sons in the midst of Israel.
Then Moses went out and spoke these words to all Israel,
saying to them: “I am 120 years old today. I can no longer lead you, for Jehovah has said to me, ‘You will not cross this Jordan.’
Jehovah your God is the one crossing before you, and he himself will annihilate these nations before you, and you will drive them away. Joshua is the one who will lead you across, just as Jehovah has spoken.
Jehovah will do to them just as he did to Siʹhon and to Og, the kings of the Amʹor·ites, and to their land when he annihilated them.
Jehovah will defeat them for you, and you are to do to them according to the whole commandment that I have given you.
Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or struck with terror before them, for Jehovah your God is the one marching with you. He will neither desert you nor abandon you.”
Moses then called Joshua and said to him before the eyes of all Israel: “Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will bring this people into the land that Jehovah swore to their forefathers to give to them, and you will give it to them as an inheritance.
Jehovah is the one marching before you, and he will continue with you. He will neither desert you nor abandon you. Do not be afraid or be terrified.”
Then Moses wrote this Law and gave it to the priests, the Levites, who carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, and to all the elders of Israel.
Moses commanded them, saying: “At the end of every seven years, at the appointed time in the year of the release, during the Festival of Booths,
when all Israel appears before the presence of Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses, you should read this Law for all Israel to hear it.
Gather the people together, the men, the women, the children, and your foreign resident who is within your cities, in order that they may listen and learn about and fear Jehovah your God and take care to carry out all the words of this Law.
Then their sons who have not known this Law will listen and learn to fear Jehovah your God all the days that you live in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
Jehovah then said to Moses: “Look! The time has drawn near for you to die. Call Joshua, and present yourselves at the tent of meeting, so that I may commission him.” So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the tent of meeting.
Then Jehovah appeared at the tent in the pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood by the entrance of the tent.
Jehovah now said to Moses: “Look! You are about to die, and this people will begin to commit spiritual prostitution with the foreign gods that are around them in the land to which they are going. They will forsake me and break my covenant that I have made with them.
At that time my anger will blaze against them, and I will forsake them and hide my face from them until they are devoured. Then after many calamities and distresses have come upon them, they will say, ‘Is it not because our God is not in our midst that these calamities have come upon us?’
But I will keep my face hidden in that day because of all the wickedness that they have done in turning to other gods.
“Now write down this song for yourselves and teach it to the Israelites. Have them learn it in order that this song may serve as my witness against the people of Israel.
When I bring them to the land that I have sworn about to their forefathers—one flowing with milk and honey—and they eat their fill and prosper, they will turn to other gods and serve them and treat me with disrespect and break my covenant.
When many calamities and distresses come upon them, this song will serve as a witness to them (for their descendants should not forget it), for I already know the inclination that they have developed even before I bring them into the land about which I have sworn.”
So Moses wrote down this song in that day and taught it to the Israelites.
He then commissioned Joshua the son of Nun and said: “Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will bring the Israelites into the land about which I have sworn to them, and I will continue with you.”
As soon as Moses had completed writing the words of this Law in a book in their entirety,
Moses commanded the Levites who carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, saying:
“Take this book of the Law and place it at the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and it will serve as a witness there against you.
For I myself well know your rebelliousness and your stubbornness. If you have been so rebellious against Jehovah while I am still alive with you, then how much more so will you be after my death!
Gather together to me all the elders of your tribes and your officers, and let me speak these words in their hearing, and let me take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against them.
For I well know that after my death you will surely act wickedly and turn aside from the way about which I have commanded you. And calamity will certainly befall you at the close of the days, because you will do what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah and you will offend him by the works of your hands.”
Then in the hearing of the entire congregation of Israel, Moses recited the words of this song from beginning to end:
“When Jehovah your God destroys the nations whose land Jehovah your God is giving you and you have dispossessed them and have settled in their cities and their houses,
you should set apart three cities in the midst of your land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess.
You should divide the territory of the land that Jehovah your God has given you to possess into three parts, and prepare the roads so that any manslayer can flee to one of those cities.
“Now this is what should take place regarding the manslayer who may flee there in order to live: When he strikes his fellow man unintentionally and he did not previously hate him;
as when he goes with his fellow man into the forest to gather wood and he raises his hand to cut the tree with the ax, but the axhead flies off the handle and hits his fellow man and he dies, the manslayer should flee to one of these cities to live.
Otherwise, in the heat of anger, the avenger of blood may chase after the manslayer, overtake him, and kill him, because the distance to the city was too far. However, he did not deserve to die, since he did not previously hate his fellow man.
That is why I am commanding you: ‘Set three cities apart.’
“If Jehovah your God enlarges your territory as he swore to your forefathers and he has given you all the land that he promised to give to your forefathers
—provided you faithfully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today, to love Jehovah your God and always to walk in his ways—then you are to add three other cities to these three.
In this way no innocent blood will be spilled in your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, and no bloodguilt will come upon you.
“But if a man hated his fellow man and he was waiting to attack him and he fatally wounded him and he died, and the man has fled to one of these cities,
the elders of his city should then summon him from there and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, and he must die.
You should not feel sorry for him, and you must remove the guilt of innocent blood out of Israel, so that it may go well for you.
“When you receive your inheritance in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, you must not move your neighbor’s boundary marker from the place where the ancestors set the boundaries.
“No single witness may convict another for any error or any sin that he may commit. On the testimony of two witnesses or on the testimony of three witnesses the matter should be established.
If a malicious witness testifies against a man and charges him with some transgression,
the two men who have the dispute will stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges who will be serving in those days.
The judges will thoroughly investigate, and if the man who testified is a false witness and has brought a false charge against his brother,
you should do to him just as he had schemed to do to his brother, and you must remove what is bad from your midst.
Those who remain will hear and be afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you.
You should not feel sorry: Life will be for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
Now this is the blessing that Moses the man of the true God pronounced on the Israelites before his death.
He said: “Jehovah—from Siʹnai he came,And he shone upon them from Seʹir. He shone forth in glory from the mountainous region of Paʹran,And with him were holy myriads,At his right hand his warriors.
He had affection for his people;All their holy ones are in your hand. They were sitting at your feet;They began to listen to your words.
(Moses gave us a command, a law,As a possession of the congregation of Jacob.)
And He became king in Jeshʹu·run,When the heads of the people gathered together,Along with all the tribes of Israel.
Let Reuʹben live and not die off,And may his men not become few.”
And he pronounced this blessing on Judah: “Hear, O Jehovah, the voice of Judah,And may you bring him back to his people. His arms have defended what belongs to him,And may you help him against his adversaries.”
Of Leʹvi he said: “Your Thumʹmim and your Uʹrim belong to the man loyal to you,Whom you put to the test at Masʹsah. You began to contend with him by the waters of Merʹi·bah,
The man who said to his father and his mother, ‘I have not shown regard to them.’ Even his brothers he did not acknowledge,And he ignored his own sons. For they kept your word,And they observed your covenant.
Let them instruct Jacob in your judicial decisionsAnd Israel in your Law. Let them offer up incense as a pleasant aroma for youAnd a whole offering on your altar.
Bless, O Jehovah, his strength,And may you show pleasure in the work of his hands. Crush the legs of those who rise up against him,So that those who hate him may rise up no more.”
Of Benjamin he said: “Let the beloved one of Jehovah reside in security by him;While he shelters him the whole day,He will reside between his shoulders.”
Of Joseph he said: “May his land be blessed by JehovahWith the choice things of heaven,With dew and the waters from the springs below,
With choice things produced by the sunAnd the choice yield each month,
With the choicest things from the ancient mountainsAnd choice things of the enduring hills,
With the choice things of the earth and what fills it,And with the approval of the One residing in the thornbush. May they come upon the head of Joseph,On the crown of the head of the one singled out from his brothers.
His splendor is like that of a firstborn bull,And his horns are the horns of a wild bull. With them he will push peoplesAll together to the ends of the earth. They are the tens of thousands of Eʹphra·im,And they are the thousands of Ma·nasʹseh.”
Of Zebʹu·lun he said: “Rejoice, O Zebʹu·lun, in your going out,And you, Isʹsa·char, in your tents.
They will call peoples to the mountain. There they will offer the sacrifices of righteousness. For they will draw from the abundant wealth of the seasAnd the hidden hoards of the sand.”
Of Gad he said: “Blessed is the one widening the borders of Gad. He lies there like a lion,Ready to tear off the arm, yes, the crown of the head.
He will select the first portion for himself,For there the allotment of a lawgiver is reserved. The heads of the people will gather together. The righteousness of Jehovah he will execute,And his judicial decisions with Israel.”
Of Dan he said: “Dan is a lion cub. He will leap out from Baʹshan.”
Of Naphʹta·li he said: “Naphʹta·li is satisfied with the approvalAnd full of the blessing of Jehovah. Take possession of the west and south.”
Of Ashʹer he said: “Blessed with sons is Ashʹer. May he be favored by his brothers,And may he dip his feet in oil.
Iron and copper are your gate locks,And you will be secure all your days.
There is none like the true God of Jeshʹu·run,Who rides through heaven to help youAnd who rides upon the clouds in his majesty.
God is a refuge from ancient times,His everlasting arms are beneath you. And he will drive away the enemy from before you,And he will say, ‘Annihilate them!’
Israel will reside in security,And the fountain of Jacob will be secludedIn a land of grain and new wine,Whose skies will drip with dew.
Happy you are, O Israel! Who is there like you,A people enjoying salvation in Jehovah,Your protective shieldAnd your majestic sword? Your enemies will cringe before you,And you will tread on their backs.”
“You must love Jehovah your God and always keep your obligation to him and his statutes, his judicial decisions, and his commandments.
You know that today I am addressing you, not your sons who have not known or seen the discipline of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand and his outstretched arm.
They did not see his signs and his deeds that he did in Egypt to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to all his land;
or what he did to the armies of Egypt, to Pharʹaoh’s horses and war chariots, which were overwhelmed by the waters of the Red Sea when they were chasing after you, and Jehovah destroyed them once and for all.
They did not see what he has done for you in the wilderness until your coming to this place,
or what he did to Daʹthan and A·biʹram, the sons of E·liʹab the son of Reuʹben, when the earth opened and swallowed them up, along with their households and their tents and every living thing that followed them, before the eyes of all Israel.
Your own eyes have seen all the great deeds that Jehovah did.
“You must keep the whole commandment that I am giving you today, so that you may grow strong and cross over into the land to take possession of it,
and so that you may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers and their offspring, a land flowing with milk and honey.
“The land you are going to take possession of is not like the land of Egypt, out of which you came, where you used to sow your seed and irrigate it with your foot, like a garden of vegetables.
But the land you are about to cross into and possess is a land of mountains and valley plains. It drinks the water that rains from the heavens;
it is a land that Jehovah your God is caring for. The eyes of Jehovah your God are constantly upon it, from the beginning of the year to the close of the year.
“And if you will diligently obey my commandments that I am commanding you today and love Jehovah your God and serve him with all your heart and all your soul,
I will also give rain for your land at its appointed time, autumn rain and spring rain, and you will gather your grain and your new wine and your oil.
And I will provide vegetation in your fields for your livestock, and you will eat and be satisfied.
Be careful not to let your heart be enticed to go astray and worship other gods and bow down to them.
Otherwise, Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain and the ground will not give its produce and you will quickly perish from the good land that Jehovah is giving you.
“You must impress these words of mine on your heart and your soul and bind them as a reminder on your hand, and they should be like a headband on your forehead.
Teach them to your children, speaking about them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.
Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates,
so that you and your sons may live long in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, for as long as the heavens are over the earth.
“If you strictly observe this commandment that I am giving you and you carry it out, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways and to cling to him,
Jehovah will drive away all these nations from before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and more numerous than you are.
Every place you set your foot will become yours. From the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non, from the River, the river Eu·phraʹtes, to the western sea, your boundary will become.
Nobody will stand up to you. Jehovah your God will spread the dread and the fear of you over the whole land on which you walk, just as he promised you.
“See, I am putting before you today a blessing and a curse:
the blessing if you obey the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today,
and the curse if you do not obey the commandments of Jehovah your God and you turn aside from the way I am commanding you to follow today and you follow gods that you have not known.
“When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are to possess, you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerʹi·zim and the curse on Mount Eʹbal.
Are they not on the other side of the Jordan toward the west, in the land of the Caʹnaan·ites who live in the Arʹa·bah, opposite Gilʹgal, beside the big trees of Moʹreh?
For you are crossing the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you. When you take possession of it and live in it,
you must be careful to carry out all the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am putting before you today.
“When eventually you enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance and you have taken possession of it and are dwelling in it,
you are to take some of the firstfruits of all the produce of the ground, which you will gather from your land that Jehovah your God is giving you, and put them in a basket and go to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside.
You must go to the priest who will be serving in those days and say to him, ‘Today I am reporting to Jehovah your God that I have come into the land that Jehovah swore to our forefathers to give to us.’
“The priest will then take the basket out of your hand and deposit it before the altar of Jehovah your God.
Then you are to declare before Jehovah your God, ‘My father was a wandering A·ra·maeʹan, and he went down to Egypt and resided there as a foreigner, with few in his household. But there he became a great nation, mighty and numerous.
And the Egyptians mistreated and oppressed us and imposed harsh slavery on us.
So we began to cry out to Jehovah, the God of our forefathers, and Jehovah heard our voice and looked upon our affliction and our trouble and our oppression.
Finally Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with terrifying deeds and with signs and miracles.
Then he brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
Now I have brought the firstfruits of the produce of the ground that Jehovah has given me.’ “You must deposit it before Jehovah your God and bow down before Jehovah your God.
You will then rejoice over all the good that Jehovah your God has given you and your household, you and the Levite and the foreign resident who is among you.
“When you finish tithing the entire tenth of your produce in the third year, the year of the tenth, you will give it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, and they will eat their fill within your cities.
You will then say before Jehovah your God, ‘I have cleared the holy portion out of my house and given it to the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, just as you have commanded me. I have not violated or neglected your commandments.
I have not eaten of it while mourning or removed any of it while unclean or given any of it for the dead. I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah my God and have done all that you commanded me.
Now look down from your holy dwelling, the heavens, and bless your people Israel and the land that you have given us, just as you swore to our forefathers, the land flowing with milk and honey.’
“This day Jehovah your God is commanding you to carry out these regulations and judicial decisions. You must observe them and carry them out with all your heart and all your soul.
Today you have obtained Jehovah’s declaration that he will become your God as you walk in his ways and observe his regulations, his commandments, and his judicial decisions, and as you listen to his voice.
And today Jehovah has obtained your declaration that you will become his people, his special property, just as he has promised you, and that you will observe all his commandments
and that he will put you high above all the other nations that he has made, giving you praise and fame and glory as you prove yourself a people holy to Jehovah your God, just as he has promised.”
These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel in the region of the Jordan in the wilderness, on the desert plains in front of Suph, between Paʹran, Toʹphel, Laʹban, Ha·zeʹroth, and Diʹza·hab.
It is 11 days from Hoʹreb to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a by way of Mount Seʹir.
In the 40th year, in the 11th month, on the first of the month, Moses spoke to the Israelites according to all that Jehovah had instructed him to tell them.
This was after he defeated Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who was dwelling in Heshʹbon, and Og the king of Baʹshan, who was dwelling in Ashʹta·roth, in Edʹre·i.
In the region of the Jordan in the land of Moʹab, Moses undertook to explain this Law, saying:
“Jehovah our God told us in Hoʹreb, ‘You have stayed long enough in this mountainous region.
Turn and set out for the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites and toward all their neighbors in the Arʹa·bah, the mountainous region, the She·pheʹlah, the Negʹeb, and the seacoast, the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, and Lebʹa·non, up to the great river, the river Eu·phraʹtes.
See, I have set the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land about which Jehovah swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give it to them and their offspring after them.’
“And I told you at that time, ‘I am not able to carry you by myself.
Jehovah your God has multiplied you, and here you are today as numerous as the stars of the heavens.
May Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, multiply you a thousand times as many as you are, and may he bless you just as he has promised you.
How can I bear by myself the burden of you and the load of you and your quarreling?
Select wise, discreet, and experienced men of your tribes, and I will appoint them as heads over you.’
You answered me, ‘What you have told us to do is good.’
So I took the heads of your tribes, wise and experienced men, and appointed them as heads over you, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, chiefs of tens, and officers of your tribes.
“At that time I instructed your judges, ‘When you hear a case between your brothers, you are to judge with righteousness between a man and his brother or a foreign resident.
You must not be partial in judgment. You should hear the small one the same as the great one. You must not become intimidated by men, for the judgment belongs to God; and if a case is too difficult for you, you should present it to me, and I will hear it.’
At that time I instructed you regarding all the things that you should do.
“Then we departed from Hoʹreb and marched through all that great and fearsome wilderness that you saw on the way to the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites, just as Jehovah our God had commanded us, and we eventually came to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a.
I then said to you, ‘You have come to the mountainous region of the Amʹor·ites, which Jehovah our God is giving to us.
See, Jehovah your God has given the land over to you. Go up, take possession of it, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has told you. Do not be afraid or terrified.’
“However, all of you approached me and said, ‘Let us send men ahead of us to search out the land for us and bring word back to us as to what route we should take and what kind of cities we will encounter.’
The suggestion seemed good to me, so I selected 12 of your men, one for each tribe.
They left and went up into the mountainous region and reached the Valley of Eshʹcol and spied it out.
They took some of the fruitage of the land and carried it back to us, and they brought word back to us, ‘The land that Jehovah our God is giving us is good.’
But you refused to go up, and you rebelled against the order of Jehovah your God.
You kept grumbling in your tents and were saying, ‘It was because Jehovah hated us that he brought us out of the land of Egypt to hand us over to the Amʹor·ites to annihilate us.
What kind of place are we going to? Our brothers made us lose heart by saying, “They are a people greater and taller than we are, and their cities are great and fortified to the heavens, and we saw the sons of the Anʹa·kim there.”’
“So I said to you, ‘Do not be struck with terror or be afraid because of them.
Jehovah your God will go before you and will fight for you, just as he did in Egypt before your very eyes.
And you saw in the wilderness how Jehovah your God carried you just as a man carries his son, everywhere you went until you came to this place.’
But despite all of this, you did not put faith in Jehovah your God,
who was going ahead of you on the way, to spy out a place for you to camp. He appeared by fire at night and by a cloud in the daytime to show you the way you should walk.
“All the while Jehovah heard what you were saying, and he became indignant and solemnly swore,
‘Not one of these men of this evil generation will see the good land that I swore to give to your fathers,
except Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh. He will see it, and I will give the land on which he walked to him and to his sons, because he has followed Jehovah wholeheartedly.
(Jehovah even became angry with me because of you, and he said, “You too will not go in there.
Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before you, is the one who will enter into the land. Make him strong, for he will cause Israel to inherit it.”)
Moreover, your children who you said would become plunder and your sons who today do not know good or bad, these will enter, and I will give it to them to possess.
But as for you, turn back and depart for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea.’
“At this you said to me, ‘We have sinned against Jehovah. We will now go up and fight, just as Jehovah our God has commanded us!’ So each of you put on his weapons of war, and you thought it would be an easy thing to go up the mountain.
But Jehovah said to me, ‘Tell them: “You must not go up and fight, for I will not be with you. If you do, you will be defeated by your enemies.”’
So I spoke to you, but you did not listen. Instead, you rebelled against Jehovah’s order and presumptuously tried to go up the mountain.
Then the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling in that mountain came out to meet you and chased you away like bees do, and they scattered you in Seʹir as far as Horʹmah.
So you returned and began to weep before Jehovah, but Jehovah did not listen to you or pay attention to you.
That is why you kept dwelling in Kaʹdesh for as long as you did.
“When Jehovah your God brings you into the land you are about to enter and take possession of, he will also clear away populous nations from before you: the Hitʹtites, the Girʹga·shites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, seven nations more populous and mightier than you are.
Jehovah your God will give them over to you, and you will defeat them. You should without fail devote them to destruction. You must not make any covenant with them nor show them any favor.
You must not form any marriage alliances with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons.
For they will turn your sons away from following me to serve other gods; then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you, and he will swiftly annihilate you.
“Instead, this is what you should do to them: Tear down their altars, break up their sacred pillars, cut down their sacred poles, and burn up their graven images.
For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah your God has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.
“It was not because you were the most numerous of all the peoples that Jehovah showed affection for you and chose you, for you were the smallest of all the peoples.
Rather, it was because of Jehovah’s love for you and because he kept the oath that he had sworn to your forefathers that Jehovah brought you out with a mighty hand, to redeem you from the house of slavery, from the power of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt.
You well know that Jehovah your God is the true God, the faithful God, keeping his covenant and loyal love to a thousand generations of those who love him and keep his commandments.
But those who hate him he will repay to their face with destruction. He will not be slow to deal with those who hate him; he will repay them to their face.
Therefore, take care to keep the commandments and the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am commanding you today, by observing them.
“If you continue listening to these judicial decisions and you observe them and carry them out, Jehovah your God will keep the covenant and the loyal love about which he swore to your forefathers.
He will love you and bless you and multiply you. Yes, he will bless you with many children and with the produce of your soil, your grain, your new wine, your oil, the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks, in the land that he swore to your forefathers to give to you.
You will become the most blessed of all the peoples; no man or woman among you will be childless, nor will your livestock be without young.
Jehovah will take away from you all sickness, and he will not bring upon you any of the terrible diseases that you have known in Egypt. Instead, he will bring them upon all those who hate you.
You are to destroy all the peoples whom Jehovah your God gives over to you. You must not feel sorry for them, and you must not serve their gods, because that would be a snare to you.
“If you should say in your heart, ‘These nations outnumber us. How can I drive them away?’
you must not be afraid of them. You should remind yourself of what Jehovah your God did to Pharʹaoh and all Egypt,
the great judgments that your eyes saw and the signs and the miracles and the mighty hand and the outstretched arm with which Jehovah your God brought you out. That is what Jehovah your God will do to all the peoples you fear.
Jehovah your God will send the feeling of dejection upon them until those who were left remaining and who were concealing themselves from before you perish.
Do not be struck with terror because of them, for Jehovah your God is with you, a great and awe-inspiring God.
“Jehovah your God will certainly drive these nations away from before you little by little. You will not be allowed to put an end to them quickly, so that the wild animals of the field will not multiply against you.
Jehovah your God will give them over to you and utterly defeat them until they are annihilated.
He will give their kings into your hand, and you will wipe out their names from under the heavens. Nobody will stand up to you, until you have exterminated them.
You should burn the graven images of their gods in the fire. Do not desire the silver and the gold on them or take it for yourself, so that you are not ensnared by it, for it is something detestable to Jehovah your God.
You must not bring a detestable thing into your house and thereby become something devoted to destruction like it. You should utterly loathe it and absolutely detest it, because it is something devoted to destruction.
“When a dispute arises between men, they may present themselves before the judges, and they will judge them and pronounce the righteous one innocent and the wicked one guilty.
If the wicked one deserves to be beaten, the judge will have him lie down prostrate, and he will be beaten in his presence. The number of strokes should correspond to the wickedness of his deed.
He may beat him with up to 40 strokes, but no more. If he would continue beating him with more strokes than this, your brother would be disgraced before your eyes.
“You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out grain.
“If brothers dwell together and one of them dies without having a son, the wife of the dead one should not marry someone from outside the family. Her brother-in-law should go to her, take her as his wife, and perform brother-in-law marriage with her.
The firstborn whom she will bear will carry on the name of his dead brother, so that his name may not be wiped out of Israel.
“Now if the man does not want to marry his brother’s widow, his brother’s widow should then go to the elders at the city gate and say, ‘My husband’s brother has refused to preserve his brother’s name in Israel. He has not consented to perform brother-in-law marriage with me.’
The elders of his city must call him and speak to him. Should he insist and say, ‘I do not want to marry her,’
then his brother’s widow should approach him before the elders, remove his sandal from his foot, spit in his face, and say, ‘That is what should be done to the man who will not build up his brother’s household.’
After that his family name in Israel will be known as ‘The house of the one who had his sandal removed.’
“If two men get into a fight with each other and the wife of the one intervenes to protect her husband from the one striking him and she reaches out her hand and grabs hold of him by his private parts,
you must amputate her hand. You should not feel sorry.
“You must not have in your bag two different stone weights, a large one and a small one.
You must not have in your house two different measuring containers, a large one and a small one.
You should keep an accurate and honest weight and an accurate and honest measure, so that you will live long in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
For every unjust person who does such things is detestable to Jehovah your God.
“Remember what Amʹa·lek did to you on the way as you were coming out of Egypt,
how he met you along the way and attacked all those straggling behind you when you were exhausted and weary. He did not fear God.
When Jehovah your God has given you rest from all your enemies around you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, you should wipe out the mention of Amʹa·lek from under the heavens. You must not forget.
“In case a prophet or one who foretells by dreams arises in your midst and gives you a sign or a portent,
and the sign or the portent about which he spoke to you comes true while he is saying, ‘Let us walk after other gods, gods that you have not known, and let us serve them,’
you must not listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer, for Jehovah your God is testing you to know whether you love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul.
After Jehovah your God you should walk, him you should fear, his commandments you should keep, to his voice you should listen; he is the one you should serve, and to him you should hold fast.
But that prophet or that dreamer should be put to death, because he encouraged rebellion against Jehovah your God—who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery—to turn you from the way in which Jehovah your God has commanded you to walk. And you must remove what is evil from your midst.
“If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or your daughter or your cherished wife or your closest companion should try to entice you in secrecy, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods,’ gods that neither you nor your forefathers have known,
from the gods of the peoples all around you, whether near you or those far away from you, from one end of the land to the other end of the land,
you must not give in to him or listen to him, nor should you show pity or feel compassion or protect him;
instead, you should kill him without fail. Your hand should be the first to come upon him to put him to death, and the hand of all the people afterward.
And you must stone him to death, because he has sought to turn you away from Jehovah your God, who has brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
Then all Israel will hear and become afraid, and they will never again do anything bad like this among you.
“In case you hear it said in one of your cities that Jehovah your God is giving you to occupy,
‘Good-for-nothing men have gone out among you to turn away the inhabitants of their city, saying: “Let us go and serve other gods,” gods that you have not known,’
you should look into the matter, making a thorough investigation and inquiry; and if it is confirmed to be true that this detestable thing has been done among you,
you should without fail strike down the inhabitants of that city with the sword. Devote it and everything that is in it, including its livestock, to destruction by the sword.
You should then collect all its spoil into the middle of its public square and burn the city with fire, and its spoil will serve as a whole offering to Jehovah your God. It will become a permanent heap of ruins. It should never be rebuilt.
Your hand should take nothing that was set apart for destruction, so that Jehovah may turn away from his burning anger and show you mercy and compassion and multiply you, just as he has sworn to your forefathers.
For you should obey Jehovah your God by keeping all his commandments that I am commanding you today, thus doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.
“If someone is found slain in a field of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess and it is not known who killed him,
your elders and judges should go out and measure the distance from the dead body to the cities that surround it.
Then the elders of the city nearest to the body should take from the herd a young cow that has never been put to work, that has never pulled in a yoke,
and the elders of that city should lead the young cow down to a valley running with water where no tilling or sowing of seed has been done, and they should break the neck of the young cow there in the valley.
“And the priests, the Levites, will approach because Jehovah your God has chosen them to minister to him, to pronounce blessings in the name of Jehovah. They will declare how every dispute involving violence should be resolved.
Then all the elders of the city who are nearest to the dead body should wash their hands over the young cow whose neck was broken in the valley,
and they should declare, ‘Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it shed.
Do not hold this against your people Israel, whom you redeemed, O Jehovah, and do not let guilt for innocent blood remain among your people Israel.’ Then the bloodguilt will not be held against them.
In this way you will remove the guilt of innocent blood from your midst by doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.
“If you go to war against your enemies and Jehovah your God defeats them for you and you take them captive,
and you see among the captives a beautiful woman and you are attracted to her and you want to take her as your wife,
you may bring her into your house. She should then shave her head, attend to her nails,
and remove the clothing of her captivity, and dwell in your house. She will weep for her father and her mother a whole month, and afterward you may have relations with her; you will become her husband and she will become your wife.
But if you are not pleased with her, you should then let her go wherever she wishes. But you may not sell her for money or treat her harshly, since you have humiliated her.
“If a man has two wives and he loves one more than the other and both have borne sons to him and the firstborn son belongs to the unloved one,
on the day that he gives his inheritance to his sons, he will not be allowed to treat the son of the loved one as his firstborn at the expense of the son of the unloved one, the firstborn.
He should recognize as the firstborn the unloved one’s son by giving him the double portion of everything he has, for that one is the beginning of his procreative power. The right of the firstborn’s position belongs to him.
“If a man has a son who is stubborn and rebellious and he does not obey his father or his mother, and they have tried to correct him but he refuses to listen to them,
his father and his mother should take hold of him and bring him out to the elders at the gate of his city
and say to the elders of his city, ‘This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious, and he refuses to obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard.’
Then all the men of his city must stone him to death. So you must remove what is bad from your midst, and all Israel will hear and become afraid.
“If a man commits a sin deserving the sentence of death and he has been put to death and you have hung him on a stake,
his dead body should not remain all night on the stake. Instead, you should be sure to bury him on that day, because the one hung up is something accursed of God, and you should not defile your land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
“Then we turned and went up by way of Baʹshan. And Og, the king of Baʹshan, came out with all his people to meet us in battle at Edʹre·i.
So Jehovah said to me, ‘Do not be afraid of him, for I will give him and all his people and his land into your hand, and you will do to him just as you did to Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon.’
So Jehovah our God also gave King Og of Baʹshan and all his people into our hand, and we kept striking him down until none of his people survived.
We then captured all his cities. There was no town that we did not take from them—60 cities, all the region of Arʹgob, the kingdom of Og in Baʹshan.
All these cities were fortified with high walls, gates, and bars, along with a great number of rural towns.
However, we devoted them to destruction, just as we had done to King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, in devoting every city to destruction, including men, women, and children.
And we took all the livestock and the spoil of the cities for ourselves.
“At that time we seized the land of the two Amʹor·ite kings who were in the region of the Jordan, from the Arʹnon Valley as far as Mount Herʹmon
(the mountain that the Si·doʹni·ans used to call Sirʹi·on and the Amʹor·ites used to call Seʹnir),
all the cities of the tableland, all Gilʹe·ad, and all Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah and Edʹre·i, the cities of the kingdom that belonged to Og in Baʹshan.
For King Og of Baʹshan was the last remaining one of the Rephʹa·im. His bier was made of iron, and it is still in Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites. It is nine cubits long and four cubits wide, by the standard cubit.
At that time we took possession of this land: from A·roʹer, which is by the Arʹnon Valley, and half of the mountainous region of Gilʹe·ad, and I have given its cities to the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites.
And the rest of Gilʹe·ad and all Baʹshan of the kingdom of Og I have given to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh. All the region of Arʹgob, which belongs to Baʹshan, was known as the land of the Rephʹa·im.
“Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh took all the region of Arʹgob as far as the boundary of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites and named those villages of Bashan after himself, Havʹvoth-jaʹir, to this day.
And I have given Gilʹe·ad to Maʹchir.
And to the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites, I have given from Gilʹe·ad to the Arʹnon Valley, with the middle of the valley as a boundary, and as far as Jabʹbok, the valley that is the boundary of the Amʹmon·ites,
and the Arʹa·bah and the Jordan and the border, from Chinʹne·reth to the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, at the base of the slopes of Pisʹgah toward the east.
“I then gave you this command: ‘Jehovah your God has given you this land to take possession of it. All your valiant men will take up arms and cross over before your brothers, the Israelites.
Only your wives, your children, and your livestock (I well know that you have a great deal of livestock) will continue dwelling in the cities that I have given you,
until Jehovah gives your brothers rest, as he does for you, and they also have taken possession of the land that Jehovah your God will give them across the Jordan. Then you will come back, each one to his possession that I have given you.’
“At that time I gave this command to Joshua: ‘You have seen with your own eyes what Jehovah your God has done to these two kings. Jehovah will do the same thing to all the kingdoms into which you will cross over.
You must not be afraid of them, for Jehovah your God is the one fighting for you.’
“At that time I pleaded with Jehovah, saying,
‘O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you have begun to show your servant your greatness and your mighty arm, for what god in the heavens or on the earth performs such mighty deeds as you?
Please let me pass over and see the good land that is across the Jordan, this good mountainous region and Lebʹa·non.’
But Jehovah was still furious with me because of you, and he would not listen to me. Rather, Jehovah said to me, ‘Enough from you! Never speak to me again about this matter.
Go up to the top of Pisʹgah, and look to the west and north and south and east and view the land with your eyes, for you will not cross over this Jordan.
Commission Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him, because he is the one who will cross over before this people and he is the one who will cause them to inherit the land that you will see.’
All this happened while we were dwelling in the valley in front of Beth-peʹor.
“When all these words come upon you, the blessing and the curse that I have put before you, and you call them to mind in all the nations where Jehovah your God has dispersed you,
and you return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice according to all that I am commanding you today, you and your sons, with all your heart and all your soul,
Jehovah your God will then bring back your captives and show you mercy and regather you from all the peoples where Jehovah your God has scattered you.
Even if your people are dispersed to the extremity of the heavens, from there Jehovah your God will gather you and bring you back.
Jehovah your God will bring you into the land your fathers took possession of, and you will possess it; and he will make you prosper and will multiply you more than your fathers.
Jehovah your God will cleanse your heart and the heart of your offspring, so that you will love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and you may live.
Then Jehovah your God will bring all these curses upon your enemies, who hated and persecuted you.
“You will then return and listen to the voice of Jehovah and observe all his commandments that I am commanding you today.
Jehovah your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the work of your hands, multiplying your children and your livestock and the produce of your ground, for Jehovah will again delight to make you prosper, just as he delighted in your forefathers.
For then you will listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and keep his commandments and statutes written in this book of the Law, and you will return to Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul.
“Now this commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach.
It is not in the heavens, so that you have to say, ‘Who will ascend to the heavens and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’
Nor is it on the other side of the sea, so that you have to say, ‘Who will cross over to the other side of the sea and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’
For the word is very near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart, so that you may do it.
“See, I do put before you today life and good, and death and bad.
If you listen to the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in his ways, and by keeping his commandments and his statutes and his judicial decisions, then you will live and multiply, and Jehovah your God will bless you in the land you are going to possess.
“But if your heart turns away and you do not listen and you are enticed and bow down to other gods and serve them,
I tell you today that you will certainly perish. You will not live long in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
I take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the curse; and you must choose life so that you may live, you and your descendants,
by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice, and by sticking to him, for he is your life and by him you will endure a long time in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
“Hear, O Israel, today you are crossing the Jordan to go in and dispossess nations greater and mightier than you, cities great and fortified to the heavens,
a people great and tall, the sons of the Anʹa·kim, about whom you know and have heard it said, ‘Who can stand up to the sons of Aʹnak?’
Therefore, you should know this day that Jehovah your God will cross ahead of you. He is a consuming fire, and he will annihilate them. He will subdue them before your eyes so that you may quickly drive them out and destroy them, just as Jehovah has promised you.
“Do not say in your heart when Jehovah your God drives them away from before you, ‘It was because of my own righteousness that Jehovah has brought me in to take possession of this land.’ Rather, it is because of the wickedness of these nations that Jehovah is driving them away from before you.
It is not because of your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart that you are going in to take possession of their land. Instead, it is because of the wickedness of these nations that Jehovah your God is driving them away from before you and in order to carry out the word that Jehovah swore to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Know, then, that it is not because of your righteousness that Jehovah your God is giving you this good land to take possession of, because you are an obstinate people.
“Remember—never forget—the way you provoked Jehovah your God in the wilderness. From the day that you left the land of Egypt until your coming to this place, you have rebelled against Jehovah.
Even in Hoʹreb you provoked Jehovah, and Jehovah was so angry with you that he was ready to annihilate you.
When I went up the mountain to receive the stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant that Jehovah made with you, I remained on the mountain 40 days and 40 nights, eating no food and drinking no water.
Then Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone written on with God’s finger, and on them were all the words that Jehovah had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire in the day of the assembly.
At the end of the 40 days and 40 nights, Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant,
and Jehovah told me, ‘Get up, go down quickly from here, because your people whom you brought out of Egypt have acted corruptly. They have quickly turned aside from the path I commanded them to follow. They have made a metal image for themselves.’
Jehovah then said to me, ‘I have seen this people, and look! it is an obstinate people.
Let me be, and I will annihilate them and wipe out their name from under the heavens, and let me make you a nation mightier and more numerous than they are.’
“Then I turned and went down the mountain while the mountain was burning with fire, and the two tablets of the covenant were in both my hands.
Then I looked and saw that you had sinned against Jehovah your God! You had made a metal calf for yourselves. You had turned aside quickly from the path Jehovah had commanded you to follow.
So I took hold of the two tablets and threw them down with both my hands and shattered them before your eyes.
Then I prostrated myself before Jehovah, as at first, for 40 days and 40 nights. I neither ate food nor drank water, because of all the sins that you had committed by your doing what was evil in Jehovah’s eyes and offending him.
For I was terrified because of Jehovah’s great anger against you, in that he was ready to annihilate you. However, Jehovah listened to me that time also.
“Jehovah was so angry with Aaron that he was ready to annihilate him, but I made supplication for Aaron at that time also.
Then I took the sinful thing you made, the calf, and burned it up in the fire; I crushed it and ground it thoroughly until it was fine like dust, and I threw the dust into the stream that flows down from the mountain.
“Further, at Tabʹe·rah, at Masʹsah, and at Kibʹroth-hat·taʹa·vah, you also provoked Jehovah to anger.
When Jehovah sent you out of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a and said, ‘Go up and take possession of the land that I will certainly give you!’ you again rebelled against the order of Jehovah your God, and you did not exercise faith in him and did not obey him.
You have rebelled against Jehovah ever since I have known you.
“So I kept prostrating myself before Jehovah 40 days and 40 nights, for I prostrated myself in this way because Jehovah said he would annihilate you.
I began to make supplication to Jehovah and to say, ‘O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, do not bring your people to ruin. They are your personal possession, whom you redeemed through your greatness and brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not pay attention to the stubbornness of this people, their wickedness, and their sin.
Otherwise the people of the land from which you brought us may say: “Jehovah was unable to bring them into the land that he promised them, and because he hated them, he brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness.”
For they are your people and your personal possession, whom you brought out with your great power and your outstretched arm.’
“If a man marries a woman but she does not please him because he found something indecent about her, he must write out a certificate of divorce for her, hand it to her, and dismiss her from his house.
After she leaves his house, she may go and become another man’s wife.
If the second man hates her and writes out a certificate of divorce for her, hands it to her, and dismisses her from his house or if the second man who married her should die,
her first husband who dismissed her will not be allowed to take her back again as his wife after she has been defiled, for that is something detestable to Jehovah. You must not bring sin into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
“When a man is newly married, he should not serve in the army or be given any other duties. He should remain exempt for one year and stay at home and bring joy to his wife.
“No one should seize a hand mill or its upper millstone as security for a loan, for that would be taking someone’s livelihood as security.
“If someone is found to have kidnapped one of his Israelite brothers and he has mistreated him and sold him, the kidnapper must die. You should remove what is bad from your midst.
“When there is an outbreak of leprosy, be very careful to do according to all that the Levitical priests will instruct you. Be careful to do exactly as I commanded them.
Remember what Jehovah your God did to Mirʹi·am on the way when you were coming out of Egypt.
“If you make any sort of loan to your neighbor, you must not enter into his house to seize from him what he has offered as security.
You should stand outside, and the man who received the loan should bring outside to you what he is giving as security.
And if the man is in need, you must not go to bed with what he gave as security still in your possession.
You should by all means return to him what he has given as security as soon as the sun sets, and he will go to bed with his garment, and he will bless you; and it will mean righteousness for you before Jehovah your God.
“You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor, whether one of your brothers or a foreign resident in your land, within your cities.
You should give him his wages that very day, before the sun sets, because he is in need and his life depends on his wages. Otherwise, he will cry out to Jehovah against you, and you will be guilty of sin.
“Fathers should not be put to death for what their children do, and children should not be put to death for what their fathers do. A person should be put to death only for his own sin.
“You must not pervert the judgment of the foreign resident or of the fatherless child, and you must not seize the garment of a widow as security for a loan.
Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and Jehovah your God redeemed you from there. That is why I am commanding you to do this.
“When you reap your harvest from your field and you have forgotten a sheaf in the field, do not go back to get it. It should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.
“When you beat your olive tree, you should not repeat the procedure on its branches. What is left should remain for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow.
“When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, you must not return to gather the leftovers. They should be left for the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow.
Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt. That is why I am commanding you to do this.
Then Moses together with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying: “Observe every commandment that I am giving you today.
And in the day when you will cross the Jordan into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, set up large stones and cover them with plaster.
Then write on them all the words of this Law when you have crossed over, so that you may enter into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you.
When you have crossed the Jordan, you should set up these stones on Mount Eʹbal and cover them with plaster, just as I am commanding you today.
You are also to build an altar there to Jehovah your God, an altar of stones. You should not use iron tools on them.
You should build the altar of Jehovah your God with whole stones and offer burnt offerings to Jehovah your God on it.
You are to offer communion sacrifices and eat them there, and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God.
And clearly write on the stones all the words of this Law.”
Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel, saying: “Keep silent and listen, O Israel. This day you have become the people of Jehovah your God.
You must listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and carry out his commandments and his regulations, which I am commanding you today.”
On that day Moses commanded the people, saying:
“The following tribes will stand on Mount Gerʹi·zim to bless the people when you have crossed the Jordan: Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, Joseph, and Benjamin.
And the following will stand on Mount Eʹbal to pronounce the curse: Reuʹben, Gad, Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, Dan, and Naphʹta·li.
And the Levites will answer every man of Israel with a loud voice:
“‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved image or a metal statue, a thing detestable to Jehovah, the workmanship of the hands of a craftsman, and who has hidden it.’ (And all the people will respond, saying, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who treats his father or his mother with contempt.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who causes a blind person to lose his way on the road.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who perverts the judgment of a foreign resident, a fatherless child, or a widow.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his father’s wife, for he has dishonored his father.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who lies down with any animal.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who lies down with his mother-in-law.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who ambushes and kills his neighbor.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“‘Cursed is the one who will not uphold the words of this Law by carrying them out.’ (And all the people will say, ‘Amen!’)
“Then we turned and departed for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, just as Jehovah had told me, and we traveled for many days around Mount Seʹir.
Finally Jehovah said to me,
‘You have gone around this mountain long enough. Now turn north.
And give this command to the people: “You will pass by the border of your brothers, the descendants of Eʹsau, who are dwelling in Seʹir, and they will be afraid of you, and you must be very careful.
Do not engage in hostilities with them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even the space of a footprint, because I have given Mount Seʹir to Eʹsau as his possession.
You should give them money for the food you will eat, and you should pay for the water you will drink.
For Jehovah your God has blessed you in all that you have done. He is fully aware of your walking through this great wilderness. These 40 years Jehovah your God has been with you, and you have lacked nothing.”’
So we passed by our brothers, the descendants of Eʹsau, who are dwelling in Seʹir, keeping away from the way of the Arʹa·bah, from Eʹlath and from Eʹzi·on-geʹber. “Next we turned and traveled by the way of the wilderness of Moʹab.
Jehovah then said to me, ‘Do not engage in hostilities or in war with Moʹab, for I will not give you any of his land as a possession because I have given Ar as a possession to the descendants of Lot.
(The Eʹmim formerly lived there, a people great and numerous and tall like the Anʹa·kim.
The Rephʹa·im were also considered like the Anʹa·kim, and the Moʹab·ites used to call them Eʹmim.
Previously, the Horʹites were living in Seʹir, but the descendants of Eʹsau dispossessed and annihilated them and settled in their place, just as Israel will do to the land that is their possession, which Jehovah will certainly give to them.)
Now go and cross over the Valley of Zeʹred.’ So we crossed over the Valley of Zeʹred.
The time it took us to walk from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a until we crossed the Valley of Zeʹred was 38 years, until the entire generation of the men of war had perished from the camp, just as Jehovah had sworn to them.
Jehovah’s hand was against them to eliminate them from the camp until they had perished.
“As soon as all the men of war had died off from among the people,
Jehovah spoke to me again, saying,
‘Today you are to pass by the territory of Moʹab, that is, Ar.
When you come near to the Amʹmon·ites, do not harass or provoke them, for I will not give you any of the land of the Amʹmon·ites as a possession, because I have given it to the descendants of Lot as their possession.
This too used to be considered the land of the Rephʹa·im. (The Rephʹa·im formerly lived there, and the Amʹmon·ites used to call them Zam·zumʹmim.
They were a great and numerous and tall people like the Anʹa·kim; but Jehovah annihilated them before the Amʹmon·ites, and these drove them out and settled in their place.
That is what he did for the descendants of Eʹsau, who now dwell in Seʹir, when he annihilated the Horʹites from before them, so that they could dispossess them and dwell in their place to this very day.
As for the Avʹvim, they had dwelled in settlements as far as Gazʹa until the Caphʹto·rim, who came out from Caphʹtor, annihilated them and settled in their place.)
“‘Get up, and make your way across the Arʹnon Valley. See, I have given into your hand Siʹhon the Amʹor·ite, king of Heshʹbon. So begin taking possession of his land, and engage him in war.
This day I will start to put the dread and the fear of you upon all the people under the heavens who hear the report about you. They will be disturbed and will tremble because of you.’
“Then I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedʹe·moth to King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, with these peaceful words,
‘Let me pass through your land. I will remain on the road and not turn to the right or to the left.
I will eat only the food and drink only the water that you will sell to me. Just allow me to pass through on foot
—that is what the descendants of Eʹsau dwelling in Seʹir and the Moʹab·ites dwelling in Ar did for me—until I pass over the Jordan into the land that Jehovah our God is giving to us.’
But King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon did not let us pass through, because Jehovah your God allowed his spirit to become obstinate and his heart to become hard, in order to give him into your hand as is now the case.
“Then Jehovah said to me, ‘See, I have already begun to give Siʹhon and his land over to you. Start to take possession of his land.’
When Siʹhon came out along with all his people to meet us in battle at Jaʹhaz,
Jehovah our God handed him over to us, so that we defeated him, his sons, and all his people.
We captured all his cities at that time and devoted every city to destruction, including men, women, and children. We left no survivor.
We plundered only the livestock for ourselves along with the spoils from the cities that we had captured.
From A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley (including the city that is in the valley), as far as Gilʹe·ad, no town was beyond our reach. Jehovah our God handed them all over to us.
However, you did not approach the land of the Amʹmon·ites, the whole bank of the Valley of Jabʹbok and the cities of the mountainous region, or any other place forbidden by Jehovah our God.
“At that time Jehovah said to me, ‘Carve out for yourself two tablets of stone like the first ones, and come up to me on the mountain; also you must make for yourself an ark of wood.
And I will write on the tablets the words that appeared on the first tablets, which you shattered, and you should place them in the ark.’
So I made an ark of acacia wood and carved out two tablets of stone like the first ones and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hand.
Then he wrote on the tablets the words he had written before, the Ten Commandments, which Jehovah had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the assembly; and Jehovah gave them to me.
Then I turned and went down the mountain and placed the tablets in the ark that I had made, where they remain, just as Jehovah had commanded me.
“The Israelites then departed from Be·erʹoth Benʹe-jaʹa·kan for Mo·seʹrah. There Aaron died and was buried, and his son El·e·aʹzar began to serve as priest in his place.
From there they departed for Gudʹgo·dah, and from Gudʹgo·dah for Jotʹba·thah, a land flowing with streams of water.
“At that time Jehovah set apart the tribe of Leʹvi to carry the ark of Jehovah’s covenant, to stand before Jehovah in order to minister to him, and to bless in his name, as they do to this day.
That is why Leʹvi has no share or inheritance with his brothers. Jehovah is his inheritance, just as Jehovah your God had said to him.
I myself stayed on the mountain as I did the first time, 40 days and 40 nights, and Jehovah listened to me on that occasion also. Jehovah did not want to destroy you.
Then Jehovah said to me, ‘Go ahead of the people, and prepare to depart, so that they may go in and take possession of the land that I have sworn to their forefathers to give to them.’
“Now, O Israel, what is Jehovah your God asking of you? Only this: to fear Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, to serve Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul,
and to keep the commandments and statutes of Jehovah that I am commanding you today for your own good.
Look, to Jehovah your God belong the heavens, even the heavens of the heavens, and the earth with all that is in it.
But only to your forefathers did Jehovah draw close and express his love, and he has chosen you, their offspring, out of all the peoples, as you are today.
You must now cleanse your hearts and stop being so stubborn.
For Jehovah your God is the God of gods and the Lord of lords, the God great, mighty, and awe-inspiring, who treats none with partiality and does not accept a bribe.
He executes justice for the fatherless child and the widow and loves the foreign resident, giving him food and clothing.
You too must love the foreign resident, for you became foreign residents in the land of Egypt.
“Jehovah your God you should fear, him you should serve, to him you should cling, and by his name you should swear.
He is the One you are to praise. He is your God, who has done all these great and awe-inspiring things for you that your own eyes have seen.
With 70 people your forefathers went down into Egypt, and now Jehovah your God has made you as numerous as the stars of the heavens.
“Observe the month of Aʹbib, and celebrate the Passover to Jehovah your God, for in the month of Aʹbib, Jehovah your God brought you out of Egypt by night.
And you should sacrifice the Passover offering to Jehovah your God, from the flock and the herd, in the place that Jehovah chooses to have his name reside.
You must not eat anything leavened along with it; for seven days you should eat unleavened bread, the bread of affliction, because you came out of the land of Egypt in haste. Do this so that you may remember the day you came out of the land of Egypt as long as you live.
No sourdough should be found with you in all your territory for seven days, nor should any of the meat that you will sacrifice in the evening on the first day remain all night until the next morning.
You will not be allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering in just any of the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you.
But it should be done at the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside. You should sacrifice the Passover offering in the evening as soon as the sun sets, at the appointed time of your coming out of Egypt.
You must cook it and eat it in the place that Jehovah your God will choose, and in the morning you may return to your own tents.
Six days you should eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there will be a solemn assembly to Jehovah your God. You must do no work.
“You should count off seven weeks. You should begin counting off seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain.
Then you are to celebrate the Festival of Weeks to Jehovah your God with the voluntary offering from your hand, given in proportion to how Jehovah your God blesses you.
And you are to rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite who is inside your cities, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are in your midst, in the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside.
Remember that you became a slave in Egypt, and observe and carry out these regulations.
“You should celebrate the Festival of Booths for seven days when you make an ingathering from your threshing floor and from your press for oil and wine.
Rejoice during your festival, you and your son, your daughter, your male slave, your female slave, the Levite, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow, who are inside your cities.
Seven days you will celebrate the festival to Jehovah your God in the place that Jehovah chooses, for Jehovah your God will bless all your produce and all that you do, and you will become nothing but joyful.
“Three times a year, all your males should appear before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses: at the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths, and none of them should appear before Jehovah empty-handed.
The gift that each one brings should be in proportion to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you.
“You should appoint judges and officers for each tribe in all the cities that Jehovah your God is giving you, and they must judge the people with righteous judgment.
You must not pervert justice, show partiality, or accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and distorts the words of the righteous.
Justice—justice you should pursue, so that you may keep living and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
“You should not plant any sort of tree as a sacred pole near the altar of Jehovah your God that you make for yourself.
“Neither should you set up a sacred pillar for yourself, something Jehovah your God hates.
Moses then summoned all Israel and said to them: “Hear, O Israel, the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am announcing to you today, and you must learn them and carefully observe them.
Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in Hoʹreb.
It was not with our forefathers that Jehovah made this covenant, but with us, all of us alive here today.
Jehovah spoke face-to-face with you in the mountain, out of the fire.
I was standing between Jehovah and you at that time to convey to you the word of Jehovah, for you were afraid because of the fire and did not go up the mountain. He said:
“‘I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
You must never have any other gods besides me.
“‘You must not make for yourself a carved image or a form like anything that is in the heavens above or on the earth below or in the waters under the earth.
You must not bow down to them nor be led to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
but showing loyal love to the thousandth generation of those who love me and keep my commandments.
“‘You must not take up the name of Jehovah your God in a worthless way, for Jehovah will not leave anyone unpunished who takes up his name in a worthless way.
“‘Observe the Sabbath day to keep it sacred, just as Jehovah your God commanded you.
You are to labor and do all your work in six days,
but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work, neither you nor your son nor your daughter nor your slave man nor your slave girl nor your bull nor your donkey nor any of your domestic animals nor your foreign resident who is inside your cities, in order that your slave man and your slave girl may rest the same as you.
Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God brought you out of there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. That is why Jehovah your God commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.
“‘Honor your father and your mother, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you, so that you may live a long time and you may prosper in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
“‘You must not murder.
“‘Neither must you commit adultery.
“‘Neither must you steal.
“‘Neither must you testify to a falsehood against your fellow man.
“‘Neither must you desire your fellow man’s wife. Neither must you selfishly desire your fellow man’s house nor his field nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his donkey nor anything that belongs to your fellow man.’
“These commandments Jehovah spoke to all your congregation on the mountain, out of the fire, the cloud, and the thick gloom, with a loud voice, and he added nothing further; then he wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.
“But as soon as you had heard the voice out of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, all the heads of your tribes and the elders approached me.
Then you said, ‘Here Jehovah our God has shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the fire. Today we have seen that God can speak with man and he can keep living.
Now, why should we die? For this great fire may consume us. If we continue hearing the voice of Jehovah our God, we are sure to die.
For who is there of all flesh who has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the fire as we did and yet goes on living?
You yourself must go near to hear all that Jehovah our God will say, and you will be the one to tell us all that Jehovah our God says to you, and we will listen and do it.’
“So Jehovah heard the words you spoke to me, and Jehovah said to me, ‘I have heard the words that this people have spoken to you. All they have said is good.
If only they would always have a heart inclined to fear me and to keep all my commandments; then it would go well with them and their sons forever!
Go say to them: “Return to your tents.”
But you should stay here with me, and let me tell you all the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that you should teach to them and that they are to observe in the land that I am giving them to take possession of.’
Now you people should be careful to do just as Jehovah your God has commanded you. You must not turn to the right or to the left.
You should walk in all the way that Jehovah your God has commanded you, in order that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land that you will take possession of.
“You are sons of Jehovah your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave your foreheads bald for a dead person.
For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God, and Jehovah has chosen you to become his people, his special property, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth.
“You must not eat anything that is detestable.
These are the animals that you may eat: the bull, the sheep, the goat,
the deer, the gazelle, the roebuck, the wild goat, the antelope, the wild sheep, and the mountain sheep.
You may eat any animal that has a split hoof divided into two and that chews the cud.
However, you must not eat the following animals that chew the cud or that have split hooves: the camel, the hare, and the rock badger, because they chew the cud but do not have split hooves. They are unclean for you.
Also the pig because it has a split hoof but does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you. You must not eat their flesh or touch their carcasses.
“Of everything that is living in the waters, you may eat these: Anything with fins and scales, you may eat.
But you must not eat anything that has no fins and scales. It is unclean for you.
“You may eat any clean bird.
But you must not eat these: the eagle, the osprey, the black vulture,
the red kite, the black kite, every kind of glede,
every kind of raven,
the ostrich, the owl, the gull, every kind of falcon,
the little owl, the long-eared owl, the swan,
the pelican, the vulture, the cormorant,
the stork, every kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
Every winged swarming creature also is unclean for you. They should not be eaten.
Any clean flying creature you may eat.
“You must not eat any animal that was found dead. You may give it to the foreign resident who is inside your cities, and he may eat it, or it may be sold to a foreigner. For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God. “You must not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.
“You must without fail give a tenth of everything your seed produces in the field year by year.
You will eat the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and your flock before Jehovah your God in the place that he chooses to have his name reside, so that you may learn to fear Jehovah your God always.
“But if the journey should be too long for you and you are not able to carry it to the place that Jehovah your God chooses as the place for his name because it is far away from you (because Jehovah your God will bless you),
you may then convert it into money, and with your money in hand, travel to the place that Jehovah your God will choose.
You may then spend the money on whatever you desire—cattle, sheep, goats, wine and other alcoholic beverages, and anything you please; and you will eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice, you and your household.
And do not neglect the Levite who is inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you.
“At the end of every three years, you should bring out the entire tenth part of your produce for that year and deposit it inside your cities.
Then the Levite, who has no share or inheritance with you, the foreign resident, the fatherless child, and the widow who are in your cities will come and eat their fill, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in all that you do.
“And if you will without fail listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by being careful to do all his commandments that I am commanding you today, Jehovah your God will certainly put you high above all other nations of the earth.
All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you, because you keep listening to the voice of Jehovah your God:
“Blessed you will be in the city, and blessed you will be in the field.
“Blessed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and the offspring of your livestock, your young cattle and sheep.
“Blessed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.
“Blessed you will be when you come in, and blessed you will be when you go out.
“Jehovah will cause your enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you. They will attack you from one direction, but they will flee from you in seven different directions.
Jehovah will decree for you a blessing on your storehouses and every undertaking of yours, and he will certainly bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.
Jehovah will establish you as a holy people to himself, just as he swore to you, because you continue to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God and walk in his ways.
All the peoples of the earth will have to see that Jehovah’s name has been called upon you, and they will be afraid of you.
“Jehovah will make you overflow with many children and much livestock and fruitful ground in the land that Jehovah swore to your forefathers to give you.
Jehovah will open up to you his good storehouse, the heavens, to give your land rain in its season and to bless all that you do. You will lend to many nations, while you yourself will not need to borrow.
Jehovah will make you the head, and not the tail; and you will be on top, and not on the bottom, if you keep obeying the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today to observe and to do.
You must not deviate from all the words that I am commanding you today, to the right or to the left, to walk after other gods to serve them.
“But if you will not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by taking care to do all his commandments and his statutes that I am commanding you today, all these curses will come upon you and overtake you:
“Cursed you will be in the city, and cursed you will be in the field.
“Cursed will be your basket and your kneading bowl.
“Cursed will be your children and the fruit of your ground and your young cattle and sheep.
“Cursed you will be when you come in, and cursed you will be when you go out.
“Jehovah will send upon you the curse, confusion and punishment in every undertaking of yours until you have been annihilated and have quickly perished, because of your bad practices and your forsaking me.
Jehovah will cause the disease to cling to you until he has exterminated you from the land you are going to take possession of.
Jehovah will strike you with tuberculosis, burning fever, inflammation, feverish heat, the sword, scorching blight, and mildew; and they will pursue you until you have perished.
The skies over your head will be copper, and the earth beneath you, iron.
Jehovah will make the rain of your land powder and dust that will come down on you from the heavens until you have been annihilated.
Jehovah will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You will attack them from one direction, but you will flee from them in seven different directions; and you will become an object of horror to all the earth’s kingdoms.
And your carcasses will become food for every bird of the sky and animal of the ground, with no one to frighten them away.
“Jehovah will strike you with the boils of Egypt, piles, eczema, and skin lesions, from which you cannot be healed.
Jehovah will strike you with madness and blindness and confusion.
You will grope about at midday, just as a blind man gropes about in darkness, and you will not succeed in anything you do; and you will be constantly defrauded and robbed, with no one to save you.
You will become engaged to a woman, but another man will rape her. You will build a house, but you will not live in it. You will plant a vineyard, but you will not begin to use it.
Your bull will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. Your donkey will be stolen right in front of you, but it will not return to you. Your sheep will be given to your enemies, but you will have no savior.
Your sons and your daughters will be given to another people while you look on, and you will always long for them, but your hands will be powerless.
The fruitage of your ground and all that you produce will be eaten by a people whom you have not known, and you will always be defrauded and crushed.
You will be driven mad by what your eyes see.
“Jehovah will strike you with painful and incurable boils on your knees and legs, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head.
Jehovah will drive you and the king whom you set up over yourself to a nation that you and your forefathers have not known, and there you will serve other gods, gods of wood and of stone.
And you will become an object of horror and of scorn, and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples to whom Jehovah drives you.
“You will take much seed out into the field, but you will gather little, because the locust will devour it.
Vineyards you will plant and cultivate, but you will drink no wine and gather nothing, because the worm will consume it.
You will have olive trees in all your territory, but you will rub no oil on yourself, because your olives will drop off.
Sons and daughters you will bear, but they will not remain yours, because they will go off into captivity.
Swarms of insects will overwhelm all your trees and the fruitage of your ground.
The foreign resident who is in your midst will keep ascending higher and higher over you, while you yourself will keep descending lower and lower.
He will lend to you, but you will not lend to him. He will become the head, while you yourself will become the tail.
“All these curses will certainly come upon you and pursue you and overtake you until you have been annihilated, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God by keeping his commandments and his statutes that he commanded you.
And they will continue on you and your offspring as a permanent sign and portent,
because you did not serve Jehovah your God with rejoicing and joy of heart when you had such an abundance of everything.
Jehovah will send your enemies against you, and you will serve them while you are hungry and thirsty and poorly clothed and lacking everything. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until he has annihilated you.
“Jehovah will raise up against you a distant nation, from the end of the earth; it will pounce like an eagle, a nation whose language you will not understand,
a nation fierce in appearance that will show no regard to the old or favor to the young.
They will eat the offspring of your livestock and the fruitage of your ground until you have been annihilated. They will not leave any grain, new wine or oil, young cattle or sheep for you until they have destroyed you.
They will besiege you, shutting you up inside all your cities throughout your land until your high and fortified walls that you are trusting in fall down. Yes, they will certainly besiege you within all your cities throughout your land that Jehovah your God has given you.
Then you will have to eat your own children, the flesh of your sons and your daughters whom Jehovah your God has given you, because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on you.
“Even the most delicate and sensitive man among you will have no pity on his brother or his cherished wife or his sons who remain,
and he will not share with them any of the flesh of his sons that he will eat, because he has nothing else on account of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities.
And the delicate and sensitive woman among you who would not even think of putting the sole of her foot on the ground because she is so delicate will show no pity to her cherished husband or her son or her daughter,
even toward the afterbirth that comes from between her legs and toward the sons she bears, for she will secretly eat them because of the severity of the siege and the distress your enemy inflicts on your cities.
“If you will not carefully observe all the words of this Law that are written in this book and you do not fear this glorious and awe-inspiring name, that of Jehovah your God,
Jehovah will inflict very severe plagues on you and your offspring, great and enduring plagues, and grievous and enduring sicknesses.
He will bring back upon you all the diseases of Egypt that you used to fear, and they will certainly cling to you.
Moreover, Jehovah will even bring upon you every sickness or plague not written in the book of this Law until you have been annihilated.
Although you have become as numerous as the stars of the heavens, very few of your number will be left, because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.
“And just as Jehovah once delighted to make you prosper and to multiply you, so Jehovah will delight to destroy you and to annihilate you; and you will be torn from the land you are about to possess.
“Jehovah will scatter you among all the nations, from the one end of the earth to the other end of the earth, and there you will have to serve gods of wood and of stone, which you and your forefathers have not known.
You will have no peace among those nations nor a place of rest for the sole of your foot. Rather, Jehovah will give you there an anxious heart and failing eyes and a feeling of despair.
Your life will be in great peril, and you will feel dread night and day; and you will be uncertain of your survival.
In the morning you will say, ‘If only it were evening!’ and in the evening you will say, ‘If only it were morning!’ because of the dread you will feel in your heart and because of what your eyes will see.
And Jehovah will certainly bring you back to Egypt by ship, by the way that I told you, ‘You will never see it again,’ and there you will have to sell yourselves to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there will be no buyer.”
“If you see your brother’s bull or his sheep going astray, do not deliberately ignore it. You should without fail lead it back to your brother.
But if your brother does not live near you or you do not know him, you should bring the animal to your house, and it will remain with you until your brother searches for it. Then you should return it to him.
That is what you should do with his donkey, with his clothing, and with anything that your brother has lost and you have found. You must not ignore it.
“If you see your brother’s donkey or his bull fall down on the road, you must not deliberately ignore it. You should without fail help him raise the animal up.
“A woman must not put on the clothing of a man, nor should a man wear the clothing of a woman. For anyone doing so is detestable to Jehovah your God.
“If you happen upon a bird’s nest along the road with young ones or eggs, whether in a tree or on the ground, and the mother is sitting on the young ones or the eggs, you must not take the mother together with her young.
Be sure to send the mother away, but you may take the young for yourself. Do this so that it may go well with you and you may live long.
“If you build a new house, you must also make a parapet for your roof, so that you may not bring bloodguilt on your house because of someone falling from it.
“You must not sow your vineyard with two sorts of seed. Otherwise, everything produced from the seed you sow as well as the product of the vineyard will be forfeited to the sanctuary.
“You must not plow with a bull and a donkey together.
“You must not wear clothing made of wool and linen mixed together.
“You should make tassels on the four corners of the clothing you wear.
“If a man takes a wife and has relations with her but then comes to hate her
and he accuses her of misconduct and gives her a bad name by saying: ‘I have taken this woman, but when I had relations with her, I did not find evidence that she was a virgin,’
the father and mother of the girl should produce the evidence of the girl’s virginity for the elders at the gate of the city.
The girl’s father must say to the elders, ‘I gave my daughter to this man as a wife, but he hates her
and is accusing her of misconduct by saying: “I have found out that your daughter does not have evidence of virginity.” Now this is the evidence of my daughter’s virginity.’ They will then spread out the cloth before the elders of the city.
The city elders will take the man and discipline him.
They will fine him 100 silver shekels and give them to the girl’s father, because the man defamed a virgin of Israel, and she will continue to be his wife. He will not be allowed to divorce her as long as he lives.
“If, though, the accusation is true, and there is no evidence that the girl was a virgin,
they should bring the girl out to the entrance of her father’s house, and the men of her city should stone her to death, because she has committed a disgraceful act in Israel by committing sexual immorality in the house of her father. So you must remove what is bad from your midst.
“If a man is found lying down with a woman who is the wife of another man, both of them must die together, the man who lay down with the woman as well as the woman. So you must remove what is bad out of Israel.
“If a virgin is engaged to a man, and another man happens to meet her in the city and lies down with her,
you should bring them both out to the gate of that city and stone them to death, the girl because she did not scream in the city and the man because he humiliated the wife of his fellow man. So you must remove what is evil from your midst.
“If, however, the man happened to meet the engaged girl in the field and the man overpowered her and lay down with her, the man who lay down with her is to die by himself,
and you must do nothing to the girl. The girl has not committed a sin deserving of death. This case is the same as when a man attacks his fellow man and murders him.
For he happened to meet her in the field, and the engaged girl screamed, but there was no one to rescue her.
“If a man happens to meet a virgin girl who is not engaged and he seizes her and lies down with her and they are discovered,
the man who lay down with her must give the girl’s father 50 silver shekels, and she will become his wife. Because he humiliated her, he will not be allowed to divorce her as long as he lives.
“No man should take his father’s wife, so that he may not dishonor his father.
“At the end of every seven years, you should grant a release.
This is the nature of the release: Every creditor will release his neighbor from the debt he incurred. He should not demand payment from his neighbor or his brother, for it will be proclaimed a release to Jehovah.
You may demand payment from the foreigner, but you should release your claim on whatever your brother owes you.
However, no one among you should become poor, for Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance,
but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today.
For Jehovah your God will bless you just as he has promised you, and you will lend to many nations, but you will not need to borrow; and you will dominate many nations, but they will not dominate you.
“If one of your brothers becomes poor among you in one of your cities of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, do not harden your heart or be tightfisted toward your poor brother.
For you should generously open your hand to him and by all means lend whatever he needs or is lacking.
Be careful not to harbor this evil idea in your heart, ‘The seventh year, the year of the release, has approached,’ and hold back your generosity toward your poor brother and give him nothing. If he calls out to Jehovah against you, it will be a sin on your part.
You should generously give to him, and you should not give to him grudgingly, for this is why Jehovah your God will bless your every deed and undertaking.
For there will always be poor people in the land. That is why I am commanding you, ‘You should generously open up your hand to your afflicted and poor brother in your land.’
“If one of your brothers, a Hebrew man or woman, is sold to you and has served you for six years, then in the seventh year you should set him free.
And if you should set him free, do not send him away empty-handed.
You should supply him generously with something from your flock, your threshing floor, and your press for oil and wine. Just as Jehovah your God has blessed you, you should give to him.
Remember that you became a slave in the land of Egypt and that Jehovah your God redeemed you. That is why I am commanding you to do this today.
“But if he says to you, ‘I will not go out from your company!’ because he loves you and your household, since he has been happy while with you,
you should then take an awl and put it through his ear into the door, and he will become your slave for life. You should do the same with your slave girl.
Do not consider it a hardship when you set him free and he leaves you, because his service to you for six years was worth twice as much as that of a hired worker, and Jehovah your God has blessed you in everything that was done.
“You should sanctify every firstborn male of your herd and your flock to Jehovah your God. You must not do any work with the firstborn of your herd nor shear the firstborn of your flock.
You and your household should eat it before Jehovah your God year by year in the place that Jehovah will choose.
But if it has a defect—lameness, blindness, or any other serious defect—you must not sacrifice it to Jehovah your God.
You should eat it inside your cities, the unclean and clean person together, as though it were a gazelle or a deer.
But you must not eat its blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water.
“Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak,And let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
My instruction will fall as the rain;My words will trickle as the dew,As gentle rains upon grassAnd as copious showers upon vegetation.
For I will declare the name of Jehovah. Tell about the greatness of our God!
The Rock, perfect is his activity,For all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness who is never unjust;Righteous and upright is he.
They are the ones who have acted corruptly. They are not his children, the defect is their own. They are a crooked and twisted generation!
Is this the way that you should treat Jehovah,O foolish and unwise people? Is he not your Father who caused your existence,The One who made you and firmly established you?
Remember the days of old;Consider the years of past generations. Ask your father, and he can tell you;Your elders, and they will inform you.
When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance,When he divided the sons of Adam from one another,He fixed the boundary of the peoplesWith regard for the number of the sons of Israel.
For Jehovah’s people are his portion;Jacob is his inheritance.
He found him in a wilderness landAnd in an empty, howling desert. He protectively encircled him, took care of him,And safeguarded him as the pupil of his eye.
Just as an eagle stirs up its nest,Hovers over its fledglings,Spreading out its wings, taking them,Carrying them on its pinions,
Jehovah alone kept leading him;No foreign god was with him.
He made him ride upon earth’s high places,So that he ate the produce of the field. He nourished him with honey from the cragAnd oil out of a flinty rock,
Butter of the herd and milk of the flock,Together with the choicest sheep,And rams of Baʹshan, and he-goats,Together with the finest wheat;And you drank wine from the blood of grapes.
When Jeshʹu·run grew fat, he kicked out rebelliously. You have grown fat, you have become stout, you have become bloated. So he forsook God, who made him,And despised the Rock of his salvation.
They incited him to fury with foreign gods;They were offending him with detestable things.
They were sacrificing to demons, not to God,To gods that they had not known,New ones that came along recently,To gods that your forefathers did not know.
You forgot the Rock who fathered you,And you did not remember the God who gave birth to you.
When Jehovah saw it, he rejected themBecause his sons and his daughters offended him.
So he said, ‘I will hide my face from them;I will see what will become of them. For they are a perverse generation,Sons in whom there is no faithfulness.
They have incited me to fury with what is not a god;They have offended me with their worthless idols. So I will incite them to jealousy with what is not a people;I will offend them with a foolish nation.
For my anger has kindled a fireThat will burn to the depths of the Grave,And it will consume the earth and its produceAnd will set ablaze the foundations of mountains.
I will increase their calamities;I will use up my arrows on them.
They will be exhausted from hungerAnd eaten up by burning fever and bitter destruction. I will send the teeth of beasts against themAnd the venom of reptiles of the dust.
Outside, a sword will bereave them;Inside, there is terrorFor both young man and virgin,Infant together with gray-haired man.
I would have said: “I will scatter them;I will make the memory of them cease from among men,”
If not for my dread of the enemy’s reaction,Because the adversaries might misconstrue it. They might say: “Our power has triumphed;It was not Jehovah who did all of this.”
For they are a nation devoid of sense,And there is no understanding among them.
If only they were wise! They would ponder over this. They would think about their outcome.
How could one chase after 1,000,And two put 10,000 to flight? Not unless their Rock had sold themAnd Jehovah had surrendered them.
For their rock is not like our Rock,Even our enemies have understood this.
For their vine is from the vine of SodʹomAnd from the terraces of Go·morʹrah. Their grapes are grapes of poison,Their clusters are bitter.
Their wine is the venom of serpents,The cruel poison of cobras.
Is this not stored up with me,Sealed up in my storehouse?
Vengeance is mine, and retribution,At the appointed time when their foot slips,For the day of their disaster is near,And what awaits them will come quickly.’
For Jehovah will judge his people,And he will feel pity for his servantsWhen he sees that their strength has waned,And that only the helpless and weak remain.
Then he will say, ‘Where are their gods,The rock in whom they sought refuge,
Who used to eat the fat of their sacrifices,To drink the wine of their drink offerings? Let them rise up and help you. Let them become your place of refuge.
See now that I—I am he,And there are no gods apart from me. I put to death, and I make alive. I wound, and I will heal,And no one can rescue from my hand.
For I raise my hand to heaven,And I swear: “As surely as I live forever,”
If I sharpen my flashing swordAnd prepare my hand for judgment,I will pay back vengeance on my adversariesAnd bring retribution to those who hate me.
I will make my arrows drunk with blood,And my sword will eat flesh,With the blood of the slain and the captives,With the heads of the leaders of the enemy.’
Be glad, you nations, with his people,For he will avenge the blood of his servants,And he will repay vengeance to his adversariesAnd will make atonement for the land of his people.”
Thus Moses came and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Ho·sheʹa the son of Nun.
After Moses finished speaking all these words to all Israel,
he said to them: “Take to heart all the words of my warning to you today, so that you may command your sons to take care to do all the words of this Law.
For this is no empty word for you, but it means your life, and by this word you may live long in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
Jehovah spoke to Moses on this same day, saying:
“Go up into this mountain of Abʹa·rim, Mount Neʹbo, which is in the land of Moʹab, which faces toward Jerʹi·cho, and view the land of Caʹnaan, which I am giving to the Israelites as a possession.
Then you will die on the mountain you are about to ascend, and be gathered to your people, just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,
because both of you were unfaithful to me among the Israelites at the waters of Merʹi·bah of Kaʹdesh in the wilderness of Zin, because you did not sanctify me before the people of Israel.
You will see the land from a distance, but you will not enter the land that I am giving to the people of Israel.”
“Now, O Israel, listen to the regulations and the judicial decisions that I am teaching you to observe, so that you may live and go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, is giving you.
You must not add to the word that I am commanding you, neither must you take away from it, so as to keep the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you.
“Your own eyes have seen what Jehovah did in the case of the Baʹal of Peʹor; Jehovah your God annihilated from your midst every man who walked after the Baʹal of Peʹor.
But you who are holding fast to Jehovah your God are all alive today.
See, I have taught you regulations and judicial decisions, just as Jehovah my God has commanded me, so that you may observe them in the land you will take possession of.
You must carefully follow them, because this will show wisdom and understanding on your part before the peoples who will hear about all these regulations, and they will say, ‘This great nation is undoubtedly a wise and understanding people.’
For what great nation has gods as near to it as Jehovah our God is to us whenever we call on him?
And what great nation has righteous regulations and judicial decisions like this entire Law that I am putting before you today?
“Just be careful and watch yourself closely, so that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and so that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life. You must also make them known to your sons and to your grandsons.
On the day that you stood before Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb, Jehovah said to me, ‘Congregate the people together to me so that I may let them hear my words, in order that they may learn to fear me all the days that they are alive on the ground and that they may teach their sons.’
“So you came near and stood at the base of the mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire up to the very heavens; there was darkness, cloud, and thick gloom.
And Jehovah began to speak to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but you saw no form—there was only a voice.
And he declared his covenant to you, which he commanded you to observe—the Ten Commandments. Afterward, he wrote them on two tablets of stone.
At that time Jehovah commanded me to teach you regulations and judicial decisions, which you are to observe in the land you will enter to take possession of.
“Therefore, watch yourselves closely—since you did not see any form on the day Jehovah spoke to you in Hoʹreb out of the middle of the fire—
that you may not act corruptly by making for yourselves any carved image having the form of any symbol, the representation of male or female,
the representation of any animal on the earth or the representation of any bird that flies in the sky,
the representation of anything creeping on the ground or the representation of any fish in the waters under the earth.
And when you raise your eyes to the heavens and see the sun and the moon and the stars—all the army of the heavens—do not get seduced and bow down to them and serve them. Jehovah your God has given them to all the peoples under the whole heavens.
But you are the ones Jehovah took and brought out of the iron-smelting furnace, out of Egypt, to become the people of his personal possession, as you are today.
“Jehovah became angry with me because of you, and he swore that I should not cross the Jordan or go into the good land that Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance.
For I am to die in this land; I will not cross the Jordan, but you will cross over and take possession of this good land.
Be careful that you do not forget the covenant of Jehovah your God that he made with you, and do not make for yourselves a carved image, the form of anything forbidden to you by Jehovah your God.
For Jehovah your God is a consuming fire, a God who requires exclusive devotion.
“If you become father to sons and grandsons and you have lived a long time in the land and you act ruinously and make a carved image of any kind and you do what is evil in the eyes of Jehovah your God so as to offend him,
I do take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that you will surely and quickly perish from the land that you are crossing the Jordan to take possession of. You will not last long on it, but you will be utterly annihilated.
Jehovah will scatter you among the peoples, and just a few of you will survive among the nations to which Jehovah will have driven you.
There you will have to serve gods of wood and stone made by human hands, gods that cannot see or hear or eat or smell.
“If you search for Jehovah your God from there, you will certainly find him, if you inquire for him with all your heart and with all your soul.
When you are in great distress and all these things have happened to you in later times, then you will return to Jehovah your God and listen to his voice.
For Jehovah your God is a merciful God. He will not desert you or bring you to ruin or forget the covenant that he swore to your forefathers.
“Ask, now, about the former days before your time, from the day when God created man on the earth; search from one end of the heavens to the other end of the heavens. Has anything so great ever happened or has anything like it ever been heard of?
Have any other people heard the voice of God speaking out of the fire the way you have heard it and kept on living?
Or has God ever attempted to take for himself a nation out of the midst of another nation along with judgments, with signs, with miracles, with war, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds, as Jehovah your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes?
You yourselves have been shown these things so you will know that Jehovah is the true God; there is no other besides him.
He made you hear his voice from the heavens to correct you, and on the earth he made you see his great fire, and his words you heard from out of the fire.
“Because he loved your forefathers and has chosen their offspring after them, you were brought out of Egypt in his presence by his great power.
From before you he drove away nations greater and mightier than you, to bring you in and give you their land as an inheritance, as it is today.
Know, therefore, on this day, and take it to heart that Jehovah is the true God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath. There is no other.
You must keep his regulations and his commandments that I am commanding you today, in order that it may go well with you and your sons after you, so that you may long remain in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you.”
At that time Moses set apart three cities on the eastern side of the Jordan.
If any manslayer unintentionally kills his fellow man and he did not previously hate him, he must flee to one of these cities and live.
The cities are Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland for the Reuʹben·ites, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad for the Gadʹites, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan for the Ma·nasʹsites.
Now this is the Law that Moses set before the people of Israel.
These are the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Moses gave to the Israelites after they came out of Egypt,
in the region of the Jordan, in the valley opposite Beth-peʹor, in the land of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who was dwelling in Heshʹbon, whom Moses and the Israelites defeated after coming out of Egypt.
And they took possession of his land and of the land of King Og of Baʹshan, the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were in the region east of the Jordan,
from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, up to Mount Siʹon, that is, Herʹmon,
and all the Arʹa·bah in the region east of the Jordan, and as far as the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, at the base of the slopes of Pisʹgah.
“If you go to war against your enemies and you see their horses and chariots and troops that outnumber yours, do not be afraid of them, for Jehovah your God who brought you up out of the land of Egypt is with you.
When you are about to go into battle, the priest should approach and address the people.
He should tell them, ‘Hear, O Israel, you are about to do battle with your enemies. Do not be fainthearted. Do not be afraid or be terrified or tremble because of them,
for Jehovah your God is marching with you to fight for you against your enemies and to save you.’
“The officers too should tell the people, ‘Who has built a new house and has not inaugurated it? Let him return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will inaugurate it.
And who has planted a vineyard and not begun to use it? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he may die in the battle and another man will begin to use it.
And who has become engaged to a woman and has not married her? Let him go and return to his house. Otherwise, he might die in the battle and another man will marry her.’
The officers should also ask the people, ‘Who is fearful and fainthearted? He should return to his house, so that he may not cause his brothers to lose heart as he has.’
When the officers have finished speaking to the people, they should appoint chiefs of the armies to lead the people.
“If you approach a city to fight against it, you should also announce to it terms of peace.
If it gives a peaceful answer to you and opens up to you, all the people found there will become yours for forced labor, and they will serve you.
But if it refuses to make peace with you and instead goes to war with you, you should besiege it,
and Jehovah your God will certainly give it into your hand, and you must strike down every male in it with the sword.
However, the women, the children, the livestock, and everything that is in the city, all its spoil, you may plunder for yourself, and you will eat the spoil of your enemies, which Jehovah your God has given to you.
“That is what you will do to all the cities very far away from you that are not of the cities of these nearby nations.
But in the cities of these peoples, which Jehovah your God is giving you as an inheritance, you must not allow any breathing thing to live.
Instead, you should devote them completely to destruction, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, just as Jehovah your God has commanded you;
so that they may not teach you to follow all their detestable practices that they have done for their gods, causing you to sin against Jehovah your God.
“If you lay siege to a city and capture it after fighting against it for many days, you should not destroy its trees by wielding an ax against them. You may eat from them, but you should not cut them down. For should you besiege a tree of the field as you would a man?
You may destroy only a tree that you know is not used for food. You may cut it down and build siegeworks against the city that is making war against you, until it falls.
“These are the regulations and the judicial decisions that you should be careful to carry out all the days that you are alive in the land that Jehovah the God of your forefathers will give you to possess.
You should completely destroy all the places where the nations you will dispossess have served their gods, whether on the high mountains or on the hills or under any luxuriant tree.
You should pull down their altars, shatter their sacred pillars, burn their sacred poles in the fire, and cut down the graven images of their gods, obliterating their very names from that place.
“You must not worship Jehovah your God in that way.
Rather, seek Jehovah your God wherever he chooses to establish his name and his place of residence among all your tribes, and go there.
That is where you are to bring your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, your vow offerings, your voluntary offerings, and the firstborn of your herd and flock.
You and your households must eat there before Jehovah your God and rejoice in all your undertakings, because Jehovah your God has blessed you.
“You must not do as we are doing here today, with everyone doing whatever is right in his own eyes,
because you have not yet come into the resting-place and the inheritance that Jehovah your God is giving you.
When you do cross the Jordan and dwell in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess, he will certainly give you rest from all your enemies around you, and you will dwell in security.
You will bring all that I am commanding you to the place that Jehovah your God chooses to have his name reside—your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution from your hand, and every vow offering that you vow to Jehovah.
You will rejoice before Jehovah your God, you and your sons, your daughters, your male and female slaves, and the Levite inside your cities, for he has no share or inheritance with you.
Be careful not to offer up your burnt offerings in any other place you may see.
You should offer your burnt offerings only in the place that Jehovah chooses in one of your tribal territories, and there you should do everything I am commanding you.
“But whenever you desire it, you may slaughter and eat meat, according to the blessing that Jehovah your God has given you in all your cities. The unclean person and the clean person may eat it, as you would eat a gazelle or a deer.
But you must not eat the blood; you should pour it out on the ground like water.
You will not be allowed to eat within your cities the tenth part of your grain, your new wine, your oil, the firstborn of your herd and flock, any of your vow offerings that you vow, your voluntary offerings, or the contribution from your hand.
These you are to eat before Jehovah your God in the place Jehovah your God will choose—you and your son, your daughter, your male and female servant, and the Levite inside your cities; and you will rejoice before Jehovah your God in all your undertakings.
Be careful not to neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land.
“When Jehovah your God enlarges your territory, just as he has promised you, and you say, ‘I want to eat meat,’ because you desire to eat meat, you may eat meat whenever you desire it.
If the place that Jehovah your God chooses to put his name is far away from you, you should then slaughter some of your herd or some of your flock that Jehovah has given you, just as I have commanded you, and you should eat inside your cities whenever you desire it.
You may eat it as you would eat the gazelle and the deer; both the unclean person and the clean person may eat it.
Just be firmly resolved not to eat the blood, because the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the flesh.
You must not eat it. You should pour it out on the ground like water.
You must not eat it, so that it may go well with you and your children after you, because you are doing what is right in Jehovah’s eyes.
You should take only the holy things that are yours and your vow offerings when you come to the place that Jehovah will choose.
There you will offer your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, on the altar of Jehovah your God, and the blood of your sacrifices should be poured out against the altar of Jehovah your God, but the flesh you may eat.
“Be careful to obey all these words that I am commanding you, so that it may always go well with you and your sons after you, because you are doing what is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.
“When Jehovah your God annihilates the nations that you are to dispossess, and you are living in their land,
be careful not to be entrapped after they have been annihilated from before you. Do not ask about their gods, saying, ‘How were these nations accustomed to serve their gods? I too will do the same.’
You must not do this to Jehovah your God, because they do for their gods every detestable thing that Jehovah hates, even burning their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods.
Every word that I am commanding you is what you should be careful to do. You must not add to it nor take away from it.
“The Levitical priests, and indeed the entire tribe of Leʹvi, will have no share or inheritance with Israel. They will eat of the offerings made by fire to Jehovah, which are his inheritance.
So they should have no inheritance in the midst of their brothers. Jehovah is their inheritance, just as he has spoken to them.
“Now this will be the due right of the priests from the people: Whoever makes a sacrifice, whether a bull or a sheep, is to give the shoulder, the jaws, and the stomach to the priest.
The firstfruits of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the first wool that is shorn from your flock you should give him.
Jehovah your God has chosen him and his sons from all your tribes to minister in the name of Jehovah always.
“But if a Levite leaves one of your cities in Israel where he was living and he desires to go to the place that Jehovah chooses,
he may minister there in the name of Jehovah his God the same as all his brothers, the Levites, who are stationed there before Jehovah.
He will receive an equal share of food with them, in addition to what he receives from selling his ancestral possessions.
“When you have entered into the land that Jehovah your God is giving you, you must not learn to imitate the detestable practices of those nations.
There should not be found in you anyone who makes his son or his daughter pass through the fire, anyone who employs divination, anyone practicing magic, anyone who looks for omens, a sorcerer,
anyone binding others with a spell, anyone who consults a spirit medium or a fortune-teller, or anyone who inquires of the dead.
For whoever does these things is detestable to Jehovah, and on account of these detestable practices Jehovah your God is driving them away from before you.
You should prove yourself blameless before Jehovah your God.
“For these nations that you are dispossessing used to listen to those practicing magic and divination, but Jehovah your God has not allowed you to do anything like this.
Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to him.
This is in response to what you asked of Jehovah your God in Hoʹreb on the day of the assembly when you said, ‘Do not let me hear the voice of Jehovah my God or see this great fire anymore, so that I do not die.’
Then Jehovah said to me, ‘What they have said is good.
I will raise up for them from the midst of their brothers a prophet like you, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he will speak to them all that I command him.
Indeed, I will require an account from the man who will not listen to my words that he will speak in my name.
“‘If any prophet presumptuously speaks a word in my name that I did not command him to speak or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die.
However, you may say in your heart: “How will we know that Jehovah has not spoken the word?”
When the prophet speaks in the name of Jehovah and the word is not fulfilled or does not come true, then Jehovah did not speak that word. The prophet spoke it presumptuously. You should not fear him.’
“No man who has been castrated by having his testicles crushed or who has had his male organ cut off may come into the congregation of Jehovah.
“No illegitimate son may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of his descendants may come into the congregation of Jehovah.
“No Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite may come into the congregation of Jehovah. Even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants may ever come into the congregation of Jehovah,
because they did not come to your aid with food and water when you were on the way going out of Egypt, and because they hired against you Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor from Peʹthor of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a to curse you.
But Jehovah your God refused to listen to Baʹlaam. Rather, Jehovah your God changed the curse into a blessing for you, because Jehovah your God loved you.
You should never seek their welfare or their prosperity all your days.
“You must not hate an Eʹdom·ite, for he is your brother. “You must not hate an Egyptian, for you became a foreign resident in his country.
The third generation of children born to them may enter the congregation of Jehovah.
“When you are encamped against your enemies, you should avoid anything bad.
If a man becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, he should go outside the camp and not reenter the camp.
When evening falls, he should wash with water, and then he may return to the camp at sunset.
A private place should be designated for use outside the camp, and there is where you should go.
A peg should be part of your equipment. When you squat outside, you should dig a hole with it and then cover your excrement.
For Jehovah your God is walking about within your camp to deliver you and to hand over your enemies to you, and your camp must be holy, so that he does not see anything indecent in you and turn away from accompanying you.
“You should not hand over a slave to his master when he escapes from his master and comes to you.
He may dwell among you in whatever place he chooses in one of your cities, wherever he likes. You must not mistreat him.
“None of the daughters of Israel may become a temple prostitute, neither may anyone of the sons of Israel become a temple prostitute.
You must not bring the price paid to a female prostitute or the price paid to a male prostitute into the house of Jehovah your God to fulfill a vow, for both of them are something detestable to Jehovah your God.
“You must not make your brother pay interest, whether interest on money, on food, or on anything on which interest may be charged.
You may make a foreigner pay interest, but you must not make your brother pay interest, so that Jehovah your God may bless you in every undertaking of yours in the land you are going to take possession of.
“If you make a vow to Jehovah your God, do not be slow about paying it. For Jehovah your God will surely require it of you; otherwise, it will be a sin on your part.
But if you refrain from making a vow, you will not be guilty of sin.
The word of your lips you should keep, and you must carry out what your own mouth vowed as a voluntary offering to Jehovah your God.
“If you enter your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat enough grapes to satisfy your appetite, but you should not put any in your container.
“If you go into your neighbor’s field of standing grain, you may pluck the ripe ears with your hand, but you should not put a sickle to your neighbor’s grain.
Then Moses went up from the desert plains of Moʹab to Mount Neʹbo, to the top of Pisʹgah, which faces Jerʹi·cho. And Jehovah showed him all the land, from Gilʹe·ad to Dan,
and all Naphʹta·li and the land of Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, and all the land of Judah as far as the western sea,
and the Negʹeb and the District, the valley plain of Jerʹi·cho, the city of the palm trees, as far as Zoʹar.
Jehovah then said to him: “This is the land about which I have sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give it.’ I have let you see it with your own eyes, but you will not cross over there.”
After that Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in the land of Moʹab just as Jehovah had said.
He buried him in the valley in the land of Moʹab, opposite Beth-peʹor, and nobody knows where his grave is down to this day.
Moses was 120 years old at his death. His eyes had not grown dim, and his strength had not departed.
The people of Israel wept for Moses on the desert plains of Moʹab for 30 days. Then the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were completed.
Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hand on him; and the Israelites began to listen to him, and they did just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
But there has never again arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face-to-face.
He performed all the signs and the miracles that Jehovah had sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all his land,
along with the mighty hand and the awesome power that Moses displayed before the eyes of all Israel.
“Now these are the commandments, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah your God has given to teach you, so that you may observe them when you cross over into the land that you are to take possession of,
in order that you may fear Jehovah your God and keep all his statutes and his commandments that I am commanding you—you and your son and your grandson—all the days of your life, so that you may live a long time.
And you must listen, O Israel, and carefully observe them, so that you may prosper and become very many in the land flowing with milk and honey, just as Jehovah, the God of your forefathers, has promised you.
“Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.
You must love Jehovah your God with all your heart and all your soul and all your strength.
These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart,
and you must inculcate them in your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.
Tie them as a reminder on your hand, and they must be like a headband on your forehead.
Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.
“When Jehovah your God brings you into the land that he swore to your forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to give you—great and fine cities that you did not build,
houses full of all sorts of good things that you did not work for, hewn cisterns that you did not dig, and vineyards and olive trees that you did not plant—and you have eaten and become satisfied,
be careful not to forget Jehovah, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
Jehovah your God you should fear, and him you should serve, and by his name you should swear.
You must not follow after other gods, any gods of the peoples who are all around you,
for Jehovah your God who is in your midst is a God who requires exclusive devotion. Otherwise, the anger of Jehovah your God will blaze against you and he will annihilate you from the face of the earth.
“You must not put Jehovah your God to the test the way you put him to the test at Masʹsah.
You should diligently observe the commandments of Jehovah your God and his reminders and his regulations that he has commanded you to observe.
You must do what is right and good in Jehovah’s eyes, in order that you may prosper and that you may enter and take possession of the good land about which Jehovah has sworn to your forefathers,
by driving out all your enemies from before you, just as Jehovah has promised.
“In the future, when your son asks you, ‘What is the meaning of the reminders, the regulations, and the judicial decisions that Jehovah our God has commanded you?’
then you will say to your son, ‘We became slaves to Pharʹaoh in Egypt, but Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
So before our eyes Jehovah kept sending signs and miracles, great and devastating, upon Egypt, upon Pharʹaoh, and upon all his household.
And he brought us out from there in order to bring us here to give us the land about which he had sworn to our forefathers.
Then Jehovah commanded us to carry out all these regulations and to fear Jehovah our God for our lasting good, so that we could keep alive, as we are today.
And it will mean righteousness for us if we are careful to observe all these commandments in obedience to Jehovah our God, just as he has commanded us.’
These are the words of the covenant that Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the people of Israel in the land of Moʹab, in addition to the covenant that he made with them at Hoʹreb.
Moses then called together all Israel and said to them: “You have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all his land,
the great judgments that your eyes saw, those great signs and miracles.
But Jehovah has not given you a heart to understand and eyes to see and ears to hear, down to this day.
‘While I kept guiding you for 40 years in the wilderness, your garments did not wear out on you and your sandals did not wear out on your feet.
You did not eat bread, and you did not drink wine or anything alcoholic, so that you would know that I am Jehovah your God.’
You eventually came to this place, and Siʹhon the king of Heshʹbon and Og the king of Baʹshan came out to meet us in battle, but we defeated them.
After that we took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of the Ma·nasʹsites.
Therefore, observe the words of this covenant and obey them, so that everything you do will turn out well.
“All of you are stationed today before Jehovah your God, the heads of your tribes, your elders, your officers, every man of Israel,
your children, your wives, and your foreign resident who is in the midst of your camp, from the one gathering your wood to the one drawing your water.
You are here in order to enter into the covenant of Jehovah your God and his oath, which Jehovah your God is making with you today
in order that he may establish you today as his people and that he may be your God, just as he has promised you and just as he swore to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
“Now it is not with you alone that I am making this covenant and this oath,
but it is with those standing here with us today before Jehovah our God and with those who are not here with us today.
(For you well know how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we passed through the midst of various nations on our journey.
And you used to see their detestable things and their disgusting idols of wood and stone, silver and gold, that were among them.)
Beware that there may not be a man or a woman, a family or a tribe among you today whose heart turns away from Jehovah our God to go serve the gods of those nations, that there may not be a root among you producing poisonous fruit and wormwood.
“But if someone hears the words of this oath and boasts in his heart, saying, ‘I will have peace, though I insist on walking in the ways of my own heart,’ to the ruin of everything in his path,
Jehovah will not be willing to forgive him. Instead, Jehovah’s great anger will blaze against that man, and the entire curse written in this book will certainly come upon him, and Jehovah will indeed wipe out his name from under the heavens.
Jehovah will then single him out from all the tribes of Israel for calamity in accord with the entire curse of the covenant that is written in this book of the Law.
“When the future generation of your sons and the foreigner from a distant land see the plagues of the land, the maladies that Jehovah has brought upon it—
sulfur and salt and burning, so that its whole land will not be sown or sprout, nor will any vegetation spring up in it, like the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah, Adʹmah and Ze·boiʹim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger and in his wrath—
they and all the nations will say, ‘Why did Jehovah do this to this land? What caused this great, burning anger?’
Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah, the God of their forefathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
But they went and served other gods and bowed down to them, gods that they had not known and that he had not permitted them to worship.
Then Jehovah’s burning anger came against that land by bringing upon it the entire curse written in this book.
Therefore, Jehovah uprooted them from their soil in his anger and fury and great indignation and deported them to another land, where they are today.’
“The things concealed belong to Jehovah our God, but the things revealed belong to us and to our descendants forever, so that we may carry out all the words of this Law.
“You should be careful to observe every commandment that I am giving you today, so that you may continue living and multiply and go in and take possession of the land about which Jehovah swore to your forefathers.
Remember the long road that Jehovah your God made you walk these 40 years in the wilderness, to humble you and to put you to the test so as to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep his commandments or not.
So he humbled you and let you go hungry and fed you with the manna, which neither you had known nor your fathers had known, in order to make you know that man does not live by bread alone but man lives by every expression from Jehovah’s mouth.
The clothing you wore did not wear out, nor did your feet become swollen these 40 years.
You well know in your heart that just as a man corrects his son, Jehovah your God was correcting you.
“Now you must keep the commandments of Jehovah your God by walking in his ways and by fearing him.
For Jehovah your God is bringing you into a good land, a land of streams of water, springs and fountains flowing in the valley plain and in the mountainous region,
a land of wheat and barley, of grapevines, fig trees, and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey,
a land where food will not be scarce and you will lack nothing, a land where the stones contain iron and from its mountains you will mine copper.
“When you have eaten and are satisfied, you must praise Jehovah your God for the good land that he has given you.
Be careful not to forget Jehovah your God by failing to keep his commandments, his judicial decisions, and his statutes that I am commanding you today.
When you eat and are satisfied and you build fine houses and dwell in them,
when your herd and your flocks multiply and your silver and gold increase and you have an abundance of everything,
do not let your heart become proud and cause you to forget Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery,
who caused you to walk through the great and fearsome wilderness, with poisonous serpents and scorpions and with parched ground that has no water. He made water flow out of the flinty rock
and fed you with manna in the wilderness, which your fathers had not known, in order to humble you and to put you to the test so as to benefit you in the future.
If you should say in your heart, ‘My own power and the strength of my own hand have produced this wealth for me,’
remember that it is Jehovah your God who gives power to you to make wealth, in order to carry out his covenant that he swore to your forefathers, as it is today.
“If you should ever forget Jehovah your God and you walk after other gods and serve them and bow down to them, I do bear witness against you today that you will surely perish.
Like the nations that Jehovah is destroying before you, that is how you will perish, because you would not listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.
Then the lot fell for the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, because he was Joseph’s firstborn. Since Maʹchir, the firstborn of Ma·nasʹseh and the father of Gilʹe·ad, was a man of war, he received Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan.
And the lot fell for the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh according to their families, for the sons of Abi-eʹzer, the sons of Heʹlek, the sons of Asʹri·el, the sons of Sheʹchem, the sons of Heʹpher, and the sons of She·miʹda. These were the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Joseph, the males according to their families.
But Ze·loʹphe·had the son of Heʹpher, the son of Gilʹe·ad, the son of Maʹchir, the son of Ma·nasʹseh, did not have sons, only daughters, and these were the names of his daughters: Mahʹlah, Noah, Hogʹlah, Milʹcah, and Tirʹzah.
So they presented themselves before El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the chieftains, saying: “It was Jehovah who commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So at the order of Jehovah, he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.
There were also ten allotments that fell to Ma·nasʹseh apart from the land of Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan, which were on the other side of the Jordan,
for the daughters of Ma·nasʹseh received an inheritance along with his sons, and the land of Gilʹe·ad became the property of the rest of the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh.
And the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was from Ashʹer to Mich·meʹthath, which faces Sheʹchem, and the boundary continued toward the south to the land of the inhabitants of En-Tapʹpu·ah.
The land of Tapʹpu·ah became Ma·nasʹseh’s, but Tapʹpu·ah on Ma·nasʹseh’s boundary belonged to the descendants of Eʹphra·im.
And the boundary went down to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, southward to the wadi. There were cities of Eʹphra·im among the cities of Ma·nasʹseh, and the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh was on the north of the wadi, and it ended at the sea.
To the south it belonged to Eʹphra·im, and to the north it belonged to Ma·nasʹseh, and the sea was his boundary, and on the north they reached to Ashʹer, and on the east, to Isʹsa·char.
In the territories of Isʹsa·char and Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh was given Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Ibʹle·am and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of En-dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, and the inhabitants of Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, three of the heights.
But the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh were not able to take possession of these cities; the Caʹnaan·ites persisted in dwelling in this land.
When the Israelites grew strong, they subjected the Caʹnaan·ites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out entirely.
The descendants of Joseph said to Joshua: “Why have you given us as an inheritance only one lot and one allotment? We are a numerous people, for Jehovah has blessed us until now.”
Joshua replied to them: “If you are such a numerous people, go up to the forest and clear out a place for yourself there in the land of the Perʹiz·zites and the Rephʹa·im, since the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im is too cramped for you.”
Then the descendants of Joseph said: “The mountainous region is not enough for us, and all the Caʹnaan·ites who are dwelling in the land of the valley have war chariots with iron scythes, both those in Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns and those in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.”
So Joshua said this to the house of Joseph, to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh: “You are a numerous people, and you have great power. You will not receive only one lot,
but the mountainous region will also be yours. Although it is a forest, you will clear it, and it will be the extremity of your territory. For you will drive away the Caʹnaan·ites, even though they are strong and have war chariots with iron scythes.”
Then the second lot came out for Simʹe·on, for the tribe of Simʹe·on by their families. And their inheritance was within the inheritance of Judah.
Their inheritance was Beʹer-sheʹba with Sheʹba, Mo·laʹdah,
Haʹzar-shuʹal, Baʹlah, Eʹzem,
El·toʹlad, Beʹthul, Horʹmah,
Zikʹlag, Beth-marʹca·both, Haʹzar-suʹsah,
Beth-le·baʹoth, and Sha·ruʹhen—13 cities and their settlements;
Aʹin, Rimʹmon, Eʹther, and Aʹshan—four cities and their settlements;
and all the settlements that were around these cities as far as Baʹal·ath-beʹer, Raʹmah of the south. This was the inheritance of the tribe of Simʹe·on by their families.
The inheritance of the descendants of Simʹe·on was taken out of the allotment of Judah, because the share of Judah was too large for them. So the descendants of Simʹe·on received a possession within their inheritance.
Next the third lot came up for the descendants of Zebʹu·lun by their families, and the boundary of their inheritance went as far as Saʹrid.
Their boundary went up westward to Marʹe·al and reached to Dabʹbe·sheth and then to the valley in front of Jokʹne·am.
And it went from Saʹrid eastward toward the sunrise, to the border of Chisʹloth-taʹbor and out to Dabʹe·rath and then up to Ja·phiʹa.
And from there it continued eastward toward the sunrise to Gath-heʹpher, to Eth-kaʹzin, and out to Rimʹmon, and it extended to Neʹah.
And the boundary went around it on the north to Hanʹna·thon, and it ended at the Valley of Iphʹtah-el,
and Katʹtath, Na·halʹal, Shimʹron, Iʹda·lah, and Bethʹle·hem—12 cities and their settlements.
This was the inheritance of the descendants of Zebʹu·lun by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.
The fourth lot came out for Isʹsa·char, for the descendants of Isʹsa·char by their families.
And their boundary was to Jezʹre·el, Che·sulʹloth, Shuʹnem,
Haphʹa·raʹim, Shiʹon, An·a·haʹrath,
Rabʹbith, Kishʹi·on, Eʹbez,
Reʹmeth, En-ganʹnim, En-hadʹdah, and Beth-pazʹzez.
And the boundary reached to Taʹbor and Sha·ha·zuʹmah and Beth-sheʹmesh, and the end of their border was at the Jordan—16 cities and their settlements.
This was the inheritance of the tribe of Isʹsa·char by their families, the cities and their settlements.
Then the fifth lot came out for the tribe of Ashʹer by their families.
And their boundary was Helʹkath, Haʹli, Beʹten, Achʹshaph,
Al·lamʹme·lech, Aʹmad, and Miʹshal. It reached westward to Carʹmel and to Shiʹhor-libʹnath,
and it went back toward the east to Beth-daʹgon and reached to Zebʹu·lun and the Valley of Iphʹtah-el to the north, to Beth-eʹmek and Ne·iʹel, and it extended to Caʹbul on the left,
and to Eʹbron, Reʹhob, Hamʹmon, and Kaʹnah as far as Great Siʹdon.
And the boundary went back to Raʹmah and as far as the fortified city of Tyre. Then the boundary went back to Hoʹsah, and it ended at the sea in the region of Achʹzib,
Umʹmah, Aʹphek, and Reʹhob—22 cities and their settlements.
This was the inheritance of the tribe of Ashʹer by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.
The sixth lot came out for the descendants of Naphʹta·li, for the descendants of Naphʹta·li by their families.
Their boundary was from Heʹleph, from the big tree in Za·a·nanʹnim, and Adʹa·mi-neʹkeb and Jabʹne·el as far as Lakʹkum; and it ended at the Jordan.
The boundary went back westward to Azʹnoth-taʹbor and extended from there to Hukʹkok and reached to Zebʹu·lun on the south and to Ashʹer on the west and to Judah at the Jordan toward the east.
And the fortified cities were Zidʹdim, Zer, Hamʹmath, Rakʹkath, Chinʹne·reth,
Adʹa·mah, Raʹmah, Haʹzor,
Keʹdesh, Edʹre·i, En-haʹzor,
Yiʹron, Migʹdal-el, Hoʹrem, Beth-aʹnath, and Beth-sheʹmesh—19 cities and their settlements.
This was the inheritance of the tribe of Naphʹta·li by their families, the cities and their settlements.
The seventh lot came out for the tribe of Dan by their families.
And the border of their inheritance was Zoʹrah, Eshʹta·ol, Ir-sheʹmesh,
Sha·al·abʹbin, Aiʹja·lon, Ithʹlah,
Eʹlon, Timʹnah, Ekʹron,
Elʹte·keh, Gibʹbe·thon, Baʹal·ath,
Jeʹhud, Benʹe-beʹrak, Gath-rimʹmon,
Me-jarʹkon, and Rakʹkon, with the border facing Jopʹpa.
But the territory of Dan was too cramped for them. So they went up and fought against Leʹshem and captured it and struck it with the sword. Then they took possession of it and settled in it, and they changed the name of Leʹshem to Dan, after the name of Dan their forefather.
This was the inheritance of the tribe of Dan by their families. These were the cities and their settlements.
Thus they finished dividing the land for inheritance by its territories. Then the Israelites gave Joshua the son of Nun an inheritance in their midst.
At the order of Jehovah they gave him the city he asked for, Timʹnath-seʹrah, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he built up the city and settled in it.
These were the inheritances that El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel distributed by lot in Shiʹloh before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting. So they finished apportioning the land.
As soon as Jaʹbin king of Haʹzor heard of it, he sent word to Joʹbab king of Maʹdon, and to the king of Shimʹron, the king of Achʹshaph,
the kings who were in the northern mountainous region, those in the plains south of Chinʹne·reth, those in the She·pheʹlah and on the slopes of Dor to the west,
the Caʹnaan·ites to the east and the west, the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites in the mountainous region, and the Hiʹvites at the base of Herʹmon in the land of Mizʹpah.
So they came out with all their armies, a vast multitude as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore, together with very many horses and war chariots.
All these kings agreed to meet, and they came and camped together at the waters of Merʹom to fight against Israel.
At this Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid because of them, for about this time tomorrow, I am giving over all of them slain to Israel. Their horses you must hamstring, and their chariots you must burn in the fire.”
Joshua together with all the fighting men then launched a surprise attack against them along the waters of Merʹom.
Jehovah gave them into Israel’s hand, and they defeated them and pursued them as far as Great Siʹdon and Misʹre·photh-maʹim and the Valley of Mizʹpeh to the east, and they struck them down until no survivors remained.
Joshua then did to them just as Jehovah had told him; he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots in the fire.
Moreover, Joshua then returned and captured Haʹzor and struck down its king with the sword, because Haʹzor had formerly been the head of all these kingdoms.
They struck down everyone in it with the sword, devoting them to destruction. Not a breathing thing was left. Then he burned Haʹzor in the fire.
Joshua captured all the cities of these kings and defeated all their kings with the sword. He devoted them to destruction, just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded.
However, Israel did not burn any of the cities that stood on their mounds except Haʹzor; it was the only one Joshua burned.
All the spoil of these cities and the livestock, the Israelites plundered for themselves. But they struck every human with the sword until they had annihilated each one. They did not let anyone who breathed remain.
Just as Jehovah had commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Joshua conquered all this land, the mountainous region, all the Negʹeb, all the land of Goʹshen, the She·pheʹlah, the Arʹa·bah, and the mountainous region of Israel and its She·pheʹlah,
from Mount Haʹlak, which goes up to Seʹir, and as far as Baʹal-gad in the Valley of Lebʹa·non at the base of Mount Herʹmon, and he captured all their kings and defeated them, putting them to death.
Joshua waged war with all these kings for quite some time.
There was no city that made peace with the Israelites except the Hiʹvites inhabiting Gibʹe·on. They conquered all the others by war.
It was Jehovah who allowed their hearts to become stubborn so that they waged war against Israel, in order for him to devote them to destruction without any favorable consideration. They were to be annihilated, just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
At that time Joshua wiped out the Anʹa·kim from the mountainous region, from Hebʹron, Deʹbir, Aʹnab, and all the mountainous region of Judah and all the mountainous region of Israel. Joshua devoted them and their cities to destruction.
There were no Anʹa·kim left in the land of the Israelites; they remained only in Gazʹa, in Gath, and in Ashʹdod.
So Joshua took control of all the land, just as Jehovah had promised Moses, and then Joshua gave it as an inheritance to Israel by their shares to be divided among their tribes. And the land had rest from war.
After the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, Jehovah said to Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses:
“Moses my servant is dead. Now get up, cross the Jordan, you and all this people, and go into the land that I am giving to them, to the people of Israel.
I will give you every place on which you set your foot, just as I promised Moses.
Your territory will extend from the wilderness up to Lebʹa·non and to the great river, the Eu·phraʹtes—all the land of the Hitʹtites—and to the Great Sea on the west.
No one will be able to take a stand against you as long as you live. Just as I was with Moses, so I will be with you. I will neither desert you nor abandon you.
Be courageous and strong, for you are the one who will cause this people to inherit the land that I swore to their forefathers I would give to them.
“Only be courageous and very strong, and observe carefully the entire Law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not deviate from it either to the right or to the left, so that you may act wisely wherever you go.
This book of the Law should not depart from your mouth, and you must read it in an undertone day and night, in order to observe carefully all that is written in it; for then your way will be successful and then you will act wisely.
Have I not commanded you? Be courageous and strong. Do not be struck with terror or fear, for Jehovah your God is with you wherever you go.”
Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people:
“Pass throughout the camp and give this command to the people, ‘Get provisions ready, because in three days you will cross the Jordan to go in and take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess.’”
And to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Joshua said:
“Remember what Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you: ‘Jehovah your God is giving you rest and has given you this land.
Your wives, your children, and your livestock will dwell in the land that Moses has given you on this side of the Jordan, but all you mighty warriors should cross over in battle formation ahead of your brothers. You must help them
until Jehovah gives your brothers rest, just as he has given you, and they also take possession of the land that Jehovah your God is giving them. Then return to the land you were given to occupy and take possession of it, the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you on the east side of the Jordan.’”
They answered Joshua: “We will do all that you have commanded, and we will go wherever you send us.
Just as we listened to everything Moses said, so we will listen to you. Only may Jehovah your God be with you just as he was with Moses.
Any man who rebels against your order and does not obey every command you give him will be put to death. Only be courageous and strong.”
But the Israelites were unfaithful with regard to what had been devoted to destruction, for Aʹchan son of Carʹmi, son of Zabʹdi, son of Zeʹrah, of the tribe of Judah, took some of what was devoted to destruction. At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against the Israelites.
Then Joshua sent men out from Jerʹi·cho to Aʹi, which is close by Beth-aʹven and east of Bethʹel, telling them: “Go up and spy on the land.” So the men went up and spied on Aʹi.
When they returned to Joshua, they told him: “Not all the people need to go up. About two or three thousand men are enough to defeat Aʹi. Do not tire out all the people by making them go, for there are only a few of them.”
So about 3,000 men went up there, but they had to flee from the men of Aʹi.
The men of Aʹi struck down 36 men, and they pursued them from outside the city gate as far as Shebʹa·rim, and they continued striking them down on the descent. So the courage of the people melted and flowed away like water.
At this Joshua ripped his garments and fell with his face to the ground before the Ark of Jehovah until the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they kept throwing dust on their heads.
Joshua said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, why did you bring this people all the way across the Jordan just to hand us over to the Amʹor·ites to be destroyed? If only we had been satisfied to remain on the other side of the Jordan!
Pardon me, O Jehovah, what can I say now that Israel has retreated before his enemies?
When the Caʹnaan·ites and all the inhabitants of the land hear about it, they will surround us and wipe out our very name from the earth, and what will you do about your great name?”
Jehovah replied to Joshua: “Get up! Why are you lying on your face?
Israel has sinned. They have violated my covenant that I commanded them to keep. They took some of what was devoted to destruction, stealing it and secretly putting it among their own possessions.
Therefore, the Israelites will not be able to stand against their enemies. They will turn their backs and flee from their enemies, because they have become something devoted to destruction. I will not be with you again unless you annihilate from your midst what was devoted to destruction.
Get up and sanctify the people! Tell them, ‘Sanctify yourselves tomorrow, for this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “What is devoted to destruction is among you, O Israel. You will not be able to stand against your enemies until you remove from your midst the thing devoted to destruction.
You are to present yourselves in the morning, tribe by tribe, and the tribe that Jehovah selects will come near, family by family, and the family that Jehovah selects will come near, household by household, and the household that Jehovah selects will come near, man by man.
And the one who is caught with the thing devoted to destruction will be burned with fire, he and all that belongs to him, because he has violated the covenant of Jehovah and because he has committed a disgraceful act in Israel.”’”
So Joshua rose early the next morning and had Israel come near, tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was selected.
He had the families of Judah come near and the family of the Zeʹrah·ites was selected, after which he had the family of the Zeʹrah·ites come near, man by man, and Zabʹdi was selected.
Finally he had the household of Zabʹdi come near, man by man, and Aʹchan son of Carʹmi, son of Zabʹdi, son of Zeʹrah, of the tribe of Judah, was selected.
Then Joshua said to Aʹchan: “My son, please, honor Jehovah the God of Israel and make confession to him. Tell me, please, what you have done. Do not hide it from me.”
Aʹchan answered Joshua: “For a fact I am the one who sinned against Jehovah the God of Israel, and this is what I have done.
When I saw among the spoil a good-looking official garment from Shiʹnar and 200 shekels of silver and one gold bar weighing 50 shekels, I desired them, so I took them. They are now hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the money underneath.”
At once Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent, and there the garment was hidden in his tent, with the money underneath it.
So they took the things out of the tent and brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites and placed them before Jehovah.
Joshua and all Israel with him then took Aʹchan the son of Zeʹrah, the silver, the official garment, and the bar of gold, along with his sons, his daughters, his bull, his donkey, his flock, his tent, and everything that was his, and they brought them up to the Valley of Aʹchor.
Joshua said: “Why have you brought disaster upon us? Jehovah will bring disaster upon you on this day.” With that all Israel stoned him, after which they burned them with fire. Thus they stoned all of them.
And they raised a huge pile of stones over him that remains to this day. At this Jehovah’s hot anger subsided. That is why the name of that place is Valley of Aʹchor to this day.
Now Joshua had grown old and was advanced in years. So Jehovah said to him: “You have grown old and are advanced in years; but much of the land remains to be taken in possession.
This is the land remaining: all the regions of the Phi·lisʹtines and all the Geshʹur·ites
(from the branch of the Nile that is east of Egypt up to the border of Ekʹron to the north, which used to be considered Caʹnaan·ite territory) including that of the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines—the Gazʹites, the Ashʹdod·ites, the Ashʹke·lon·ites, the Gitʹtites, and the Ekʹron·ites; that of the Avʹvim
to the south; all the land of the Caʹnaan·ites; Me·arʹah, which belongs to the Si·doʹni·ans, as far as Aʹphek, to the border of the Amʹor·ites;
the land of the Geʹbal·ites and all of Lebʹa·non toward the east, from Baʹal-gad at the base of Mount Herʹmon to Leʹbo-haʹmath;
all the inhabitants of the mountainous region from Lebʹa·non to Misʹre·photh-maʹim; and all the Si·doʹni·ans. I will drive them out before the Israelites. You have only to assign it to Israel as an inheritance, just as I have commanded you.
Now you must apportion this land as an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.”
With the other half tribe, the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites took their inheritance that Moses gave them on the east side of the Jordan, just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had given them:
from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the tableland of Medʹe·ba as far as Diʹbon;
and all the cities of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who reigned in Heshʹbon, up to the border of the Amʹmon·ites;
also Gilʹe·ad and the territory of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites and all Mount Herʹmon and all Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah;
all the royal realm of Og in Baʹshan, who reigned in Ashʹta·roth and in Edʹre·i. (He was one of the last of the Rephʹa·im.) Moses defeated them and drove them out.
But the Israelites did not drive out the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites, for Geshʹur and Maʹa·cath live in the midst of Israel to this day.
It was only to the tribe of the Levites that he did not give an inheritance. The offerings made by fire to Jehovah the God of Israel are their inheritance, just as he promised them.
Then Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the Reuʹben·ites by their families,
and their territory was from A·roʹer, which is on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and the city in the middle of the valley, and all the tableland by Medʹe·ba;
Heshʹbon and all its towns on the tableland, Diʹbon, Baʹmoth-baʹal, Beth-baʹal-meʹon,
Jaʹhaz, Kedʹe·moth, Mephʹa·ath,
Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Sibʹmah, and Zeʹreth-shaʹhar on the mountain of the valley,
Beth-peʹor, the slopes of Pisʹgah, Beth-jeshʹi·moth,
all the cities of the tableland, and all the royal realm of King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who reigned in Heshʹbon. Moses defeated him and the Midʹi·an·ite chieftains Eʹvi, Reʹkem, Zur, Hur, and Reʹba, vassals of Siʹhon who were dwelling in the land.
Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, the diviner, was one whom the Israelites killed with the sword along with the rest who were slain.
The boundary of the Reuʹben·ites was the Jordan; and this territory was the inheritance of the Reuʹben·ites by their families, with the cities and their settlements.
Furthermore, Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of Gad, the Gadʹites by their families,
and their territory included Jaʹzer and all the cities of Gilʹe·ad and half of the land of the Amʹmon·ites as far as A·roʹer, which faces Rabʹbah;
and from Heshʹbon to Raʹmath-mizʹpeh and Betʹo·nim, and from Ma·ha·naʹim to the border of Deʹbir;
and in the valley, Beth-haʹram, Beth-nimʹrah, Sucʹcoth, and Zaʹphon, the rest of the royal realm of King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon, with the Jordan as the border from the lower end of the Sea of Chinʹne·reth on the east side of the Jordan.
This was the inheritance of the Gadʹites by their families, with the cities and their settlements.
Further, Moses gave an inheritance to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, to half of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh by their families.
And their territory extended from Ma·ha·naʹim and took in all of Baʹshan, all the royal realm of King Og of Baʹshan, and all the tent villages of Jaʹir in Baʹshan, 60 towns.
And half of Gilʹe·ad, and Ashʹta·roth and Edʹre·i, the cities of the royal realm of Og in Baʹshan, went to the sons of Maʹchir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, to half of the sons of Maʹchir by their families.
These were the inheritances that Moses gave them on the desert plains of Moʹab beyond the Jordan, east of Jerʹi·cho.
But to the tribe of the Levites, Moses did not give an inheritance. Jehovah the God of Israel is their inheritance, just as he promised them.
The heads of the paternal houses of the Levites now approached El·e·aʹzar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel,
and they spoke to them in Shiʹloh in the land of Caʹnaan, saying: “Jehovah through Moses commanded that we be given cities in which to dwell, along with their pastures for our livestock.”
So at the order of Jehovah, the Israelites gave the Levites these cities and their pastures out of their own inheritance.
The lot came out for the families of the Koʹhath·ites, and the Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest were given by lot 13 cities out of the tribe of Judah, the tribe of Simʹe·on, and the tribe of Benjamin.
And for the rest of the Koʹhath·ites, there were allotted ten cities out of the families of the tribe of Eʹphra·im, the tribe of Dan, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.
And for the Gerʹshon·ites, there were allotted 13 cities out of the families of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, the tribe of Ashʹer, the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Baʹshan.
For the Me·rarʹites by their families, there were 12 cities out of the tribe of Reuʹben, the tribe of Gad, and the tribe of Zebʹu·lun.
Thus the Israelites gave the Levites these cities and their pastures by lot, just as Jehovah had commanded through Moses.
So from the tribe of Judah and the tribe of Simʹe·on, they gave these cities here mentioned by name,
and they were given to the sons of Aaron of the Koʹhath·ite families of the Levites, because they received the first lot.
They gave them Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the father of Aʹnak), that is, Hebʹron, in the mountainous region of Judah, and its surrounding pastures.
But the field of the city and its settlements they gave to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh as his possession.
And to the sons of Aaron the priest, they gave the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Hebʹron with its pastures, also Libʹnah with its pastures,
Jatʹtir with its pastures, Esh·te·moʹa with its pastures,
Hoʹlon with its pastures, Deʹbir with its pastures,
Aʹin with its pastures, Jutʹtah with its pastures, and Beth-sheʹmesh with its pastures—nine cities out of these two tribes.
And from the tribe of Benjamin: Gibʹe·on with its pastures, Geʹba with its pastures,
Anʹa·thoth with its pastures, and Alʹmon with its pastures—four cities.
All the cities given to the descendants of Aaron, the priests, were 13 cities with their pastures.
And the rest of the Koʹhath·ite families among the Levites were given by lot cities from the tribe of Eʹphra·im.
They gave them the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Sheʹchem with its pastures in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, Geʹzer with its pastures,
Kibʹza·im with its pastures, and Beth-hoʹron with its pastures—four cities.
And from the tribe of Dan: Elʹte·ke with its pastures, Gibʹbe·thon with its pastures,
Aiʹja·lon with its pastures, Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures—four cities.
And from the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh: Taʹa·nach with its pastures and Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures—two cities.
All the cities together with their pastures that the rest of the families of the Koʹhath·ites received were ten.
And the Gerʹshon·ites of the families of the Levites received from the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Goʹlan, in Baʹshan, with its pastures and Be·eshʹte·rah with its pastures—two cities.
And from the tribe of Isʹsa·char: Kishʹi·on with its pastures, Dabʹe·rath with its pastures,
Jarʹmuth with its pastures, and En-ganʹnim with its pastures—four cities.
And from the tribe of Ashʹer: Miʹshal with its pastures, Abʹdon with its pastures,
Helʹkath with its pastures, and Reʹhob with its pastures—four cities.
And from the tribe of Naphʹta·li: the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Keʹdesh in Galilee with its pastures, Hamʹmoth-dor with its pastures, and Karʹtan with its pastures—three cities.
All the cities of the Gerʹshon·ites by their families were 13 cities with their pastures.
And the families of the Me·rarʹites, the rest of the Levites, received from the tribe of Zebʹu·lun: Jokʹne·am with its pastures, Karʹtah with its pastures,
Dimʹnah with its pastures, and Na·halʹal with its pastures—four cities.
And from the tribe of Reuʹben: Beʹzer with its pastures, Jaʹhaz with its pastures,
Kedʹe·moth with its pastures, and Mephʹa·ath with its pastures—four cities.
And from the tribe of Gad: the city of refuge for the manslayer, namely, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad with its pastures, Ma·ha·naʹim with its pastures,
Heshʹbon with its pastures, and Jaʹzer with its pastures—a total of four cities.
All the cities that were allotted to the Me·rarʹites by their families, the rest of the families of the Levites, were 12 cities.
All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the Israelites were 48 cities together with their pastures.
Each of these cities had its pastures all around it—this was the case for all these cities.
So Jehovah gave Israel all the land that he had sworn to give to their forefathers, and they took possession of it and settled in it.
Furthermore, Jehovah gave them rest on every side, just as he had sworn to their forefathers, and not one of all their enemies could stand against them. Jehovah gave all their enemies into their hand.
Not a promise failed out of all the good promises that Jehovah had made to the house of Israel; all of them came true.
Then Joshua got up early in the morning, and he and all the Israelites departed from Shitʹtim and came to the Jordan. They spent the night there before crossing over.
After three days, the officers passed throughout the camp
and commanded the people: “As soon as you see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you should depart from your place and follow it.
But keep a distance of about 2,000 cubits from it; do not come any nearer to it, so that you may know which is the way to go, for you have not traveled on this way before.”
Joshua now said to the people: “Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow Jehovah will do wonderful things among you.”
Then Joshua said to the priests: “Take up the ark of the covenant and pass ahead of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went ahead of the people.
Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “This day I will start to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, so that they may know that I will be with you just as I was with Moses.
You should give this command to the priests carrying the ark of the covenant: ‘When you reach the edge of the waters of the Jordan, you should stand still in the Jordan.’”
And Joshua said to the Israelites: “Come here and listen to the words of Jehovah your God.”
Joshua then said: “By this you will know that a living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive away from before you the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Hiʹvites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Girʹga·shites, the Amʹor·ites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
Look! The ark of the covenant of the Lord of the whole earth is passing ahead of you into the Jordan.
Now take 12 men from the tribes of Israel, one man for each tribe,
and as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests carrying the Ark of Jehovah, the Lord of the whole earth, touch the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan flowing from upstream will be halted and they will stand still like a dam.”
So when the people departed from their tents just before crossing the Jordan, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant went ahead of the people.
As soon as the carriers of the Ark reached the Jordan and the priests carrying the Ark dipped their feet into the edge of the waters (now the Jordan overflows its banks all the days of harvest),
the waters flowing from upstream stood still. They rose up like a dam very far away at Adam, the city near Zarʹe·than, while the waters descending toward the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, drained away. They were halted, and the people crossed over opposite Jerʹi·cho.
While the priests carrying the ark of Jehovah’s covenant kept standing still on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan, all Israel crossed over on dry ground until the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan.
When all the kings who were on the west side of the Jordan heard what had happened, those in the mountainous region, in the She·pheʹlah, along the entire coast of the Great Sea, and in front of Lebʹa·non—the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites—
they formed an alliance to fight against Joshua and Israel.
The inhabitants of Gibʹe·on also heard what Joshua had done to Jerʹi·cho and Aʹi.
So they acted shrewdly and put provisions into worn-out sacks on their donkeys, along with worn-out wineskins that had burst and had been mended;
they also had worn-out and patched sandals on their feet, and they were wearing worn-out garments. All the bread of their provisions was dry and crumbly.
Then they went to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal and said to him and the men of Israel: “We have come from a distant land. Now make a covenant with us.”
But the men of Israel said to the Hiʹvites: “Perhaps you are living near us. So how can we make a covenant with you?”
They replied to Joshua: “We are your servants.” Then Joshua said to them: “Who are you, and where do you come from?”
At this they said to him: “Your servants have come from a very distant land out of regard for the name of Jehovah your God, because we have heard about his fame and about all he did in Egypt
and about all he did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites who were on the other side of the Jordan, King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon and King Og of Baʹshan, who was in Ashʹta·roth.
So our elders and all the inhabitants of our land told us, ‘Take provisions with you for the journey and go to meet them. Tell them: “We will be your servants; now make a covenant with us.”’
This bread that we took as our provisions was still hot on the day we left our houses to come here to you. Now you can see it is dry and crumbly.
And these wineskins were new when we filled them, but now they have burst. And our garments and sandals have worn out because of the great length of the journey.”
At that the men took some of their provisions, but they did not inquire of Jehovah.
So Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant with them to let them live, and that is what the chieftains of the assembly swore to them in an oath.
At the end of three days, after they made a covenant with them, they heard that they lived nearby, in their vicinity.
Then the Israelites set out and came to their cities on the third day; their cities were Gibʹe·on, Che·phiʹrah, Be·erʹoth, and Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.
But the Israelites did not attack them, because the chieftains of the assembly had sworn an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel. So all the assembly began to murmur against the chieftains.
At this all the chieftains said to the entire assembly: “Since we swore an oath to them by Jehovah the God of Israel, we are not allowed to hurt them.
This is what we will do: We will let them live, so that there is no indignation against us because of the oath that we swore to them.”
And the chieftains added: “Let them live, but let them become gatherers of wood and drawers of water for all the assembly.” This is what the chieftains promised them.
Joshua now called them and said to them: “Why did you trick us by saying, ‘We are from a place very far away from you,’ when you really live right among us?
From now on you are cursed, and you will always occupy a slave’s position as gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.”
They answered Joshua: “It was because your servants were plainly told that Jehovah your God had commanded Moses his servant to give you all the land and to annihilate all its inhabitants from before you. So we were afraid for our lives because of you, and that is why we did this.
Now we are at your mercy. Do to us whatever you think is good and right.”
And that is what he did with them; he saved them from the hands of the Israelites, and they did not kill them.
But that day Joshua made them gatherers of wood and drawers of water for the assembly and for Jehovah’s altar at the place that He should choose, and they remain so to this day.
Joshua then assembled all the tribes of Israel together at Sheʹchem and summoned the elders of Israel, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and they stood before the true God.
Joshua said to all the people: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘It was on the other side of the River that your forefathers lived a long time ago—Teʹrah the father of Abraham and the father of Naʹhor—and they used to serve other gods.
“‘In time I took your forefather Abraham from the other side of the River and had him walk through all the land of Caʹnaan and made his offspring many. I gave him Isaac;
then to Isaac I gave Jacob and Eʹsau. Later to Eʹsau I gave Mount Seʹir as his possession; and Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.
I later sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt with what I did among them, and then I brought you out.
When I was bringing your fathers out of Egypt and you came to the sea, the Egyptians were chasing after your fathers with war chariots and cavalrymen as far as the Red Sea.
They began to cry out to Jehovah, so he placed a darkness between you and the Egyptians and brought the sea over them and covered them, and your own eyes saw what I did in Egypt. Then you dwelled in the wilderness many years.
“‘And I brought you to the land of the Amʹor·ites who were dwelling on the other side of the Jordan, and they fought against you. But I gave them into your hand so that you could take possession of their land, and I annihilated them from before you.
Then Baʹlak son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab, rose up and fought against Israel. So he summoned Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor to curse you.
But I would not listen to Baʹlaam. So he blessed you repeatedly, and I rescued you from his hand.
“‘Then you crossed the Jordan and came to Jerʹi·cho. And the leaders of Jerʹi·cho, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Girʹga·shites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites fought against you, but I gave them into your hand.
So I sent the feeling of dejection ahead of you, and it drove them out from before you—two kings of the Amʹor·ites. It was not by your sword and not by your bow.
Thus I gave you a land for which you had not toiled and cities that you had not built, and you settled in them. You are eating from vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant.’
“Therefore, fear Jehovah and serve him with integrity and faithfulness, and remove the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River and in Egypt, and serve Jehovah.
Now if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah, choose for yourselves today whom you will serve, whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River or the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling. But as for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.”
At this the people answered: “It is unthinkable for us to abandon Jehovah and to serve other gods.
It is Jehovah our God who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, and who performed these great signs before our eyes and who kept guarding us the entire way in which we walked and among all the peoples through whom we passed.
Jehovah drove out all the peoples, including the Amʹor·ites, who lived in the land before us. Therefore, we too will serve Jehovah, because he is our God.”
Then Joshua said to the people: “You are not able to serve Jehovah, for he is a holy God; he is a God who requires exclusive devotion. He will not pardon your transgressions and your sins.
If you abandon Jehovah and serve foreign gods, he will also turn against you and exterminate you after doing good for you.”
But the people said to Joshua: “No, but we will serve Jehovah!”
So Joshua said to the people: “You are witnesses against yourselves that of your own accord, you have chosen for yourselves to serve Jehovah.” To this they said: “We are witnesses.”
“Therefore, remove the foreign gods that are among you, and incline your hearts to Jehovah the God of Israel.”
The people said to Joshua: “We will serve Jehovah our God, and we will obey his voice!”
So Joshua made a covenant with the people on that day and established a regulation and a ruling for them in Sheʹchem.
Then Joshua wrote these words in the book of God’s Law and took a great stone and set it up under the large tree that is by the sanctuary of Jehovah.
Joshua went on to say to all the people: “Look! This stone will serve as a witness against us, because it has heard everything Jehovah said to us, and it will serve as a witness against you, so that you may not deny your God.”
With that Joshua sent the people away, each one to his inheritance.
After these things, Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of 110.
So they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timʹnath-seʹrah, which is in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, north of Mount Gaʹash.
Israel continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and who had known all of Jehovah’s deeds in behalf of Israel.
The bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up out of Egypt, were buried in Sheʹchem in the portion of the field that Jacob had acquired from the sons of Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father, for 100 pieces of money; and it became the inheritance of the sons of Joseph.
Also, El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron died. So they buried him in the Hill of Phinʹe·has his son, which had been given to him in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im.
Then Joshua the son of Nun secretly sent two men out from Shitʹtim as spies. He told them: “Go and inspect the land, especially Jerʹi·cho.” So they went and came to the house of a prostitute named Raʹhab, and they stayed there.
The king of Jerʹi·cho was told: “Look! Israelite men have come in here tonight to spy out the land.”
At that the king of Jerʹi·cho sent word to Raʹhab: “Bring out the men who came and are staying in your house, for they have come to spy out the entire land.”
But the woman took the two men and hid them. Then she said: “Yes, the men came to me, but I did not know where they were from.
And at dark when the city gate was about to be closed, the men went out. I do not know where the men went, but if you quickly chase after them, you will catch up with them.”
(However, she had taken them up to the roof and hidden them among stalks of flax laid in rows on the roof.)
So the men chased after them in the direction of the Jordan at the fords, and the city gate was shut once the pursuers had gone out.
Before the men lay down to sleep, she came up to them on the roof.
She said to the men: “I do know that Jehovah will give you the land and that the fear of you has fallen upon us. All the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of you,
for we heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you when you left Egypt and what you did to the two kings of the Amʹor·ites, Siʹhon and Og, whom you devoted to destruction on the other side of the Jordan.
When we heard about it, we lost heart, and no one has any courage because of you, for Jehovah your God is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath.
Now, please, swear to me by Jehovah that, because I showed loyal love to you, you will also show loyal love to my father’s household; and you must give me a sign of good faith.
You must spare the lives of my father and mother, my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them, and you must save us from death.”
At that the men said to her: “We will give our lives for yours! If you do not tell about our mission, then we will show loyal love and faithfulness toward you when Jehovah gives us the land.”
After that she let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was on a side of the city wall. In fact, she was dwelling on the wall.
Then she said to them: “Go to the mountainous region and hide there for three days, so that those pursuing you may not find you. Then, after your pursuers have come back, you can go on your way.”
The men said to her: “We will be free from guilt respecting this oath that you made us swear
unless, when we come into the land, you tie this cord of scarlet thread in the window by which you let us down. You should gather your father, your mother, your brothers, and all your father’s household with you into the house.
Then if anyone goes out the doors of your house into the open, his blood will be on his own head, and we will be free from guilt. But if harm comes to anyone who remains with you in the house, his blood will be on our heads.
But if you report our mission, we will be free from guilt respecting your oath that you made us swear.”
She replied: “Let it be according to your words.” With that she sent them off, and they went their way. Afterward, she tied the scarlet cord in the window.
So they left and went to the mountainous region and stayed there for three days, until the pursuers returned. The pursuers had been looking for them on every road but did not find them.
The two men then descended from the mountainous region and crossed the river and came to Joshua the son of Nun. They related to him all the things that had happened to them.
Then they said to Joshua: “Jehovah has handed over the entire land to us. In fact, all the inhabitants of the land are disheartened because of us.”
As soon as King A·doʹni-zeʹdek of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Aʹi and devoted it to destruction, doing to Aʹi and its king just as he had done to Jerʹi·cho and its king, and how the inhabitants of Gibʹe·on had made peace with Israel and remained among them,
he was greatly alarmed, because Gibʹe·on was a great city, like one of the royal cities. It was greater than Aʹi, and all its men were warriors.
So A·doʹni-zeʹdek king of Jerusalem sent this message to Hoʹham king of Hebʹron, Piʹram king of Jarʹmuth, Ja·phiʹa king of Laʹchish, and Deʹbir king of Egʹlon:
“Come to my aid, and let us attack Gibʹe·on, because it has made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.”
At this the five kings of the Amʹor·ites—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon—gathered together along with their armies, and they marched on and encamped against Gibʹe·on to fight against it.
Then the men of Gibʹe·on sent word to Joshua at the camp at Gilʹgal: “Do not forsake your slaves. Come quickly! Rescue us and help us! All the kings of the Amʹor·ites from the mountainous region have gathered against us.”
So Joshua went up from Gilʹgal with all the fighting men and the mighty warriors.
Jehovah then said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid of them, for I have handed them over to you. Not one of them will be able to stand against you.”
Joshua came against them by surprise after marching all night long from Gilʹgal.
Jehovah threw them into confusion before Israel, and they inflicted a great slaughter on them at Gibʹe·on, pursuing them by way of the ascent of Beth-hoʹron and striking them down as far as A·zeʹkah and Mak·keʹdah.
While they were fleeing from Israel and were on the descent of Beth-hoʹron, Jehovah hurled great hailstones from the sky on them as far as A·zeʹkah, and they perished. In fact, more died from the hail than from the sword of the Israelites.
It was then, on the day that Jehovah routed the Amʹor·ites before the eyes of the Israelites, that Joshua said to Jehovah before Israel: “Sun, stand still over Gibʹe·on,And moon, over the Valley of Aiʹja·lon!”
So the sun stood still and the moon did not move until the nation could take vengeance on its enemies. Is it not written in the book of Jaʹshar? The sun stood still in the middle of the sky and did not hasten to set for about a whole day.
There has never been a day like that one, either before it or after it, when Jehovah listened to the voice of a man, for Jehovah was fighting for Israel.
After that Joshua together with all Israel returned to the camp at Gilʹgal.
Meanwhile, the five kings fled and hid in the cave at Mak·keʹdah.
Then it was reported to Joshua: “The five kings have been found hiding in the cave at Mak·keʹdah.”
So Joshua said: “Roll large stones over the mouth of the cave and assign men to guard them.
But the rest of you should not stop. Pursue your enemies and strike them from the rear. Do not allow them to enter into their cities, for Jehovah your God has given them into your hands.”
After Joshua and the Israelites had finished inflicting a very great slaughter on them, to the point of wiping them out except for some survivors who escaped and entered into the fortified cities,
all the people returned safely to Joshua at the camp at Mak·keʹdah. Not a man dared to utter a word against the Israelites.
Then Joshua said: “Open the mouth of the cave and bring the five kings out of the cave to me.”
So they brought to him from the cave these five kings: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebʹron, the king of Jarʹmuth, the king of Laʹchish, and the king of Egʹlon.
When they brought these kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the commanders of the fighting men who had gone with him: “Come forward. Place your feet on the backs of the necks of these kings.” So they came forward and placed their feet on the backs of their necks.
Then Joshua said to them: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Be courageous and strong, for this is what Jehovah will do to all your enemies against whom you are fighting.”
Then Joshua struck them and put them to death and hung them on five stakes, and they remained hanging on the stakes until the evening.
At sunset Joshua ordered that they be taken down off the stakes and thrown into the cave where they had hidden themselves. Then large stones were placed at the mouth of the cave, and these remain to this very day.
Joshua captured Mak·keʹdah on that day and struck it with the sword. He devoted its king and everyone in it to destruction, letting no survivor remain. He did to the king of Mak·keʹdah just as he had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.
Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Mak·keʹdah to Libʹnah and fought against Libʹnah.
Jehovah also gave it and its king into Israel’s hand, and they struck it and everyone in it with the sword, not letting a survivor remain in it. So they did to its king just as they had done to the king of Jerʹi·cho.
Next Joshua together with all Israel went from Libʹnah to Laʹchish and camped there and fought against it.
Jehovah gave Laʹchish into Israel’s hand, and they captured it on the second day. They struck it and everyone in it with the sword, just as they had done to Libʹnah.
Then Hoʹram king of Geʹzer went up to help Laʹchish, but Joshua struck him and his people down until not one survivor remained.
Then Joshua together with all Israel went from Laʹchish to Egʹlon and camped there and fought against it.
They captured it on that day and struck it with the sword. They devoted everyone in it to destruction on that day, just as they had done to Laʹchish.
Then Joshua together with all Israel went up from Egʹlon to Hebʹron and fought against it.
They captured it and struck it, its king, its towns, and everyone in it with the sword, not letting any survivor remain. Just as he had done to Egʹlon, he devoted it and everyone in it to destruction.
Finally Joshua together with all Israel turned toward Deʹbir and fought against it.
He captured it, its king, and all its towns, and they struck them down with the sword, devoting everyone in it to destruction, not letting any survivor remain. He did to Deʹbir and its king just as he had done to Hebʹron and to Libʹnah and its king.
Joshua conquered all the land of the mountainous region, the Negʹeb, the She·pheʹlah, and the slopes, and all their kings, not letting any survivor remain; he devoted everything that breathed to destruction, just as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded.
Joshua conquered them from Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to Gazʹa and all the land of Goʹshen and up to Gibʹe·on.
Joshua captured all these kings and their land, all at the same time, because it was Jehovah the God of Israel who was fighting for Israel.
Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilʹgal.
And the land that fell by lot to the descendants of Joseph was from the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho to the waters east of Jerʹi·cho, through the wilderness going up from Jerʹi·cho into the mountainous region of Bethʹel.
It extended from Bethʹel belonging to Luz and continued to the boundary of the Arʹchites at Atʹa·roth,
then it went down westward to the boundary of the Japhʹle·tites as far as the boundary of Lower Beth-hoʹron and Geʹzer, and it ended at the sea.
So Joseph’s descendants, Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im, took possession of their land.
The boundary of the descendants of Eʹphra·im by their families was as follows: The boundary of their inheritance to the east was Atʹa·roth-adʹdar, as far as Upper Beth-hoʹron,
and the boundary extended to the sea. Mich·meʹthath was on the north, and the boundary went around east to Taʹa·nath-shiʹloh, and it passed on the east to Ja·noʹah.
Then it went down from Ja·noʹah to Atʹa·roth and Naʹa·rah and reached to Jerʹi·cho and extended to the Jordan.
From Tapʹpu·ah the boundary continued westward to the Wadi of Kaʹnah, and it ended at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of Eʹphra·im by their families;
the descendants of Eʹphra·im also had enclave cities in the midst of the inheritance of Ma·nasʹseh, all the cities and their settlements.
But they did not drive away the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Geʹzer, and the Caʹnaan·ites continue to dwell among Eʹphra·im to this day and have been subjected to forced labor.
As soon as all the kings of the Amʹor·ites who were on the west side of the Jordan and all the kings of the Caʹnaan·ites who were by the sea heard that Jehovah had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, they lost heart, and they lost all courage because of the Israelites.
At that time Jehovah said to Joshua: “Make for yourself flint knives and circumcise the men of Israel again, a second time.”
So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the men of Israel at Gibʹe·ath-ha·arʹa·loth.
This is why Joshua circumcised them: All the males of the people who left Egypt, all the men of war, had died in the wilderness on the journey after they left Egypt.
All the people who left Egypt were circumcised, but all the people born in the wilderness on the journey after they left Egypt were not circumcised.
The Israelites had walked for 40 years in the wilderness until the entire nation had died off, that is, the men of war who left Egypt who did not obey the voice of Jehovah. Jehovah swore to them that he would never let them see the land that Jehovah had sworn to their forefathers to give to us, a land flowing with milk and honey.
So he raised up their sons instead of them. These Joshua circumcised; they were uncircumcised because they had not circumcised them during the journey.
When they finished circumcising the entire nation, they remained where they were in the camp until they recovered.
Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Today I have rolled away from you the reproach of Egypt.” So that place has been called Gilʹgal until this day.
The Israelites continued to camp at Gilʹgal, and they observed the Passover on the 14th day of the month, in the evening, on the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho.
And they began to eat the produce of the land the day after the Passover, unleavened bread and roasted grains, on this same day.
Then the manna stopped on the day following when they had eaten some of the produce of the land; there was no longer manna for the Israelites, but they began to eat the produce of the land of Caʹnaan in that year.
When Joshua was near Jerʹi·cho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword in his hand. Joshua walked up to him and asked: “Are you on our side or on the side of our adversaries?”
To this he said: “No, but I have come as prince of Jehovah’s army.” With that Joshua fell with his face to the ground and prostrated himself and said to him: “What does my lord have to say to his servant?”
The prince of Jehovah’s army replied to Joshua: “Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy.” At once Joshua did so.
Now this is what the Israelites took as an inheritance in the land of Caʹnaan, which El·e·aʹzar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun and the heads of the paternal houses of the tribes of Israel gave them to inherit.
Their inheritance was by lot, just as Jehovah had commanded through Moses for the nine and a half tribes.
Moses had given the inheritance of the other two and a half tribes on the other side of the Jordan, and to the Levites he did not give an inheritance among them.
The descendants of Joseph were considered two tribes, Ma·nasʹseh and Eʹphra·im; and they did not give a share in the land to the Levites, except cities to dwell in and their pastures for their livestock and their property.
So the Israelites apportioned the land just as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
Then the men of Judah approached Joshua in Gilʹgal, and Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite said to him: “You well know what Jehovah said to Moses the man of the true God about you and me at Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a.
I was 40 years old when Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me out of Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a to spy out the land, and I returned with a forthright report.
Although my brothers who went up with me caused the people to lose heart, I followed Jehovah my God wholeheartedly.
Moses swore on that day, saying: ‘The land on which your foot has walked will become a lasting inheritance for you and your sons, because you have followed Jehovah my God wholeheartedly.’
Now just as he promised, Jehovah has preserved me alive these 45 years since Jehovah made this promise to Moses when Israel walked in the wilderness; I am still here today, 85 years old.
And today I am as strong as on the day Moses sent me out. My strength is now as it was then, for war and for other activities.
Therefore, give me this mountainous region that Jehovah promised on that day. Though you heard on that day that there were Anʹa·kim there with great fortified cities, surely Jehovah will be with me, and I will drive them out, just as Jehovah promised.”
So Joshua blessed him and gave Hebʹron to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh as an inheritance.
That is why Hebʹron belongs to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh the Kenʹiz·zite as an inheritance to this day, because he followed Jehovah the God of Israel wholeheartedly.
The name of Hebʹron was previously Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the great man among the Anʹa·kim). And the land had rest from war.
Then Joshua summoned the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh
and said to them: “You have done all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and you have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you.
You have not forsaken your brothers all this time, down to this day; and you have kept the obligation of the commandment of Jehovah your God.
Now Jehovah your God has given your brothers rest, just as he promised them. So now you may return to your tents in the land that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you to possess on the other side of the Jordan.
Only be very careful to carry out the commandment and the Law that Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in all his ways, by keeping his commandments, by sticking to him, and by serving him with all your heart and with all your soul.”
Then Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.
And to the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Moses had given an inheritance in Baʹshan, and to the other half of the tribe, Joshua gave land on the west side of the Jordan, along with their brothers. Moreover, when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them
and said to them: “Return to your tents with many riches, with very much livestock, with silver and gold, copper and iron, and garments in very great quantity. Take your share of the spoil of your enemies, along with your brothers.”
After that the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh departed from the other Israelites, from Shiʹloh in the land of Caʹnaan, and they returned to the land of Gilʹe·ad, the land of their possession where they had settled at the order of Jehovah through Moses.
When they came to the regions of the Jordan in the land of Caʹnaan, the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh built an altar there by the Jordan, a large, impressive altar.
Later the other Israelites heard about it and said: “Look! The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have built an altar on the frontier of the land of Caʹnaan in the regions of the Jordan on the side belonging to the Israelites.”
When the Israelites heard about it, the whole assembly of the Israelites congregated at Shiʹloh to go to war against them.
Then the Israelites sent Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad,
and ten chieftains were with him, one chieftain of each paternal house of all the tribes of Israel, each a head of his paternal house among the thousands of Israel.
When they came to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in the land of Gilʹe·ad, they said to them:
“This is what all the assembly of Jehovah says: ‘What is this act of unfaithfulness that you have committed against the God of Israel? You have turned back today from following Jehovah by building yourselves an altar and rebelling against Jehovah.
Was the error of Peʹor not enough for us? We have not cleansed ourselves from it down to this day, even though a plague came upon the assembly of Jehovah.
And you would turn back today from following Jehovah! If you rebel today against Jehovah, then tomorrow he will be indignant against the entire assembly of Israel.
Now if it is because the land of your possession is unclean, cross over to the land of Jehovah’s possession where the tabernacle of Jehovah resides and settle among us, but do not rebel against Jehovah, and do not make us rebels by building yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of Jehovah our God.
When Aʹchan the son of Zeʹrah committed an act of unfaithfulness regarding what was devoted to destruction, did not indignation come against all the assembly of Israel? And he was not the only man to die for his error.’”
At this the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh said in answer to the heads of the thousands of Israel:
“The God of gods, Jehovah! The God of gods, Jehovah! He knows, and Israel will also know. If we were rebellious and unfaithful to Jehovah, do not spare us this day.
If we built ourselves an altar to turn back from following Jehovah and to offer burnt offerings, grain offerings, and communion sacrifices on it, Jehovah will exact the penalty.
No, it was because of another concern that we did this, for we said, ‘In the future, your sons will say to our sons: “What do you have to do with Jehovah the God of Israel?
Jehovah has put the Jordan as a boundary between us and you, the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites. You have no share in Jehovah.” And your sons will hinder our sons from worshipping Jehovah.’
“So we said, ‘Let us by all means take action by building an altar, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices,
but to be a witness between you and us and our descendants after us that we will carry out our service to Jehovah before him with our burnt offerings and our sacrifices and our communion sacrifices, so that your sons may not say to our sons in the future: “You have no share in Jehovah.”’
So we said, ‘If they should say that to us and to our descendants in the future, we will then say: “See the replica of Jehovah’s altar that our forefathers made, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but to be a witness between you and us.”’
It is unthinkable for us to rebel against Jehovah and to turn back today from following Jehovah by building an altar for burnt offerings, grain offerings, and sacrifices, other than the altar of Jehovah our God that is before his tabernacle!”
When Phinʹe·has the priest, the chieftains of the assembly, and the heads of the thousands of Israel who were with him heard the words that the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh spoke, they were satisfied.
So Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest said to the descendants of Reuʹben, Gad, and Ma·nasʹseh: “Today we know that Jehovah is among us, because you have not committed this act of unfaithfulness against Jehovah. Now you have saved the Israelites out of the hand of Jehovah.”
Then Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the priest and the chieftains returned from the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites in the land of Gilʹe·ad to the land of Caʹnaan, and they brought back word to the other Israelites.
And the Israelites were satisfied with the report. The Israelites then praised God, and they said nothing more about going to war against the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites to destroy the land in which they were dwelling.
So the Reuʹben·ites and the Gadʹites named the altar, because “it is a witness between us that Jehovah is the true God.”
The land allotted to the tribe of Judah for their families extended to the boundary of Eʹdom, the wilderness of Zin, to the Negʹeb at its southern end.
Their southern boundary ran from the extremity of the Salt Sea, from the bay that faces southward.
And it extended south to the ascent of A·krabʹbim, passed over to Zin, then went up from the south to Kaʹdesh-barʹne·a, over to Hezʹron, up to Adʹdar, and went around toward Karʹka.
Then it passed on to Azʹmon and extended to the Wadi of Egypt, and the boundary ended at the Sea. This was their southern boundary.
The eastern boundary was the Salt Sea up to the end of the Jordan, and the boundary at the northern corner was at the bay of the sea, at the end of the Jordan.
The boundary went up to Beth-hogʹlah and passed over at the north of Beth-arʹa·bah, and the boundary went up to the stone of Boʹhan the son of Reuʹben.
The boundary went up to Deʹbir at the Valley of Aʹchor and turned northward to Gilʹgal, which is in front of the ascent of A·dumʹmim that is south of the wadi, and the boundary passed over to the waters of En-sheʹmesh and ended at En-roʹgel.
The boundary went up to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom to the slope of the Jebʹu·site at the south, that is, Jerusalem, and the boundary went up to the top of the mountain that faces the Valley of Hinʹnom to the west, which is at the extremity of the Valley of Rephʹa·im to the north.
And the boundary was marked from the top of the mountain to the spring of the waters of Neph·toʹah and extended to the cities of Mount Eʹphron; and the boundary was marked to Baʹal·ah, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.
The boundary went around from Baʹal·ah westward to Mount Seʹir and passed over to the slope of Mount Jeʹa·rim at the north, that is, Chesʹa·lon, and it went down to Beth-sheʹmesh and passed over to Timʹnah.
And the boundary extended to the slope of Ekʹron to the north, and the boundary was marked to Shikʹke·ron and passed over to Mount Baʹal·ah and extended to Jabʹne·el, and the boundary ended at the sea.
The western boundary was at the Great Sea and its coast. This was the boundary of the descendants of Judah by their families on all sides.
And to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh, he gave a share among the descendants of Judah at the order of Jehovah to Joshua, namely, Kirʹi·ath-arʹba (Arʹba was the father of Aʹnak), that is, Hebʹron.
So Caʹleb drove out from there the three sons of Aʹnak: Sheʹshai, A·hiʹman, and Talʹmai, descendants of Aʹnak.
Then he went up from there against the inhabitants of Deʹbir. (The name of Deʹbir was previously Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher.)
Caʹleb then said: “To the man who strikes Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achʹsah as a wife.”
And Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, Caʹleb’s brother, captured it. So he gave him his daughter Achʹsah as a wife.
While she was going home, she urged him to ask her father for a field. Then she dismounted from her donkey. Caʹleb asked her: “What do you want?”
She said: “Please grant me a blessing, for you have given me a piece of land in the south; give me also Gulʹloth-maʹim.” So he gave her Upper Gulʹloth and Lower Gulʹloth.
This was the inheritance of the tribe of Judah by their families.
The cities at the extremity of the tribe of Judah toward the boundary of Eʹdom in the south were: Kabʹze·el, Eʹder, Jaʹgur,
Kiʹnah, Di·moʹnah, A·daʹdah,
Keʹdesh, Haʹzor, Ithʹnan,
Ziph, Teʹlem, Be·aʹloth,
Haʹzor-ha·datʹtah, and Keʹri·oth-hezʹron, that is, Haʹzor,
Aʹmam, Sheʹma, Mo·laʹdah,
Haʹzar-gadʹdah, Heshʹmon, Beth-pelʹet,
Haʹzar-shuʹal, Beʹer-sheʹba, Biz·i·o·thiʹah,
Baʹal·ah, Iʹim, Eʹzem,
El·toʹlad, Cheʹsil, Horʹmah,
Zikʹlag, Mad·manʹnah, San·sanʹnah,
Le·baʹoth, Shilʹhim, Aʹin, and Rimʹmon—a total of 29 cities together with their settlements.
In the She·pheʹlah, there were: Eshʹta·ol, Zoʹrah, Ashʹnah,
Za·noʹah, En-ganʹnim, Tapʹpu·ah, Eʹnam,
Jarʹmuth, A·dulʹlam, Soʹcoh, A·zeʹkah,
Shaʹa·raʹim, Ad·i·thaʹim, and Ge·deʹrah and Ged·e·ro·thaʹim—14 cities and their settlements.
Zeʹnan, Ha·dashʹah, Migʹdal-gad,
Diʹle·an, Mizʹpeh, Jokʹthe·el,
Laʹchish, Bozʹkath, Egʹlon,
Cabʹbon, Lahʹmam, Chitʹlish,
Ge·deʹroth, Beth-daʹgon, Naʹa·mah, and Mak·keʹdah—16 cities and their settlements.
Libʹnah, Eʹther, Aʹshan,
Iphʹtah, Ashʹnah, Neʹzib,
Keiʹlah, Achʹzib, and Ma·reʹshah—nine cities and their settlements.
Ekʹron and its dependent towns and its settlements;
from Ekʹron westward, all that is alongside Ashʹdod and their settlements.
Ashʹdod, its dependent towns and its settlements; Gazʹa, its dependent towns and its settlements, down to the Wadi of Egypt, the Great Sea, and the adjacent region.
And in the mountainous region, Shaʹmir, Jatʹtir, Soʹcoh,
Danʹnah, Kirʹi·ath-sanʹnah, that is, Deʹbir,
Aʹnab, Eshʹte·moh, Aʹnim,
Goʹshen, Hoʹlon, and Giʹloh—11 cities and their settlements.
Arab, Duʹmah, Eʹshan,
Jaʹnim, Beth-tapʹpu·ah, A·pheʹkah,
Humʹtah, Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, and Ziʹor—nine cities and their settlements.
Maʹon, Carʹmel, Ziph, Jutʹtah,
Jezʹre·el, Jokʹde·am, Za·noʹah,
Kaʹin, Gibʹe·ah, and Timʹnah—ten cities and their settlements.
Halʹhul, Beth-zur, Geʹdor,
Maʹa·rath, Beth-aʹnoth, and Elʹte·kon—six cities and their settlements.
Kirʹi·ath-baʹal, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and Rabʹbah—two cities and their settlements.
In the wilderness, Beth-arʹa·bah, Midʹdin, Se·caʹcah,
Nibʹshan, the City of Salt, and En-gedʹi—six cities and their settlements.
As for the Jebʹu·sites who were dwelling in Jerusalem, the men of Judah were not able to drive them away, so the Jebʹu·sites continue dwelling with the people of Judah in Jerusalem to this day.
As soon as the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan, Jehovah said to Joshua:
“Take 12 men from the people, one man from each tribe,
and give them this command: ‘Take up 12 stones from the middle of the Jordan, from the place where the priests’ feet stood still, and carry them over with you and set them down in the place where you will spend the night.’”
So Joshua called the 12 men whom he had appointed from the Israelites, one man from each tribe,
and Joshua said to them: “Pass ahead of the Ark of Jehovah your God to the middle of the Jordan, and each of you should lift up a stone on his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the Israelites,
to serve as a sign among you. If your children should later ask you, ‘Why do you have these stones?’
you must tell them: ‘Because the waters of the Jordan were halted from before the ark of Jehovah’s covenant. When it crossed the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were halted. These stones will serve as a lasting memorial to the people of Israel.’”
So the Israelites did just as Joshua had commanded. They took up 12 stones from the middle of the Jordan, just as Jehovah had instructed Joshua, to correspond to the number of the tribes of the Israelites. They took them over to the place where they would spend the night and set them down there.
Joshua also set up 12 stones in the middle of the Jordan at the place where the feet of the priests who carried the ark of the covenant stood, and the stones are there to this day.
The priests carrying the Ark remained standing in the middle of the Jordan until everything that Jehovah had ordered Joshua to tell the people to do was completed, in harmony with all that Moses had commanded Joshua. All the while, the people hurried across.
As soon as all the people had finished crossing over, the Ark of Jehovah and the priests crossed over in the sight of the people.
And the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh crossed over in battle formation ahead of the other Israelites, just as Moses had instructed them.
About 40,000 soldiers armed for battle crossed over before Jehovah onto the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho.
On that day Jehovah exalted Joshua in the eyes of all Israel, and they deeply respected him all the days of his life, just as they had deeply respected Moses.
Then Jehovah said to Joshua:
“Command the priests carrying the ark of the Testimony to come up out of the Jordan.”
So Joshua commanded the priests: “Come up out of the Jordan.”
When the priests carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came up from the middle of the Jordan and the soles of the feet of the priests stepped onto dry ground, the waters of the Jordan resumed their course and overflowed the banks as before.
The people came up from the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month and camped at Gilʹgal on the eastern border of Jerʹi·cho.
As for the 12 stones that they had taken out of the Jordan, Joshua set these up at Gilʹgal.
Then he said to the Israelites: “In the future when your children ask their fathers, ‘What do these stones mean?’
you must explain to your children: ‘Israel crossed the Jordan on dry land
when Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan before them until they had crossed it, just as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea when he dried it up before us until we crossed it.
He did this so that all the peoples of the earth may know how mighty Jehovah’s hand is and so that you may always fear Jehovah your God.’”
Then Jehovah said to Joshua:
“Tell the Israelites, ‘Select for yourselves the cities of refuge about which I spoke to you through Moses,
so that the manslayer who unintentionally or accidentally kills someone may flee there. And they will serve as a refuge for you from the avenger of blood.
He must flee to one of these cities and stand at the entrance of the city gate and present his case in the hearing of the elders of that city. Then they must receive him into the city and give him a place and he will live with them.
If the avenger of blood chases after him, they should not surrender the manslayer into his hand, for he killed his fellow man accidentally and he did not previously hate him.
He must dwell in that city until he stands trial before the assembly and remain there until the death of the high priest who is in office at that time. Then the manslayer may return to the city from which he fled, and he may enter his city and his house.’”
So they gave a sacred status to Keʹdesh in Galilee in the mountainous region of Naphʹta·li, Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and Kirʹi·ath-arʹba, that is, Hebʹron, in the mountainous region of Judah.
In the region of the Jordan, east of Jerʹi·cho, they selected Beʹzer in the wilderness on the tableland out of the tribe of Reuʹben, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad out of the tribe of Gad, and Goʹlan in Baʹshan out of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.
These became the cities appointed for all the Israelites and for the foreign residents residing among them, so that anyone who unintentionally killed someone could flee there and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood prior to standing trial before the assembly.
Now these are the kings of the land whom the Israelites defeated, whose land they took possession of on the east side of the Jordan, from the Arʹnon Valley up to Mount Herʹmon and all the Arʹa·bah toward the east:
King Siʹhon of the Amʹor·ites, who lived in Heshʹbon and ruled from A·roʹer, which was on the rim of the Arʹnon Valley, and from the middle of the valley, and half of Gilʹe·ad as far as the Valley of Jabʹbok, the boundary of the Amʹmon·ites.
He also ruled over the Arʹa·bah as far as the Sea of Chinʹne·reth toward the east and as far as the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, the Salt Sea, to the east in the direction of Beth-jeshʹi·moth, and toward the south under the slopes of Pisʹgah.
Also the territory of King Og of Baʹshan, who was one of the last of the Rephʹa·im and who lived in Ashʹta·roth and Edʹre·i
and ruled in Mount Herʹmon, in Salʹe·cah, and in all Baʹshan, as far as the boundary of the Geshʹur·ites and the Ma·acʹa·thites, and half of Gilʹe·ad, to the territory of King Siʹhon of Heshʹbon.
Moses the servant of Jehovah and the Israelites defeated them, after which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave their land as a possession to the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh.
These are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the Israelites defeated on the west side of the Jordan, from Baʹal-gad in the Valley of Lebʹa·non and as far as Mount Haʹlak, which goes up to Seʹir, after which Joshua gave their land to the tribes of Israel as a possession by their shares,
in the mountainous region, in the She·pheʹlah, in the Arʹa·bah, on the slopes, in the wilderness, and in the Negʹeb—the land of the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Caʹnaan·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites:
The king of Jerʹi·cho, one; the king of Aʹi, which was beside Bethʹel, one;
the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebʹron, one;
the king of Jarʹmuth, one; the king of Laʹchish, one;
the king of Egʹlon, one; the king of Geʹzer, one;
the king of Deʹbir, one; the king of Geʹder, one;
the king of Horʹmah, one; the king of Aʹrad, one;
the king of Libʹnah, one; the king of A·dulʹlam, one;
the king of Mak·keʹdah, one; the king of Bethʹel, one;
the king of Tapʹpu·ah, one; the king of Heʹpher, one;
the king of Aʹphek, one; the king of Las·sharʹon, one;
the king of Maʹdon, one; the king of Haʹzor, one;
the king of Shimʹron-meʹron, one; the king of Achʹshaph, one;
the king of Taʹa·nach, one; the king of Me·gidʹdo, one;
the king of Keʹdesh, one; the king of Jokʹne·am in Carʹmel, one;
the king of Dor on the slopes of Dor, one; the king of Goiʹim in Gilʹgal, one;
the king of Tirʹzah, one; a total of 31 kings.
Then all the assembly of the Israelites congregated at Shiʹloh, and they set up the tent of meeting there, as the land was now subdued before them.
But there were still seven tribes left of the Israelites whose inheritance had not been allotted.
So Joshua said to the Israelites: “How long will you put off going in to take possession of the land that Jehovah the God of your forefathers has given you?
Give me three men from each tribe to send out; they should go out and walk throughout the land and map it out according to their inheritance. Then they should return to me.
They must apportion it among themselves into seven shares. Judah will remain in his territory to the south, and the house of Joseph will remain in their territory to the north.
As for you, map out the land into seven shares, and bring them here to me, and I will cast lots here for you before Jehovah our God.
But the Levites have no share among you, because the priesthood of Jehovah is their inheritance; and Gad, Reuʹben, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh have already taken their inheritance on the east side of the Jordan, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave them.”
The men prepared to go, and Joshua commanded those who were to map out the land: “Go and walk through the land and map it out and return to me, and I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah in Shiʹloh.”
With that the men went and traveled through the land and mapped it out by cities into seven shares, recording it in a book. After that they returned to Joshua at the camp in Shiʹloh.
Joshua then cast lots for them in Shiʹloh before Jehovah. There Joshua apportioned the land to the Israelites by their shares.
The lot came up for the tribe of Benjamin by their families, and the territory of their lot was between the people of Judah and the people of Joseph.
On the north side, their boundary started at the Jordan, and the boundary went up to the slope of Jerʹi·cho on the north and went up on the mountain westward, and it extended to the wilderness of Beth-aʹven.
And the boundary continued from there to Luz, at the southern slope of Luz, that is, Bethʹel; the boundary went down to Atʹa·roth-adʹdar on the mountain that is south of Lower Beth-hoʹron.
And the boundary was marked at the western side and went around toward the south from the mountain that faces Beth-hoʹron to the south; it ended at Kirʹi·ath-baʹal, that is, Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, a city of Judah. This is the western side.
The south side was from the extremity of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and the boundary extended westward; it went out to the spring of the waters of Neph·toʹah.
The boundary went down to the extremity of the mountain that faces the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, which is in the Valley of Rephʹa·im to the north, and it went down to the Valley of Hinʹnom, to the slope of the Jebʹu·site on the south, and down to En-roʹgel.
And it was marked northward and extended to En-sheʹmesh and then out to Gel·iʹloth, which is in front of the ascent of A·dumʹmim, and it went down to the stone of Boʹhan the son of Reuʹben.
And it continued to the northern slope in front of the Arʹa·bah and went down to the Arʹa·bah.
And the boundary continued to the northern slope of Beth-hogʹlah, and the boundary ended at the northern bay of the Salt Sea at the southern end of the Jordan. This was the southern boundary.
And the Jordan served as its boundary on the eastern side. This was the inheritance of the descendants of Benjamin by their families, according to its boundaries on all sides.
And the cities of the tribe of Benjamin by their families were: Jerʹi·cho, Beth-hogʹlah, Eʹmek-keʹziz,
Beth-arʹa·bah, Zem·a·raʹim, Bethʹel,
Avʹvim, Paʹrah, Ophʹrah,
Cheʹphar-amʹmo·ni, Ophʹni, and Geʹba—12 cities and their settlements.
Gibʹe·on, Raʹmah, Be·erʹoth,
Mizʹpeh, Che·phiʹrah, Moʹzah,
Reʹkem, Irʹpe·el, Tarʹa·lah,
Zeʹlah, Ha-eʹleph, Je·buʹsi, that is, Jerusalem, Gibʹe·ah, and Kirʹi·ath—14 cities and their settlements. This was the inheritance of the descendants of Benjamin by their families.
Many days after Jehovah had given Israel rest from all its surrounding enemies, when Joshua was old and advanced in years,
Joshua summoned all Israel, its elders, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and he said to them: “I have grown old; I am advanced in years.
And you have seen for yourselves all that Jehovah your God did to all these nations in your behalf because Jehovah your God was the one who was fighting for you.
See, I assigned to you by lot the land of the nations that remain as an inheritance for your tribes, as well as that of all the nations that I destroyed, from the Jordan to the Great Sea on the west.
And Jehovah your God was the one who kept thrusting them away from before you, and he drove them out for you, and you took possession of their land, just as Jehovah your God promised you.
“Now you must be very courageous to observe and carry out all that is written in the book of the Law of Moses by never deviating from it to the right or to the left,
by never mingling with these nations that remain with you. You must not even mention the names of their gods nor swear by them, and you must never serve them nor bow down to them.
But you must stick to Jehovah your God, just as you have done down to this day.
Jehovah will drive away great and mighty nations from before you, for not a man has been able to stand before you to this day.
Just one man of you will chase a thousand, because Jehovah your God is fighting for you, just as he promised you.
So be on guard constantly by loving Jehovah your God.
“But if you should turn back at all and stick to what is left of these nations that remain with you and you form marriage alliances with them and associate with them and they with you,
you should know for sure that Jehovah your God will not continue to drive out these nations for you. They will become a trap and a snare and a scourge on your flanks and thorns in your eyes until you have perished from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you.
“Now look! I am about to die, and you well know with all your heart and with all your soul that not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.
But just as all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you have come upon you, so Jehovah will bring upon you all the calamity that he promised and will annihilate you from this good land that Jehovah your God has given you.
If you violate the covenant of Jehovah your God that he commanded you to keep and if you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then Jehovah’s anger will blaze against you and you will quickly perish from the good land that he has given you.”
Now Jerʹi·cho was tightly shut up because of the Israelites; no one was leaving and no one was entering.
Jehovah then said to Joshua: “See, I have handed over to you Jerʹi·cho and its king and its mighty warriors.
All you fighting men should march around the city, going around the city once. That is what you should do for six days.
Have seven priests carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark. But on the seventh day, you should march around the city seven times and the priests should blow the horns.
When the ram’s horn is sounded—as soon as you hear the sound of the horn—all the people should shout a great war cry. Then the wall of the city will fall down flat, and the people must go up, each one straight ahead.”
So Joshua the son of Nun called the priests together and told them: “Take up the ark of the covenant, and seven priests should carry seven ram’s horns before the Ark of Jehovah.”
Then he told the people: “Move on and march around the city, and the armed troops should go ahead of the Ark of Jehovah.”
And just as Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns before Jehovah went forward and blew the horns, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah was following them.
And the armed troops went ahead of the priests who were blowing the horns, and the rear guard followed the Ark as the horns were blown continuously.
Now Joshua had commanded the people: “Do not shout nor let your voices be heard. Not a word should come out of your mouths until the day I say to you, ‘Shout!’ Then shout.”
He had the Ark of Jehovah go around the city, going around it once, after which they returned to the camp and spent the night there.
The next morning Joshua got up early, and the priests took up the Ark of Jehovah,
and seven priests carrying seven ram’s horns walked before the Ark of Jehovah, continuously blowing the horns. The armed troops were walking ahead of them while the rear guard was following the Ark of Jehovah as the horns were blown continuously.
They marched around the city on the second day once, after which they returned to the camp. That was what they did for six days.
On the seventh day they got up early, as soon as the dawn broke, and they marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times.
And on the seventh time, the priests blew the horns, and Joshua told the people: “Shout, for Jehovah has given you the city!
The city and everything in it is to be devoted to destruction; it all belongs to Jehovah. Only Raʹhab the prostitute may keep living, she and all who are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers we sent out.
But keep away from what is devoted to destruction, so that you do not desire something devoted to destruction and take it, making the camp of Israel something devoted to destruction by bringing disaster on it.
But all the silver and the gold and the articles of copper and iron are holy to Jehovah. They should go into the treasury of Jehovah.”
Then the people shouted when the horns were blown. As soon as the people heard the sound of the horn and shouted a great war cry, the wall fell down flat. After that the people went up into the city, each one straight ahead, and they captured the city.
They devoted all that was in the city to destruction by the sword, man and woman, young and old, bull, sheep, and donkey.
Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land: “Go into the house of the prostitute and bring out the woman and all who belong to her, just as you swore to her.”
So the young spies went in and brought out Raʹhab, along with her father, her mother, her brothers, and all who belonged to her; yes, they brought out her whole family, and they brought them safely to a place outside the camp of Israel.
Then they burned the city and everything in it with fire. But the silver, the gold, and the articles of copper and iron, they gave to the treasury of Jehovah’s house.
Only Raʹhab the prostitute and her father’s household and all who belonged to her were spared by Joshua; and she lives in Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent out to spy on Jerʹi·cho.
At that time Joshua pronounced this oath: “Cursed be the man before Jehovah who undertakes to rebuild this city of Jerʹi·cho. At the cost of his firstborn he will lay its foundation, and at the cost of his youngest he will put up its doors.”
So Jehovah was with Joshua, and his fame spread through all the earth.
Then Jehovah said to Joshua: “Do not be afraid or be terrified. Take with you all the fighting men and go up against Aʹi. See, I have handed over to you the king of Aʹi, his people, his city, and his land.
Do to Aʹi and to its king just as you did to Jerʹi·cho and its king, except you may plunder its spoil and its livestock for yourselves. Set an ambush behind the city.”
So Joshua and all the fighting men went up against Aʹi. Joshua chose 30,000 mighty warriors and sent them off by night.
He gave them this command: “See, you are to lie in ambush behind the city. Do not go very far from the city, and all of you be ready.
I and all the people with me will approach the city, and when they come out against us as before, we will retreat from them.
When they come out after us, we will draw them away from the city, for they will say, ‘They are retreating from us just as before.’ And we will retreat from them.
Then you should rise up from the ambush and capture the city; Jehovah your God will hand it over to you.
As soon as you have seized the city, you should set it on fire. You should do according to Jehovah’s word. See, I have given you your orders.”
Then Joshua sent them out, and they marched to the place of ambush; they took a position between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of Aʹi, while Joshua spent that night with the people.
After Joshua rose up early in the morning and gathered the troops, he and the elders of Israel led them to Aʹi.
All the fighting men who were with him marched up and advanced to the front of the city. They camped to the north of Aʹi, with the valley between them and Aʹi.
In the meantime, he had taken about 5,000 men and had set them as an ambush between Bethʹel and Aʹi, to the west of the city.
So the people set the main camp to the north of the city and the rear guard west of the city, and Joshua went that night into the middle of the valley.
And as soon as the king of Aʹi saw this, he and the men of the city hurried out early in the morning to meet Israel in battle at a certain place overlooking the desert plain. But he did not know that there was an ambush set against him to the rear of the city.
When the men of Aʹi attacked, Joshua and all Israel fled along the road in the direction of the wilderness.
Then all the people who were in the city were summoned to pursue them; and as they pursued Joshua they were drawn away from the city.
Not a man was remaining in Aʹi and Bethʹel who did not go out after Israel. They left the city wide open and pursued Israel.
Jehovah now said to Joshua: “Stretch out the javelin that is in your hand toward Aʹi, for into your hand I will give it.” So Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
The moment he stretched out his hand, the ambush rose up quickly from its place and ran into the city and captured it. They immediately set the city on fire.
When the men of Aʹi turned around, they saw the smoke of the city rising to the sky, and they had no strength to flee in any direction. Then the people who had been fleeing toward the wilderness turned on their pursuers.
When Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had captured the city and saw the smoke of the city rising, they turned around and attacked the men of Aʹi.
And the others came out of the city to meet them, so that the men of Aʹi were trapped in the middle, with some Israelites on this side and some on that side, and they struck them down until there was not one survivor or escapee remaining.
But they caught the king of Aʹi alive and brought him before Joshua.
After Israel finished killing all the inhabitants of Aʹi in the field, in the wilderness where they had pursued them, and every last one of them had fallen by the sword, then all Israel returned to Aʹi and struck it with the sword.
All those who fell on that day, from man to woman, amounted to 12,000, all the people of Aʹi.
Joshua did not draw back his hand with which he had stretched out the javelin until he had devoted all the inhabitants of Aʹi to destruction.
However, Israel took the livestock and the spoil of that city for themselves, according to the orders that Jehovah had given to Joshua.
Then Joshua burned Aʹi and reduced it to a permanent mound of ruins, as it remains to this day.
He hung the king of Aʹi on a stake until the evening, and as the sun was about to set, Joshua gave the order to take his dead body down from the stake. Then they pitched it at the entrance of the city gate and raised up a great pile of stones over him, which is there to this day.
It was then that Joshua built an altar on Mount Eʹbal to Jehovah the God of Israel,
just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded the Israelites and as it is written in the book of the Law of Moses: “An altar of whole stones on which no iron tool has been wielded.” On it they offered up burnt offerings to Jehovah as well as communion sacrifices.
Then he wrote there on the stones a copy of the Law that Moses had written before the Israelites.
All Israel, their elders, the officers, and their judges were standing on both sides of the Ark in front of the Levitical priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. The foreign residents were there as well as the natives. Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerʹi·zim, and the other half in front of Mount Eʹbal (just as Moses the servant of Jehovah had previously commanded), to bless the people of Israel.
After this he read aloud all the words of the Law, the blessings and the curses, according to all that is written in the book of the Law.
There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua did not read aloud in front of all the congregation of Israel, including the women and children and the foreign residents who were living among them.
There was a man of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im named Miʹcah.
He said to his mother: “The 1,100 silver pieces that were taken from you about which you pronounced a curse, which I heard—look! the silver is with me. I was the one who took it.” At that his mother said: “May Jehovah bless my son.”
So he gave the 1,100 pieces of silver back to his mother, but his mother said: “I will without fail sanctify the silver to Jehovah from my hand for my son to use in making a carved image and a metal statue. Now I give it back to you.”
After he returned the silver to his mother, his mother took 200 silver pieces and gave them to the silversmith. He made a carved image and a metal statue; and they were put in Miʹcah’s house.
This man Miʹcah had a house of gods, and he made an ephʹod and teraphim statues and installed one of his sons to serve as priest for him.
In those days, there was no king in Israel. Each one was doing what was right in his own eyes.
Now there was a young man of Bethʹle·hem in Judah who was of the family of Judah. He was a Levite who had been living there for a time.
The man left the city of Bethʹle·hem in Judah to find a place to live. While on his journey, he came to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to the house of Miʹcah.
Then Miʹcah said to him: “Where do you come from?” He replied: “I am a Levite from Bethʹle·hem in Judah, and I am on my way to find a place to live.”
So Miʹcah said to him: “Stay with me and serve as a father and a priest for me. I will give you ten silver pieces a year and a set of garments and your food.” So the Levite went in.
Thus the Levite agreed to stay with the man, and the young man became like one of his sons.
Furthermore, Miʹcah installed the Levite to serve as a priest for him, and he lived in the house of Miʹcah.
Then Miʹcah said: “Now I know that Jehovah will be good to me, for the Levite has become my priest.”
In those days, when there was no king in Israel, a Levite who was then living in a remote part of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im took a concubine from Bethʹle·hem in Judah as his wife.
But his concubine was unfaithful to him, and she left him to go to her father’s house at Bethʹle·hem in Judah. She remained there for four months.
Then her husband went after her to persuade her to come back; he had his male attendant and a couple of donkeys with him. So she brought him into her father’s house. When her father saw him, he was glad to meet him.
So his father-in-law, the young woman’s father, convinced him to stay with him three days; and they would eat and drink, and he would spend the night there.
On the fourth day, when they got up early in the morning to go, the father of the young woman said to his son-in-law: “Eat something to give you strength, and then you may go.”
So they sat down, and they both ate and drank together; after that the father of the young woman said to the man: “Please, stay overnight and enjoy yourself.”
When the man rose to go, his father-in-law kept begging him, so he stayed overnight again.
When he got up early in the morning on the fifth day to go, the father of the young woman said: “Please, eat something to give you strength.” And they lingered until it was late in the day, and they both kept eating.
When the man rose to go with his concubine and his attendant, his father-in-law, the young woman’s father, said to him: “Look, now! It is almost evening. Please, stay overnight. Here the day is coming to an end. Stay here overnight and enjoy yourself. Tomorrow you can get up early for your journey and go to your home.”
However, the man did not want to stay another night, so he got up and traveled as far as Jeʹbus, that is, Jerusalem. He had with him the two saddled donkeys, his concubine, and his attendant.
When they were close to Jeʹbus, the daylight was nearly gone. So the attendant said to his master: “Should we stop at this city of the Jebʹu·sites and stay overnight here?”
But his master said to him: “We should not stop at a city of foreigners who are not Israelites. We will go on as far as Gibʹe·ah.”
Then he said to his attendant: “Come and let us try to reach one of those places; we will stay overnight either in Gibʹe·ah or in Raʹmah.”
So they went on their way, and the sun began to set when they were near Gibʹe·ah, which belongs to Benjamin.
So they stopped there and went in to stay overnight in Gibʹe·ah. Once inside, they sat down in the public square of the city, but nobody took them into his house to stay overnight.
Eventually that evening, an old man came in from his work in the field. He was from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he was living for a time in Gibʹe·ah; but the residents of the city were Benʹja·min·ites.
When he looked up and saw the traveler in the public square of the city, the old man said: “Where are you going, and where do you come from?”
He replied: “We are traveling from Bethʹle·hem in Judah to a remote area of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, where I am from. I went to Bethʹle·hem in Judah, and I am going to the house of Jehovah, but nobody is taking me into his house.
We have enough straw and fodder for our donkeys, and bread and wine for me, the woman, and our attendant. There is nothing lacking.”
However, the old man said: “May you have peace! Let me take care of anything you need. Just do not stay overnight in the public square.”
So he brought him into his house and gave feed to the donkeys. Then they washed their feet and ate and drank.
While they were enjoying themselves, some worthless men of the city surrounded the house and were pounding on the door, and they kept saying to the old man who owned the house: “Bring out the man who came into your house, so that we may have sex with him.”
At that the owner of the house went out and said to them: “No, my brothers, do not act wickedly. Please, this man is a guest in my house. Do not commit this disgraceful act.
Here are my virgin daughter and this man’s concubine. Let me bring them out, and you can humiliate them if you must. But you must not commit this disgraceful act toward this man.”
But the men refused to listen to him, so the man grabbed hold of his concubine and brought her outside to them. They raped her and abused her all night long until the morning. Then they sent her away at the break of dawn.
Early in the morning, the woman came and fell down at the entrance of the man’s house where her master was and lay there until it was light.
When her master got up in the morning and opened the doors of the house to go out to resume his journey, he saw the woman, his concubine, lying at the entrance of the house with her hands on the threshold.
So he said to her: “Get up; let us go.” But there was no answer. The man then put her on the donkey and set out for his home.
When he reached his house, he took the slaughtering knife and took hold of his concubine and cut her up limb by limb into 12 pieces and sent one piece into each territory of Israel.
All who saw it said: “Such a thing has never happened or been seen from the day that the Israelites went up out of the land of Egypt down to this day. Consider it, take counsel, and tell us what to do.”
Now Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite was a mighty warrior; he was the son of a prostitute, and Gilʹe·ad was Jephʹthah’s father.
But Gilʹe·ad’s wife also bore him sons. When the sons of his wife grew up, they drove Jephʹthah out and said to him: “You will have no inheritance in our father’s household, for you are the son of another woman.”
So Jephʹthah fled from his brothers and settled in the land of Tob. And idle men joined company with Jephʹthah, and they followed him.
After a while, the Amʹmon·ites fought against Israel.
And when the Amʹmon·ites fought against Israel, the elders of Gilʹe·ad immediately went to bring Jephʹthah back from the land of Tob.
They said to Jephʹthah: “Come and serve as our commander, so that we can fight against the Amʹmon·ites.”
But Jephʹthah said to the elders of Gilʹe·ad: “Was it not you who hated me so much that you drove me out of my father’s house? Why have you come to me now when you are in distress?”
At this the elders of Gilʹe·ad said to Jephʹthah: “That is why now we have returned to you. If you go with us and fight against the Amʹmon·ites, you will become our leader over all the inhabitants of Gilʹe·ad.”
So Jephʹthah said to the elders of Gilʹe·ad: “If you bring me back to fight against the Amʹmon·ites and Jehovah defeats them for me, then I will indeed become your leader!”
The elders of Gilʹe·ad said to Jephʹthah: “Let Jehovah be the witness between us if we do not do as you say.”
So Jephʹthah went with the elders of Gilʹe·ad, and the people made him their leader and commander. And Jephʹthah repeated all his words before Jehovah in Mizʹpah.
Jephʹthah then sent messengers to the king of the Amʹmon·ites, saying: “What do you have against me that you have come to attack my land?”
So the king of the Amʹmon·ites said to the messengers of Jephʹthah: “It is because Israel took my land when they came up out of Egypt, from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok and as far as the Jordan. Now return it peaceably.”
But Jephʹthah sent messengers back to the king of the Amʹmon·ites
to say to him: “This is what Jephʹthah says: ‘Israel did not take the land of the Moʹab·ites and the land of the Amʹmon·ites,
for when they came up out of Egypt, Israel walked through the wilderness as far as the Red Sea and came to Kaʹdesh.
Then Israel sent messengers to the king of Eʹdom, saying: “Please let us pass through your land,” but the king of Eʹdom did not listen. Also to the king of Moʹab they sent word, but he did not consent. So Israel kept dwelling in Kaʹdesh.
When they walked through the wilderness, they bypassed the land of Eʹdom and the land of Moʹab. They traveled east of the land of Moʹab and camped in the region of the Arʹnon; they did not come within the boundary of Moʹab, for the Arʹnon was the boundary of Moʹab.
“‘After that Israel sent messengers to Siʹhon king of the Amʹor·ites, king of Heshʹbon, and Israel said to him: “Please let us pass through your land to our own place.”
But Siʹhon did not trust Israel to cross through his territory, so Siʹhon gathered all his people together and encamped in Jaʹhaz and fought against Israel.
At this Jehovah the God of Israel gave Siʹhon and all his people into Israel’s hand, so that they defeated them and Israel took possession of all the land of the Amʹor·ites, the inhabitants of that land.
Thus they took possession of all the territory of the Amʹor·ites from the Arʹnon to the Jabʹbok and from the wilderness to the Jordan.
“‘It was Jehovah the God of Israel who drove out the Amʹor·ites from before his people Israel, and now would you drive them out?
Do you not possess whatever your god Cheʹmosh gives you to possess? So everyone whom Jehovah our God has driven out from before us is the one we will drive out.
Now are you any better than Baʹlak the son of Zipʹpor, the king of Moʹab? Did he ever contend with Israel, or did he ever fight against them?
While Israel was dwelling in Heshʹbon and its dependent towns and in A·roʹer and its dependent towns and in all the cities that are by the banks of the Arʹnon for 300 years, why did you never try to take them back during that time?
I have not sinned against you, but you are wrong to attack me. Let Jehovah the Judge be judge today between the people of Israel and the people of Amʹmon.’”
But the king of the Amʹmon·ites would not listen to the message that Jephʹthah sent to him.
Jehovah’s spirit came upon Jephʹthah, and he passed through Gilʹe·ad and Ma·nasʹseh to go to Mizʹpeh of Gilʹe·ad, and from Mizʹpeh of Gilʹe·ad he continued on to the Amʹmon·ites.
Then Jephʹthah made a vow to Jehovah and said: “If you give the Amʹmon·ites into my hand,
then whoever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the Amʹmon·ites will become Jehovah’s, and I will offer that one up as a burnt offering.”
So Jephʹthah went to fight against the Amʹmon·ites, and Jehovah gave them into his hand.
He struck them down with a very great slaughter from A·roʹer all the way to Minʹnith—20 cities—and as far as Aʹbel-kerʹa·mim. Thus the Amʹmon·ites were subdued before the Israelites.
Finally Jephʹthah came to his home in Mizʹpah, and look! his daughter was coming out to meet him, playing the tambourine and dancing! Now she was his one and only child. Besides her, he had neither son nor daughter.
When he saw her, he ripped his garments and said: “Oh no, my daughter! You have broken my heart, for you have become the one I have banished. Now I have opened my mouth to Jehovah, and I am unable to turn back.”
But she said to him: “My father, if you have opened your mouth to Jehovah, do to me as you have promised, since Jehovah has executed vengeance for you upon your enemies, the Amʹmon·ites.”
She then said to her father: “Let this be done for me: Let me be alone for two months, and let me go away into the mountains, and let me weep over my virginity with my female companions.”
At this he said: “Go!” So he sent her away for two months, and she went to the mountains with her companions to weep over her virginity.
At the end of two months, she returned to her father, after which he carried out the vow he had made regarding her. She never had relations with a man. And it became a custom in Israel:
From year to year, the young women of Israel would go to give commendation to the daughter of Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite four days in the year.
After the death of Joshua, the Israelites inquired of Jehovah: “Who of us will go up first to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites?”
Jehovah replied: “Judah will go up. Look! I am giving the land into his hand.”
Then Judah said to his brother Simʹe·on: “Come up with me into my assigned territory to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites. Then I will go with you into your assigned territory.” So Simʹe·on went with him.
When Judah went up, Jehovah gave the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites into their hands, and they defeated 10,000 men in Beʹzek.
They found A·doʹni-beʹzek in Beʹzek, and there they fought against him and defeated the Caʹnaan·ites and the Perʹiz·zites.
When A·doʹni-beʹzek fled, they chased him and caught him and cut off his thumbs and his big toes.
Then A·doʹni-beʹzek said: “There are 70 kings whose thumbs and big toes were cut off and who are picking up food under my table. Just as I have done, so God has repaid me.” After that they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.
Furthermore, the men of Judah fought against Jerusalem and captured it; they struck it with the sword and set the city on fire.
Afterward, the men of Judah went down to fight against the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the mountainous region and the Negʹeb and the She·pheʹlah.
So Judah marched against the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Hebʹron (the name of Hebʹron was previously Kirʹi·ath-arʹba), and they struck down Sheʹshai, A·hiʹman, and Talʹmai.
They marched from there against the inhabitants of Deʹbir. (The name of Deʹbir was previously Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher.)
Then Caʹleb said: “To the man who strikes Kirʹi·ath-seʹpher and captures it, I will give my daughter Achʹsah as a wife.”
And Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, Caʹleb’s younger brother, captured it. So he gave him his daughter Achʹsah as a wife.
While she was going home, she urged him to ask her father for a field. Then she dismounted from her donkey. Caʹleb asked her: “What do you want?”
She said to him: “Please grant me a blessing, for you have given me a piece of land in the south; give me also Gulʹloth-maʹim.” So Caʹleb gave her Upper Gulʹloth and Lower Gulʹloth.
And the descendants of the Kenʹite, Moses’ father-in-law, came up from the city of palm trees with the people of Judah to the wilderness of Judah south of Aʹrad. They went there and settled among the people.
But Judah marched on with his brother Simʹe·on, and they attacked the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting Zeʹphath and devoted it to destruction. So they named the city Horʹmah.
Then Judah captured Gazʹa and its territory, Ashʹke·lon and its territory, and Ekʹron and its territory.
Jehovah was with Judah, and they took possession of the mountainous region, but they could not drive out the inhabitants of the plain, because they had war chariots with iron scythes.
They gave Hebʹron to Caʹleb, just as Moses had promised, and he drove out from there the three sons of Aʹnak.
But the Benʹja·min·ites did not drive out the Jebʹu·sites inhabiting Jerusalem, so the Jebʹu·sites continue dwelling with the Benʹja·min·ites in Jerusalem down to this day.
Meantime, the house of Joseph went up against Bethʹel, and Jehovah was with them.
The house of Joseph was spying on Bethʹel (incidentally, the name of the city was previously Luz),
and the spies saw a man going out of the city. So they said to him: “Show us, please, the way into the city, and we will treat you kindly.”
So the man showed them the way into the city, and they struck the city with the sword, but they let the man and all his family go free.
The man went to the land of the Hitʹtites and built a city and named it Luz, which is its name to this day.
Ma·nasʹseh did not take possession of Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Dor and its dependent towns, the inhabitants of Ibʹle·am and its dependent towns, and the inhabitants of Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns. The Caʹnaan·ites persisted in dwelling in this land.
When Israel grew stronger, they subjected the Caʹnaan·ites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out completely.
Nor did Eʹphra·im drive out the Caʹnaan·ites who were dwelling in Geʹzer. The Caʹnaan·ites continued to dwell among them in Geʹzer.
Zebʹu·lun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitʹron and the inhabitants of Naʹha·lol. The Caʹnaan·ites continued to dwell among them and were subjected to forced labor.
Ashʹer did not drive out the inhabitants of Acʹco and the inhabitants of Siʹdon, Ahʹlab, Achʹzib, Helʹbah, Aʹphik, and Reʹhob.
So the Ashʹer·ites continued to dwell among the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the land, because they did not drive them out.
Naphʹta·li did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-sheʹmesh and the inhabitants of Beth-aʹnath, but they continued to dwell among the Caʹnaan·ites inhabiting the land. The inhabitants of Beth-sheʹmesh and Beth-aʹnath became forced laborers for them.
The Amʹor·ites confined the Danʹites to the mountainous region, for they would not let them come down into the plain.
So the Amʹor·ites persisted in dwelling in Mount Heʹres, Aiʹja·lon, and Sha·alʹbim. But when the power of the house of Joseph increased, they were forced into hard labor.
The territory of the Amʹor·ites was from the ascent of A·krabʹbim, from Seʹla upward.
Then Jer·ub·baʹal, that is, Gidʹe·on, and all the people with him rose early and encamped at the Spring of Haʹrod, while the camp of Midʹi·an was north of him at the hill of Moʹreh in the valley plain.
Jehovah now said to Gidʹe·on: “There are too many people with you for me to give Midʹi·an into their hand. Otherwise, Israel might brag about itself against me and say, ‘My own hand saved me.’
Now, please, announce in the presence of the people: ‘Whoever is afraid and trembling, let him return home.’” So Gidʹe·on put them to the test. With that, 22,000 of the people returned home, and 10,000 remained.
Still Jehovah said to Gidʹe·on: “There are yet too many people. Have them go down to the water so that I may test them for you there. When I say to you, ‘This one will go with you,’ he will go with you, but when I say to you, ‘This one will not go along with you,’ he will not go along.”
So he took the people down to the water. Then Jehovah said to Gidʹe·on: “Separate everyone who laps up the water with his tongue just as a dog laps, from those who bend down on their knees to drink.”
The number of those lapping up the water, putting their hand to their mouth, was 300 men. The rest of the people bent down on their knees to drink.
Jehovah now said to Gidʹe·on: “I will save you with the 300 men who lapped the water, and I will give Midʹi·an into your hand. But let all the other people go back home.”
So after they took the provisions and the horns from the people, he sent all the other men of Israel back home, and he kept only the 300 men. The camp of Midʹi·an was below him in the valley plain.
During that night, Jehovah said to him: “Get up, attack the camp, for I have given it into your hand.
But if you are afraid to attack, go down to the camp with Puʹrah your attendant.
Listen to what they say, and afterward you will have the courage to attack the camp.” At that he and Puʹrah his attendant went down to the edge of the encamped army.
Now Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and all the Easterners covered the valley plain like a swarm of locusts, and their camels were without number, as many as the grains of sand on the seashore.
Gidʹe·on now came, and there was a man relating a dream to his companion, and he said: “This is the dream I had. There was a round loaf of barley bread rolling into the camp of Midʹi·an. It came to a tent and struck it so hard that it collapsed. Yes, it turned the tent upside down, and the tent fell flat.”
At this his companion said: “This can only be the sword of Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash, a man of Israel. God has given Midʹi·an and all the camp into his hand.”
As soon as Gidʹe·on heard him relate the dream and its interpretation, he bowed down to worship. After that he returned to the camp of Israel and said: “Get up, for Jehovah has given the camp of Midʹi·an into your hand.”
Then he divided the 300 men into three bands and gave all of them horns and large empty jars with torches inside the jars.
Then he said to them: “Watch me and do exactly what I do. When I come to the edge of the camp, you should do just as I do.
When I blow the horn, I and all who are with me, you also must blow the horns all around the camp and shout, ‘For Jehovah and for Gidʹe·on!’”
Gidʹe·on and the 100 men who were with him came to the edge of the camp at the start of the middle night watch, just after the sentries were posted. They blew the horns and smashed the large water jars that were in their hands.
So the three bands blew the horns and shattered the large jars. They held the torches in their left hands and blew the horns in their right hands and they called out: “The sword of Jehovah and of Gidʹe·on!”
All the while each man stood in his place all around the camp, and the whole army ran away, shouting as they fled.
The 300 continued to blow the horns, and Jehovah turned the sword of each one against the other throughout the camp; and the army fled as far as Beth-shitʹtah, on to Zerʹe·rah, as far as the outskirts of Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah by Tabʹbath.
And the men of Israel were called together from Naphʹta·li, Ashʹer, and all of Ma·nasʹseh, and they chased after Midʹi·an.
Gidʹe·on sent messengers into all the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, saying: “Go down to attack Midʹi·an, and capture the access to the waters as far as Beth-barʹah and the Jordan.” So all the men of Eʹphra·im were gathered together, and they captured the waters as far as Beth-barʹah and the Jordan.
They also captured the two princes of Midʹi·an, Oʹreb and Zeʹeb; they killed Oʹreb on the rock of Oʹreb, and they killed Zeʹeb at the winepress of Zeʹeb. They kept on pursuing Midʹi·an, and they brought the heads of Oʹreb and Zeʹeb to Gidʹe·on in the region of the Jordan.
Again the Israelites did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and Jehovah gave them into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines for 40 years.
Meanwhile, there was a man of Zoʹrah of the family of the Danʹites, whose name was Ma·noʹah. His wife was barren and childless.
In time Jehovah’s angel appeared to the woman and said to her: “Look, you are barren and childless. But you will conceive and give birth to a son.
Now be careful not to drink wine or anything alcoholic, and do not eat anything unclean.
Look! You will conceive and give birth to a son, and no razor should touch his head, because the child will be a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth, and he will take the lead in saving Israel out of the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
Then the woman went and told her husband: “A man of the true God came to me, and his appearance was like an angel of the true God, very awe-inspiring. I did not ask him where he was from, nor did he tell me his name.
But he said to me, ‘Look! You will conceive and give birth to a son. Now do not drink wine or anything alcoholic, and do not eat anything unclean, because the child will be a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth until the day of his death.’”
Ma·noʹah pleaded with Jehovah and said: “Pardon me, Jehovah. Please let the man of the true God whom you just sent come again to instruct us about what we should do with the child who will be born.”
So the true God listened to Ma·noʹah, and the angel of the true God came again to the woman while she was sitting in the field; her husband Ma·noʹah was not with her.
The woman quickly ran and told her husband: “Look! The man who came to me the other day has appeared to me.”
Then Ma·noʹah got up and went with his wife. He came to the man and said to him: “Are you the man who spoke to my wife?” He said: “I am.”
Then Ma·noʹah said: “May your words come true! What will be the child’s manner of life, and what will be his work?”
So Jehovah’s angel said to Ma·noʹah: “Your wife should keep herself from everything that I mentioned to her.
She should not eat anything that the grapevine produces, she should not drink wine or anything alcoholic, and she should not eat anything unclean. Everything that I commanded her, let her observe.”
Ma·noʹah now said to Jehovah’s angel: “Please stay, and let us prepare a young goat for you.”
But Jehovah’s angel said to Ma·noʹah: “If I stay, I will not eat your food; but if you wish to present a burnt offering to Jehovah, you may offer it up.” Ma·noʹah did not know that he was Jehovah’s angel.
Then Ma·noʹah said to Jehovah’s angel: “What is your name, so that we may honor you when your word comes true?”
However, Jehovah’s angel said to him: “Why are you asking about my name, seeing that it is a wonderful one?”
Then Ma·noʹah took the young goat and the grain offering and offered them on the rock to Jehovah. And He was doing something amazing while Ma·noʹah and his wife were looking on.
As the flame ascended from the altar heavenward, Jehovah’s angel ascended in the flame from the altar while Ma·noʹah and his wife were looking on. At once they fell with their faces to the ground.
Jehovah’s angel did not appear again to Ma·noʹah and his wife. Then Ma·noʹah realized that he was Jehovah’s angel.
Ma·noʹah then said to his wife: “We are sure to die, because it is God whom we have seen.”
But his wife said to him: “If Jehovah wanted to put us to death, he would not have accepted a burnt offering and a grain offering from our hand, he would not have shown us all these things, and he would not have told us any of these things.”
The woman later gave birth to a son and named him Samson; and as the boy grew, Jehovah continued to bless him.
In time Jehovah’s spirit started to impel him in Maʹha·neh-dan, between Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol.
Now the men of Israel had sworn this oath in Mizʹpah: “Not one of us will give his daughter to a man from Benjamin as a wife.”
Consequently, the people came to Bethʹel and sat there before the true God until evening, crying out and weeping bitterly.
And they were saying: “Why, O Jehovah the God of Israel, has this happened in Israel? Why should one tribe be missing today from Israel?”
And the next day the people got up early and built an altar there to offer up burnt offerings and communion offerings.
Then the people of Israel said: “Who of all the tribes of Israel did not come up to assemble before Jehovah?” for they had taken a great oath that anyone who did not come up to Jehovah at Mizʹpah would be put to death without fail.
So the people of Israel felt sorrow over what had happened to Benjamin their brother. They said: “Today one tribe has been chopped off from Israel.
What should we do to provide wives for those who are left, now that we have sworn by Jehovah not to give them any of our daughters as wives?”
They asked: “Who among the tribes of Israel did not come up to Jehovah at Mizʹpah?” It so happened that no one had come from Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad into the camp where the congregation was.
When the people were counted, they saw that none of the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad were there.
So the assembly sent there 12,000 of the mightiest men. They commanded them: “Go and strike down the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad with the sword, even the women and the children.
This is what you should do: Every male, as well as every woman who has had sexual relations with a male, you should devote to destruction.”
Among the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, they found 400 girls who were virgins, who had never had sexual relations with a man. So they brought them to the camp at Shiʹloh, which is in the land of Caʹnaan.
Then all the assembly sent a message to the Benʹja·min·ites on the crag of Rimʹmon and offered them peace.
So Benjamin came back at that time. They gave them the women whom they had kept alive from the women of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, but they did not find enough for them.
And the people felt sorrow over what had happened to Benjamin because Jehovah had made a division among the tribes of Israel.
The elders of the assembly said: “What should we do to provide wives for the remaining men, since all the women were annihilated out of Benjamin?”
They replied: “There should be an inheritance for the survivors of Benjamin, so that a tribe may not be wiped out of Israel.
But we are not allowed to give them wives from our daughters, because the people of Israel have sworn: ‘Cursed is the one who gives a wife to Benjamin.’”
Then they said: “Look! There is a festival of Jehovah from year to year in Shiʹloh, which is north of Bethʹel and east of the highway that goes up from Bethʹel to Sheʹchem and south of Le·boʹnah.”
So they commanded the men of Benjamin: “Go and set an ambush in the vineyards.
And when you see the young women of Shiʹloh come out to join in their circle dances, each of you should come out from the vineyards and seize a wife from the young women of Shiʹloh, and you should return to the land of Benjamin.
And should their fathers or their brothers come to make a complaint against us, we will then tell them, ‘Show us favor for their sakes, because we could not provide each one a wife by war and you could not give a wife to them without becoming guilty.’”
So the men of Benjamin did just that, and they each carried off a wife from the women who were dancing. After that they went back to their inheritance and rebuilt their cities and settled in them.
And the Israelites dispersed from there at that time, each one to his tribe and his family, and they departed from there, each one to his inheritance.
In those days there was no king in Israel. Each one was doing what was right in his own eyes.
These are the nations that Jehovah allowed to remain so that they could test all those of Israel who had not experienced any of the wars of Caʹnaan
(this was so that succeeding generations of Israelites would experience war, those who had not experienced such things before):
the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines, and all the Caʹnaan·ites, the Si·doʹni·ans, and the Hiʹvites inhabiting Mount Lebʹa·non from Mount Baʹal-herʹmon as far as Leʹbo-haʹmath.
They served as a means of testing Israel to determine whether Israel would obey Jehovah’s commandments that he had given their fathers through Moses.
So the Israelites lived among the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites.
They would take their daughters as wives, and their own daughters they gave to their sons, and they began serving their gods.
So the Israelites did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and they forgot Jehovah their God and were serving the Baʹals and the sacred poles.
At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim the king of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a. The Israelites served Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim for eight years.
When the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, Jehovah raised up a savior to rescue the Israelites, Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz, the younger brother of Caʹleb.
The spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he became the judge of Israel. When he went out to battle, Jehovah gave Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim the king of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a into his hand so that he prevailed over Cuʹshan-rish·a·thaʹim.
After that the land had rest for 40 years. Then Othʹni·el the son of Keʹnaz died.
And once again the Israelites began doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. So Jehovah let Egʹlon the king of Moʹab prevail over Israel, because they did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.
Furthermore, he brought against them the Amʹmon·ites and the A·malʹek·ites. They attacked Israel and captured the city of palm trees.
The Israelites served Egʹlon the king of Moʹab for 18 years.
Then the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, so Jehovah raised up for them a savior, Eʹhud the son of Geʹra, a Benʹja·min·ite who was left-handed. In time the Israelites sent tribute through him to Egʹlon the king of Moʹab.
Meanwhile, Eʹhud made for himself a two-edged sword, a cubit long, and he strapped it underneath his garment on his right thigh.
He then presented the tribute to Egʹlon the king of Moʹab. Now Egʹlon was a very fat man.
When Eʹhud finished presenting the tribute, he sent away the people who had carried the tribute.
But after reaching the carved images at Gilʹgal, he himself went back and said: “I have a secret message for you, O king.” So the king said: “Silence!” With that all his attendants left him.
So Eʹhud came to him as he was sitting alone in his cool roof chamber. Then Eʹhud said: “I have a message from God for you.” So he rose up from his throne.
Then Eʹhud drew the sword from his right thigh with his left hand and plunged it into his belly.
The handle went in after the blade, and the fat closed in over the blade, for he did not draw the sword out of his belly, and the fecal matter came out.
Eʹhud went out through the porch, closing the doors of the roof chamber behind him and locking them.
After he left, the servants returned and saw that the doors of the roof chamber were locked. So they said: “He must be relieving himself in the cool interior room.”
They kept waiting until they were embarrassed, but when they saw that he was still not opening the doors of the roof chamber, they took the key and opened them and saw their lord fallen to the floor dead!
Eʹhud escaped while they were lingering, and he passed by the carved images and made it safely to Se·iʹrah.
When he arrived, he sounded the horn in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im; and the Israelites went down out of the mountainous region, with him at their head.
Then he said to them: “Follow me, because Jehovah has given your enemies, the Moʹab·ites, into your hand.” So they followed him and captured the fords of the Jordan against the Moʹab·ites, and they did not allow anyone to cross.
At that time they struck down about 10,000 Moʹab·ites, all strong and valiant men; not a single one escaped.
So Moʹab was subdued on that day under Israel’s hand; and the land had rest for 80 years.
After him was Shamʹgar the son of Aʹnath, who struck down 600 Phi·lisʹtine men with a cattle goad; he too saved Israel.
In time A·bimʹe·lech the son of Jer·ub·baʹal went to his mother’s brothers in Sheʹchem, and he said to them and to all the family of his grandfather:
“Please ask all the leaders of Sheʹchem, ‘Which is better for you, for all 70 sons of Jer·ub·baʹal to rule over you or for one man to rule over you? And remember that I am your own bone and flesh.’”
So his mother’s brothers said this in his behalf to all the leaders of Sheʹchem, and their hearts were inclined to follow A·bimʹe·lech, for they said: “He is our own brother.”
Then they gave him 70 pieces of silver from the house of Baʹal-beʹrith, and A·bimʹe·lech used it to hire idle and insolent men to accompany him.
After that he went to his father’s house at Ophʹrah and killed his brothers, the sons of Jer·ub·baʹal, 70 men, on one stone. The only survivor was Joʹtham, the youngest son of Jer·ub·baʹal, because he hid.
Then all the leaders of Sheʹchem and all Beth-milʹlo gathered together and made A·bimʹe·lech king, close by the big tree, by the pillar that was in Sheʹchem.
When they reported it to Joʹtham, he at once went and stood on the top of Mount Gerʹi·zim and called out in a loud voice to them: “Listen to me, you leaders of Sheʹchem, and then God will listen to you.
“Once there were trees that went to anoint a king over them. So they said to the olive tree, ‘Rule over us.’
But the olive tree said to them, ‘Must I give up my oil, which they use to glorify God and men, to go and wave over the other trees?’
Then the trees said to the fig tree, ‘Come and rule over us.’
But the fig tree said to them, ‘Must I give up my sweetness and my good fruitage to go and wave over the other trees?’
Next the trees said to the vine, ‘Come and rule over us.’
The vine replied to them, ‘Must I give up my new wine that makes God and men rejoice to go and wave over the trees?’
Finally all the other trees said to the bramble, ‘Come and rule over us.’
At this the bramble said to the trees, ‘If you are really anointing me as king over you, come and seek refuge under my shadow. But if not, let fire come out of the bramble and consume the cedars of Lebʹa·non.’
“Now have you acted sincerely and honorably in making A·bimʹe·lech king, and have you shown goodness toward Jer·ub·baʹal and his household, and have you treated him as he deserves?
When my father fought for you, he risked his life to save you from Midʹi·an’s hand.
But today you have risen up against my father’s household and killed his sons, 70 men, on one stone. Then you made A·bimʹe·lech, the son of his slave girl, king over the leaders of Sheʹchem just because he is your brother.
Yes, if you are acting sincerely and honorably toward Jer·ub·baʹal and his household this day, rejoice over A·bimʹe·lech and let him also rejoice over you.
But if not, may fire come out of A·bimʹe·lech and consume the leaders of Sheʹchem and Beth-milʹlo, and may fire come out of the leaders of Sheʹchem and Beth-milʹlo and consume A·bimʹe·lech.”
Then Joʹtham fled and escaped to Beʹer, and he lived there because of his brother A·bimʹe·lech.
A·bimʹe·lech ruled over Israel for three years.
Then God let hostility develop between A·bimʹe·lech and the leaders of Sheʹchem, and they dealt treacherously with A·bimʹe·lech.
This was so that the violence done to the 70 sons of Jer·ub·baʹal might be avenged, so as to place responsibility for their blood on their brother A·bimʹe·lech for killing them and on the leaders of Sheʹchem for helping him to kill his brothers.
So the leaders of Sheʹchem set men to ambush him on the mountaintops, and they would rob everyone who passed by them on the road. In time it was reported to A·bimʹe·lech.
Then Gaʹal son of Eʹbed and his brothers crossed over into Sheʹchem, and the leaders of Sheʹchem put their trust in him.
They went out into the field and gathered the grapes of their vineyards, trod them out, and held a festival, after which they went into the house of their god and ate and drank and cursed A·bimʹe·lech.
Then Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed said: “Who is A·bimʹe·lech, and who is Sheʹchem that we should serve him? Is he not the son of Jer·ub·baʹal, and is not Zeʹbul his commissioner? Serve the men of Haʹmor, Sheʹchem’s father! But why should we serve him?
If only this people were under my command, I would depose A·bimʹe·lech.” Then he said to A·bimʹe·lech: “Increase your army and come out.”
When Zeʹbul the prince of the city heard the words of Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed, his anger blazed.
So he secretly sent messengers to A·bimʹe·lech, saying: “Look! Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed and his brothers are now in Sheʹchem, and here they are inciting the city against you.
Now come up by night, you and your men, and lie in wait in the field.
As soon as the sun rises in the morning, you should get up early and attack the city; and when he and his men come out against you, do whatever you can to defeat him.”
So A·bimʹe·lech and all the people with him rose up by night, and in four bands they lay in wait against Sheʹchem.
When Gaʹal the son of Eʹbed went out and stood at the entrance of the city gate, A·bimʹe·lech and the people with him rose up from the ambush.
When Gaʹal saw the people, he said to Zeʹbul: “Look! There are people coming down from the mountaintops.” But Zeʹbul said to him: “You are seeing the shadows of the mountains as if they were men.”
Gaʹal later said: “Look! People are coming down from the center of the land, and one band is coming by the way of the big tree of Me·onʹe·nim.”
Zeʹbul replied to him: “Where now is your boast, ‘Who is A·bimʹe·lech that we should serve him?’ Are these not the people you rejected? Go out now and fight against them.”
So Gaʹal went out at the head of the leaders of Sheʹchem and fought against A·bimʹe·lech.
A·bimʹe·lech pursued him, and Gaʹal fled from him, and many fell slain as far as the entrance of the city gate.
And A·bimʹe·lech continued to dwell in A·ruʹmah, and Zeʹbul drove Gaʹal and his brothers out of Sheʹchem.
The next day the people went out into the field, and A·bimʹe·lech was told about it.
So he took the people and divided them into three bands and lay in wait in the field. When he saw the people going out of the city, he attacked them and struck them down.
A·bimʹe·lech and the bands with him charged forward and took a position at the entrance of the city gate, while two bands attacked all who were in the field, and they struck them down.
A·bimʹe·lech fought against the city all that day and captured it. He killed the people in it, and then he pulled the city down and sowed it with salt.
When all the leaders of the tower of Sheʹchem heard about this, they immediately went to the vault of the house of El-beʹrith.
As soon as it was reported to A·bimʹe·lech that all the leaders of the tower of Sheʹchem had gathered together,
A·bimʹe·lech and all the men with him went up Mount Zalʹmon. A·bimʹe·lech took an ax in his hand and cut off a tree branch and lifted it on his shoulder and said to the people with him: “What you saw me do, hurry and do the same!”
So all the people also cut off branches and followed A·bimʹe·lech. Then they put the branches against the vault and set the vault on fire. So all the people of the tower of Sheʹchem also died, about 1,000 men and women.
A·bimʹe·lech then went to Theʹbez; he camped against Theʹbez and captured it.
There was a strong tower in the middle of the city, and all the men and women and all the city leaders fled there. They shut themselves in and climbed onto the roof of the tower.
A·bimʹe·lech made his way to the tower and attacked it. He approached the entrance of the tower to set it on fire.
Then one of the women dropped an upper millstone on A·bimʹe·lech’s head and crushed his skull.
He quickly called the attendant bearing his weapons and said to him: “Draw your sword and put me to death, so that they may not say about me, ‘A woman killed him.’” So his attendant ran him through, and he died.
When the men of Israel saw that A·bimʹe·lech was dead, they all went back home.
Thus God repaid A·bimʹe·lech for the evil that he had done to his father by killing his 70 brothers.
God also made all the evil of the men of Sheʹchem come back on their own heads. So the curse of Joʹtham the son of Jer·ub·baʹal came upon them.
Then Jehovah’s angel went up from Gilʹgal to Boʹchim and said: “I brought you up out of Egypt into the land about which I swore to your forefathers. Furthermore, I said, ‘I will never break my covenant with you.
For your part, you must not make a covenant with the inhabitants of this land and you should pull down their altars.’ But you have not obeyed my voice. Why have you done this?
That is why I also said, ‘I will not drive them away from before you, and they will ensnare you, and their gods will lure you away.’”
When Jehovah’s angel spoke these words to all the Israelites, the people began to weep loudly.
So they named that place Boʹchim, and they sacrificed there to Jehovah.
When Joshua sent the people away, each of the Israelites went to his inheritance to take possession of the land.
The people continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and who had seen all of Jehovah’s great deeds in behalf of Israel.
Then Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of 110.
So they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timʹnath-heʹres, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, north of Mount Gaʹash.
All that generation were gathered to their ancestors, and another generation arose after them that did not know Jehovah or what he had done for Israel.
So the Israelites did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and served the Baʹals.
Thus they abandoned Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt. And they followed other gods, the gods of the peoples who were all around them, and they bowed down to them and offended Jehovah.
They abandoned Jehovah and served Baʹal and the Ashʹto·reth images.
At this Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, so he handed them over to plunderers who pillaged them. He sold them into the hand of the enemies around them, and they were no longer able to hold their own against their enemies.
Wherever they went, the hand of Jehovah was against them, bringing disaster on them, just as Jehovah had said and just as Jehovah had sworn to them, and they were in great distress.
So Jehovah would raise up judges who would save them from the hand of their plunderers.
But they refused to listen even to the judges and would prostitute themselves to other gods and bow down to them. They quickly turned aside from the way in which their forefathers had walked, those who had obeyed the commandments of Jehovah. They failed to do that.
Whenever Jehovah did raise up judges for them, Jehovah would be with the judge and save them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for Jehovah was moved to pity over their groaning caused by those who oppressed them and those who were treating them abusively.
But when the judge died, they would again act more corruptly than their fathers by following other gods, serving them and bowing down to them. They did not abandon their practices and their stubborn behavior.
Finally Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he said: “Because this nation has violated my covenant that I commanded their forefathers and they have disobeyed me,
I for my part will not drive out from before them even one of the nations that Joshua left behind when he died.
This is to test whether Israel will keep Jehovah’s way by walking in it as their fathers did.”
So Jehovah allowed these nations to remain. He did not drive them out quickly, and he did not give them into Joshua’s hand.
After A·bimʹe·lech, Toʹla the son of Puʹah, the son of Doʹdo, a man of Isʹsa·char, rose up to save Israel. He lived in Shaʹmir in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im.
He judged Israel for 23 years. Then he died and was buried in Shaʹmir.
After him Jaʹir the Gilʹe·ad·ite rose up and judged Israel for 22 years.
He had 30 sons who rode on 30 donkeys, and they had 30 cities, which to this day are called Havʹvoth-jaʹir; they are in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
After that Jaʹir died and was buried in Kaʹmon.
Again the Israelites did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and they began to serve the Baʹals, the Ashʹto·reth images, the gods of Aʹram, the gods of Siʹdon, the gods of Moʹab, the gods of the Amʹmon·ites, and the gods of the Phi·lisʹtines. They abandoned Jehovah and did not serve him.
Then Jehovah’s anger blazed against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines and the Amʹmon·ites.
So they crushed and greatly oppressed the Israelites in that year—for 18 years they oppressed all the Israelites on the side of the Jordan that had been the land of the Amʹor·ites in Gilʹe·ad.
The Amʹmon·ites would also cross the Jordan to fight against Judah and Benjamin and the house of Eʹphra·im; and Israel was greatly distressed.
Then the Israelites called to Jehovah for help, saying: “We have sinned against you, for we abandoned our God and served the Baʹals.”
But Jehovah said to the Israelites: “Did I not save you from Egypt and from the Amʹor·ites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines,
the Si·doʹni·ans, Amʹa·lek, and Midʹi·an when they oppressed you? When you cried out to me, I saved you out of their hand.
But you abandoned me and served other gods. That is why I will not save you again.
Go to the gods whom you have chosen and call for help. Let them save you in your time of distress.”
But the Israelites said to Jehovah: “We have sinned. Do to us whatever is good in your eyes. Only save us, please, this day.”
And they removed the foreign gods from their midst and served Jehovah, so that he could no longer tolerate Israel’s suffering.
In time the Amʹmon·ites were called together, and they pitched camp in Gilʹe·ad. So the Israelites gathered together and pitched camp in Mizʹpah.
The people and the princes of Gilʹe·ad said to one another: “Who will take the lead in fighting against the Amʹmon·ites? Let him become the chief over all the inhabitants of Gilʹe·ad.”
One time Samson went to Gazʹa and saw a prostitute there, and he went in to her.
The Gazʹites were told: “Samson has come here.” So they surrounded him and lay in ambush for him all night long in the city gate. They stayed quiet the whole night, saying to themselves: “When daylight comes, we will kill him.”
However, Samson kept lying there until midnight. Then he got up at midnight and grabbed the doors of the city gate and the two side posts and pulled them out along with the bar. He put them on his shoulders and carried them up to the top of the mountain that faces Hebʹron.
After that he fell in love with a woman in the Valley of Soʹrek whose name was De·liʹlah.
So the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines approached her and said: “Trick him and find out what gives him such great strength and how we can overpower him and tie him and subdue him. For this we will each give you 1,100 silver pieces.”
De·liʹlah later said to Samson: “Please tell me where your great power comes from and what can be used to tie you and subdue you.”
Samson said to her: “If they tie me with seven fresh bowstrings that have not been dried out, I will grow as weak as an ordinary man.”
So the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines brought up to her seven fresh bowstrings that had not been dried out, and she tied him with them.
Now they set an ambush in the inner room, and she called out to him: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” At that he tore apart the bowstrings, just as easily as a thread of flax comes apart when it touches fire. The secret of his power did not become known.
Then De·liʹlah said to Samson: “Look! You have fooled me and told me lies. Now tell me, please, what can be used to tie you.”
So he said to her: “If they tie me up with new ropes that have not been used for work, I will grow as weak as an ordinary man.”
So De·liʹlah took new ropes and tied him with them and called out: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” (All the while the ambush was set in the inner room.) At that he tore them off his arms like threads.
After that De·liʹlah said to Samson: “Up until now you have fooled me and told me lies. Tell me what can be used to tie you.” Then he said to her: “If you weave the seven braids of my head with the warp thread.”
So she fixed them with a pin and called out to him: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” So he woke up from his sleep and pulled out the loom pin and the warp thread.
She now said to him: “How can you say, ‘I love you,’ when your heart is not with me? These three times you have fooled me and have not told me the source of your great power.”
Because day after day she kept nagging him and pressuring him, he was weary to the point of dying.
So he finally opened his heart to her, saying: “A razor has never touched my head, because I am a Nazʹi·rite of God from birth. If I am shaved, my power will leave me and I will grow weak and become like all other men.”
When De·liʹlah saw that he had opened his heart to her, she immediately summoned the Phi·lisʹtine lords, saying: “Come up this time, for he has opened his heart to me.” So the Phi·lisʹtine lords came up to her, bringing the money with them.
She made him fall asleep on her knees; then she called the man and had him shave off the seven braids of his head. After that she began to have control over him, for his power was leaving him.
Now she called out: “The Phi·lisʹtines are upon you, Samson!” He woke up from his sleep and said: “I will go out as at other times and shake myself free.” But he did not know that Jehovah had left him.
So the Phi·lisʹtines seized him and bored his eyes out. Then they brought him down to Gazʹa and bound him with two copper fetters, and he became a grinder of grain in the prison.
But the hair of his head started to grow back again after he had been shaved.
The Phi·lisʹtine lords gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to Daʹgon their god and to celebrate, for they were saying: “Our god has given Samson our enemy into our hand!”
When the people saw him, they praised their god and said: “Our god has given into our hand our enemy, the one who devastated our land and killed so many of us.”
Because their heart was cheerful, they said: “Call Samson to provide us some amusement.” So they called Samson out of the prison to entertain them; they made him stand between the pillars.
Then Samson said to the boy holding him by the hand: “Let me feel the pillars that support the house, so that I can lean against them.”
(Incidentally, the house was full of men and women. All the Phi·lisʹtine lords were there, and on the roof there were about 3,000 men and women who were looking on while Samson provided amusement.)
Samson now called out to Jehovah: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, remember me, please, and strengthen me, please, just this once, O God, and let me take revenge on the Phi·lisʹtines for one of my two eyes.”
Then Samson braced himself against the two middle pillars that supported the house, and he leaned on them with his right hand on one and his left hand on the other.
Samson called out: “Let me die with the Phi·lisʹtines!” Then he pushed with all his might, and the house fell on the lords and all the people in it. So he killed more at his death than he had killed during his life.
Later his brothers and all his father’s family came down to take him back. They brought him up and buried him between Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol in the tomb of Ma·noʹah his father. He had judged Israel for 20 years.
On that day Debʹo·rah along with Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am sang this song:
“Because of the unbound hair in Israel,Because of the people’s volunteering,Praise Jehovah!
Listen, you kings! Give ear, you rulers! To Jehovah I will sing. I will sing praises to Jehovah, Israel’s God.
Jehovah, when you went out from Seʹir,When you marched out of the territory of Eʹdom,The earth shook, and the heavens poured,The clouds poured down water.
Mountains melted before the face of Jehovah,Even Siʹnai before the face of Jehovah, Israel’s God.
In the days of Shamʹgar the son of Aʹnath,In the days of Jaʹel, the roads were deserted;Travelers kept to the back roads.
The villagers in Israel were no more;They were no more until I, Debʹo·rah, rose up,Until I arose as a mother in Israel.
They chose new gods;Then there was war in the gates. A shield could not be seen, nor a lance,Among 40,000 in Israel.
My heart is with the commanders of Israel,Who went as volunteers with the people. Praise Jehovah!
You riders on tawny donkeys,You who sit on fine carpets,And you who walk on the road,Consider!
The voices of the water distributors were heard at the watering places;There they were recounting the righteous acts of Jehovah,The righteous acts of his villagers in Israel. Then Jehovah’s people went down to the gates.
Awake, awake, O Debʹo·rah! Awake, awake, sing a song! Rise up, Baʹrak! Lead your captives away, you son of A·binʹo·am!
Then those who were left came down to the nobles;Jehovah’s people came down to me against the mighty.
Out of Eʹphra·im was their origin, those in the valley;They are following you, O Benjamin, among your peoples. From Maʹchir the commanders went down,And from Zebʹu·lun those who bear the recruiter’s staff.
The princes in Isʹsa·char were with Debʹo·rah,As was Isʹsa·char, so was Baʹrak. Into the valley plain he was sent on foot. Among the divisions of Reuʹben there was intense heart-searching.
Why did you sit down between the two saddlebags,Listening to them playing their pipes for the flocks? For the divisions of Reuʹben, there was intense heart-searching.
Gilʹe·ad remained beyond the Jordan;And Dan, why did he stay with the ships? Ashʹer sat idle at the seashore,And by his harbors he remained.
Zebʹu·lun was a people who risked their lives to the point of death;Naphʹta·li also, on the open heights.
Kings came, they fought;The kings of Caʹnaan then foughtIn Taʹa·nach, by the waters of Me·gidʹdo. No spoil of silver did they take.
From heaven the stars fought;From their orbits they fought against Sisʹe·ra.
The torrent of Kiʹshon washed them away,The ancient torrent, the torrent of Kiʹshon. You trampled down the powerful, O my soul.
Then the hooves of horses poundedAs his stallions galloped furiously.
‘Curse Meʹroz,’ said the angel of Jehovah,‘Yes, curse its inhabitants,For they did not come to the assistance of Jehovah,To the assistance of Jehovah with the mighty ones.’
Most blessed of women is JaʹelThe wife of Heʹber the Kenʹite;She is most blessed of women living in tents.
He asked for water; she gave him milk. In a majestic banquet bowl she offered curdled milk.
With her hand she reached for the tent pin,Her right hand for the workman’s mallet. And she hammered Sisʹe·ra, she crushed his head,And she smashed and pierced his temples.
Between her feet he collapsed; he fell and lay still;Between her feet he collapsed and fell;Where he collapsed, there he fell defeated.
From the window a woman looked out,Sisʹe·ra’s mother peered out from the lattice,‘Why is his chariot delayed in coming? Why are the hoofbeats of his chariots so late?’
The wisest of her noble ladies would answer her;Yes, she too would repeat to herself,
‘They must be dividing the spoil they found,A girl, two girls, to every warrior,Spoil of dyed cloth for Sisʹe·ra, spoil of dyed cloth,An embroidered garment, dyed cloth, two embroidered garmentsFor the necks of the plunderers.’
So let all your enemies perish, O Jehovah,But let those who love you be like the sun rising in its glory.” And the land had rest for 40 years.
Then Samson went down to Timʹnah, and in Timʹnah he saw a Phi·lisʹtine woman.
So he went up and told his father and mother: “In Timʹnah a Phi·lisʹtine woman caught my eye, and I want you to get her for me as a wife.”
But his father and mother said to him: “Can you not find a woman among your relatives and among all our people? Must you go and take a wife from among the uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtines?” But Samson said to his father: “Get her for me, because she is the right one for me.”
His father and mother did not realize that this was from Jehovah, for He was looking for an opportunity against the Phi·lisʹtines, as the Phi·lisʹtines were ruling over Israel at that time.
So Samson went down with his father and mother to Timʹnah. When he reached the vineyards of Timʹnah, why look! a lion came roaring at him.
Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and he tore it in two, just as someone tears a young goat in two with his bare hands. But he did not tell his father or mother what he had done.
Then he went down and spoke to the woman, and she was still the right one in Samson’s eyes.
Later when he was going back to take her home, he turned aside to look at the dead body of the lion, and there in the lion’s carcass was a swarm of bees and honey.
So he scraped the honey out into his hands and ate it as he walked along. When he rejoined his father and mother, he gave them some to eat. But he did not tell them that he had scraped the honey out of the carcass of a lion.
His father went down to the woman, and Samson held a banquet there, for that was what the young men used to do.
When they saw him, they brought 30 groomsmen to accompany him.
Then Samson said to them: “Please let me tell you a riddle. If during the seven days of the banquet you solve it and tell me the answer, I will have to give you 30 linen garments and 30 outfits of clothing.
But if you are unable to tell me the answer, you must give me 30 linen garments and 30 outfits of clothing.” They said: “Tell us your riddle; we want to hear it.”
So he said to them: “Out of the eater came something to eat,And out of the strong came something sweet.” They were unable to solve the riddle for three days.
On the fourth day, they said to Samson’s wife: “Trick your husband so that he will tell us the answer to the riddle. Otherwise, we will burn you and your father’s house with fire. Did you invite us here to take our possessions?”
So Samson’s wife wept over him and said: “You must hate me; you do not love me. You told a riddle to my people, but you have not told the answer to me.” At this he said to her: “Why, I have not told it even to my own father and mother! Should I tell it to you?”
But she kept weeping over him the rest of the seven-day banquet. He finally told her on the seventh day, because she had pressured him. Then she told her people the answer to the riddle.
So on the seventh day before the sun set, the men of the city said to him: “What is sweeter than honey,And what is stronger than a lion?” He replied to them: “If you had not plowed with my young cow,You would not have solved my riddle.”
Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and he went down to Ashʹke·lon and struck down 30 of their men and took their clothing and gave the outfits to those who had answered the riddle. He was furious as he went back up to his father’s house.
Samson’s wife was then given to one of his groomsmen who had accompanied him.
After a while, in the days of the wheat harvest, Samson went to visit his wife, bringing a young goat. He said: “I wish to go in to my wife in the bedroom.” But her father did not allow him to go in.
Her father said: “I thought, ‘You must surely hate her.’ So I gave her to your groomsman. Is not her younger sister more attractive than she is? Please, take her instead.”
However, Samson said to them: “This time I cannot be blamed by the Phi·lisʹtines for harming them.”
So Samson went and caught 300 foxes. Then he took torches, turned the foxes tail to tail, and put one torch between each pair of tails.
Then he set fire to the torches and sent the foxes out into the fields of standing grain of the Phi·lisʹtines. He set on fire everything from sheaf to standing grain, as well as the vineyards and the olive groves.
The Phi·lisʹtines asked: “Who did this?” They were told: “It was Samson, the son-in-law of the Timʹnite, because he took his wife and gave her to his groomsman.” At that the Phi·lisʹtines went up and burned her and her father with fire.
Then Samson said to them: “If this is how you act, I will not quit until I take revenge on you.”
Then he struck them down one after the other with a great slaughter, after which he went down and stayed in a cave of the crag Eʹtam.
Later the Phi·lisʹtines came up and camped in Judah and were tramping about in Leʹhi.
Then the men of Judah said: “Why have you come up against us?” to which they answered: “We have come up to capture Samson, to do to him just as he did to us.”
So 3,000 men of Judah went down to the cave of the crag Eʹtam and said to Samson: “Do you not know that the Phi·lisʹtines are ruling over us? So why have you done this to us?” He said to them: “As they did to me, so I did to them.”
But they said to him: “We have come to capture you and to hand you over to the Phi·lisʹtines.” Then Samson said: “Swear to me that you yourselves will not assault me.”
They said to him: “No, we will only tie you and hand you over to them, but we will not put you to death.” So they bound him with two new ropes and brought him up from the crag.
When he came to Leʹhi, the Phi·lisʹtines shouted triumphantly at meeting him. Then Jehovah’s spirit empowered him, and the ropes on his arms became like linen threads that were scorched with fire, and his fetters melted off his hands.
He now found a fresh jawbone of a male donkey; he reached out and grabbed it and struck down 1,000 men with it.
Then Samson said: “With the jawbone of a donkey—one heap, two heaps! With the jawbone of a donkey I struck down 1,000 men.”
When he finished speaking, he threw the jawbone away and called that place Raʹmath-leʹhi.
Then he became very thirsty, and he called on Jehovah and said: “It was you who gave this great salvation into the hand of your servant. But now am I to die of thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?”
So God split open a hollow that was in Leʹhi, and water flowed from it. When he drank, his spirit returned and he revived. That is why he named the place En-hak·korʹe, which is in Leʹhi to this day.
And he judged Israel in the days of the Phi·lisʹtines for 20 years.
But after Eʹhud died, the Israelites again did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.
So Jehovah sold them into the hand of Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan, who reigned in Haʹzor. The chief of his army was Sisʹe·ra, who lived in Ha·roʹsheth of the nations.
The Israelites cried out to Jehovah, because Jaʹbin had 900 war chariots with iron scythes, and he harshly oppressed the Israelites for 20 years.
Now Debʹo·rah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapʹpi·doth, was judging Israel at that time.
She used to sit under Debʹo·rah’s palm tree between Raʹmah and Bethʹel in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im; the Israelites would go up to her for judgment.
She sent for Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am out of Keʹdesh-naphʹta·li and said to him: “Has not Jehovah the God of Israel given the command? ‘Go and march to Mount Taʹbor, and take 10,000 men of Naphʹta·li and Zebʹu·lun with you.
I will bring to you Sisʹe·ra, the chief of Jaʹbin’s army, along with his war chariots and his troops to the stream of Kiʹshon, and I will give him into your hand.’”
At this Baʹrak said to her: “If you go with me, I will go, but if you do not go with me, I will not go.”
To this she said: “I will certainly go with you. However, the campaign you are going on will not bring you glory, for it will be into the hand of a woman that Jehovah will give Sisʹe·ra.” Then Debʹo·rah got up and went with Baʹrak to Keʹdesh.
Baʹrak summoned Zebʹu·lun and Naphʹta·li to Keʹdesh, and 10,000 men followed his steps. Debʹo·rah also went up with him.
Incidentally, Heʹber the Kenʹite had separated from the Kenʹites, the descendants of Hoʹbab, Moses’ father-in-law, and his tent was pitched near the big tree in Za·a·nanʹnim, which is at Keʹdesh.
They reported to Sisʹe·ra that Baʹrak the son of A·binʹo·am had gone up to Mount Taʹbor.
At once Sisʹe·ra assembled all his war chariots—900 chariots with iron scythes—and all the troops that were with him from Ha·roʹsheth of the nations to go to the stream of Kiʹshon.
Debʹo·rah now said to Baʹrak: “Rise up, for this is the day that Jehovah will give Sisʹe·ra into your hand. Is Jehovah not going out before you?” And Baʹrak descended from Mount Taʹbor with 10,000 men following him.
Then Jehovah threw Sisʹe·ra and all his war chariots and all the army into confusion before the sword of Baʹrak. Finally Sisʹe·ra got down from his chariot and fled on foot.
Baʹrak chased after the war chariots and the army as far as Ha·roʹsheth of the nations. So Sisʹe·ra’s whole army fell by the sword; not even one remained.
But Sisʹe·ra fled on foot to the tent of Jaʹel the wife of Heʹber the Kenʹite, for there was peace between Jaʹbin the king of Haʹzor and the house of Heʹber the Kenʹite.
Then Jaʹel came out to meet Sisʹe·ra and said to him: “Come in, my lord, come in here. Do not be afraid.” So he went into her tent, and she covered him with a blanket.
Then he said to her: “Give me, please, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty.” So she opened a skin bottle of milk and gave him a drink, after which she again covered him.
He told her: “Stand at the entrance of the tent, and if anybody comes and asks you, ‘Is there a man here?’ say, ‘No!’”
But Jaʹel the wife of Heʹber took a tent pin and a hammer in her hand. Then while he was fast asleep and exhausted, she stealthily approached him and drove the pin through his temples and beat it into the ground, and he died.
Baʹrak went there in pursuit of Sisʹe·ra, and Jaʹel now came out to meet him and said: “Come and I will show you the man you are looking for.” He went in with her and saw Sisʹe·ra lying dead, with the tent pin through his temples.
So on that day, God subdued Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan before the Israelites.
The hand of the Israelites came down harder and harder against Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan, until they destroyed Jaʹbin the king of Caʹnaan.
Consequently, all the Israelites came out from Dan down to Beʹer-sheʹba and from the land of Gilʹe·ad, and the entire assembly gathered unitedly before Jehovah at Mizʹpah.
So the chiefs of the people and all the tribes of Israel took their places in the congregation of God’s people—400,000 foot soldiers armed with swords.
The Benʹja·min·ites heard that the men of Israel had gone up to Mizʹpah. Then the men of Israel said: “Tell us, how did this terrible thing happen?”
At this the Levite man, the husband of the murdered woman, said in answer: “I came to Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin with my concubine to stay overnight.
And the inhabitants of Gibʹe·ah rose up against me and surrounded the house by night. They meant to kill me, but they raped my concubine instead, and she died.
So I took my concubine’s body and cut it up and sent the pieces into every part of Israel’s inheritance, because they had committed a shameful and disgraceful act in Israel.
Now all you people of Israel, give your advice and counsel here.”
Then all the people rose up in unison and said: “Not one of us will go to his tent or return to his house.
Now this is what we will do to Gibʹe·ah: We will go up against it by lot.
We will take 10 men out of 100 from all the tribes of Israel, and 100 out of 1,000 and 1,000 out of 10,000 to collect provisions for the army, so that they may take action against Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin, in view of the disgraceful act that they committed in Israel.”
Thus all the men of Israel were gathered against the city united as allies.
Then the tribes of Israel sent men to all the tribesmen of Benjamin, saying: “What is this terrible thing that has happened among you?
Now hand over the worthless men from Gibʹe·ah, so that we may put them to death and clear out what is bad from Israel.” But the Benʹja·min·ites refused to listen to their Israelite brothers.
Then the Benʹja·min·ites gathered together out of the cities to Gibʹe·ah to go out to battle against the men of Israel.
That day the Benʹja·min·ites mustered from their cities 26,000 men armed with swords, apart from the 700 chosen men of Gibʹe·ah.
In this army were 700 chosen men who were left-handed. Every one of these men could sling a stone to within a hairbreadth and would not miss.
The men of Israel apart from Benjamin mustered 400,000 men armed with swords, and each one was an experienced warrior.
They rose up and went up to Bethʹel to inquire of God. Then the people of Israel said: “Who of us should go up in the lead to the battle against the Benʹja·min·ites?” Jehovah replied: “Judah is to take the lead.”
After that the Israelites rose up in the morning and camped against Gibʹe·ah.
The men of Israel now went out to battle against Benjamin; they drew up in battle formation against them at Gibʹe·ah.
So the Benʹja·min·ites came out from Gibʹe·ah and struck down 22,000 men of Israel on that day.
However, the army of the men of Israel showed themselves courageous and again drew up in battle formation in the same place as on the first day.
Then the Israelites went up and wept before Jehovah until the evening and inquired of Jehovah: “Should we again go into battle against our brothers, the people of Benjamin?” To this Jehovah said: “Go up against them.”
So the Israelites drew near to the Benʹja·min·ites on the second day.
In turn Benjamin came out from Gibʹe·ah to meet them on the second day and struck down another 18,000 Israelites, all of them armed with swords.
At that all the men of Israel went up to Bethʹel. They wept and sat there before Jehovah, and they fasted on that day until the evening and offered up burnt offerings and communion offerings before Jehovah.
After that the men of Israel inquired of Jehovah, for the ark of the covenant of the true God was there in those days.
Now Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar, the son of Aaron, was ministering before it in those days. They asked: “Should we go out yet again to battle against our brothers, the men of Benjamin, or should we stop?” Jehovah replied: “Go up, because tomorrow I will give them into your hand.”
Then Israel set men in ambush all around Gibʹe·ah.
The Israelites went up against the Benʹja·min·ites on the third day, and they drew up in formation against Gibʹe·ah the same as at the other times.
When the Benʹja·min·ites went out to meet the army, they were drawn away from the city. Then, as at the other times, they started to attack and kill some of the men on the highways, one of which goes up to Bethʹel and the other to Gibʹe·ah, leaving about 30 men of Israel dead in the open field.
So the Benʹja·min·ites said: “They are suffering defeat before us the same as before.” But the Israelites said: “We will retreat and draw them away from the city onto the highways.”
So all the men of Israel rose up from their places and drew up in formation at Baʹal-taʹmar while the Israelite ambush charged out of their places in the vicinity of Gibʹe·ah.
Thus 10,000 chosen men out of all Israel came in front of Gibʹe·ah, and the fighting was heavy. But the Benʹja·min·ites did not know that disaster was near at hand.
Jehovah defeated Benjamin before Israel, and on that day the Israelites struck down 25,100 men in Benjamin, all of them armed with swords.
However, the Benʹja·min·ites imagined that the men of Israel would be defeated when they retreated from Benjamin, but they retreated because they trusted in the ambush that was set against Gibʹe·ah.
The ambush acted quickly and charged toward Gibʹe·ah. Then the ambush spread out and struck down the whole city with the sword.
Now the men of Israel had arranged that the men who ambushed the city would make a smoke signal go up from there.
When the Israelites turned around in the battle, the men of Benjamin started by attacking and killing about 30 men of Israel, and they said: “They are clearly suffering another defeat before us, just as in the previous battle.”
But the signal started to go up from the city as a pillar of smoke. When the men of Benjamin turned to look, they saw the whole city going up in flames to the sky.
Then the men of Israel made an about-face, and the men of Benjamin were dismayed, for they saw that disaster had overtaken them.
So they retreated from the men of Israel toward the wilderness, but the battle followed them; the men coming out of the cities joined in striking them down.
They surrounded the Benʹja·min·ites and pursued them relentlessly. They trampled them down directly in front of Gibʹe·ah toward the east.
Finally 18,000 men of Benjamin fell, all mighty warriors.
The men of Benjamin turned and fled into the wilderness to the crag of Rimʹmon, and the Israelites killed 5,000 of them on the highways, and they kept pursuing them as far as Giʹdom; so they struck down 2,000 more men.
All those of Benjamin who fell on that day amounted to 25,000 men armed with swords, all mighty warriors.
But 600 retreated into the wilderness to the crag of Rimʹmon, and they stayed on the crag of Rimʹmon for four months.
And the men of Israel turned back against the Benʹja·min·ites and struck those of the city with the sword, from men to livestock, all that remained. Also, they set all the cities in their path on fire.
Then the men of Eʹphra·im were summoned, and they crossed over to Zaʹphon and said to Jephʹthah: “Why did you not call us to go with you when you crossed over to fight against the Amʹmon·ites? We will burn your house down with you in it.”
But Jephʹthah said to them: “Along with my people, I was engaged in a great conflict with the Amʹmon·ites. I did call to you for help, but you did not save me from their hand.
When I saw that you would not save me, then I decided to risk my life and go against the Amʹmon·ites, and Jehovah handed them over to me. So why have you come today to fight against me?”
Jephʹthah then gathered all the men of Gilʹe·ad, and they fought Eʹphra·im; the men of Gilʹe·ad defeated Eʹphra·im, who had said: “You are only fugitives from Eʹphra·im, you Gilʹe·ad·ites in Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh.”
Gilʹe·ad captured the fords of the Jordan ahead of Eʹphra·im; and when the men of Eʹphra·im were trying to escape, they would say, “Let me cross over”; then the men of Gilʹe·ad would ask each one, “Are you an Eʹphra·im·ite?” When he would reply, “No!”
they would say to him, “Please say Shibʹbo·leth.” But he would say, “Sibʹbo·leth,” as he was unable to say the word correctly. Then they would seize him and slay him at the fords of the Jordan. So 42,000 Eʹphra·im·ites fell at that time.
Jephʹthah judged Israel for six years, after which Jephʹthah the Gilʹe·ad·ite died and was buried in his city in Gilʹe·ad.
Ibʹzan from Bethʹle·hem judged Israel after him.
He had 30 sons and 30 daughters. He sent his daughters to marry men outside his clan, and he brought in 30 women to marry his sons. He judged Israel for seven years.
Then Ibʹzan died and was buried in Bethʹle·hem.
After him Eʹlon the Ze·buʹlu·nite judged Israel; he judged Israel for ten years.
Then Eʹlon the Ze·buʹlu·nite died and was buried in Aiʹja·lon in the land of Zebʹu·lun.
After him Abʹdon the son of Hilʹlel the Pirʹa·thon·ite judged Israel.
He had 40 sons and 30 grandsons who rode on 70 donkeys. He judged Israel for eight years.
Then Abʹdon the son of Hilʹlel the Pirʹa·thon·ite died and was buried in Pirʹa·thon in the land of Eʹphra·im in the mountain of the A·malʹek·ite.
In those days there was no king in Israel. And in those days the tribe of the Danʹites was looking for an inheritance to dwell in, because until then they had not received an inheritance among the tribes of Israel.
The Danʹites sent five men from among their family, capable men from Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol, to spy out the land and to explore it. They said to them: “Go, explore the land.” When they came to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to the house of Miʹcah, they spent the night there.
While they were near the house of Miʹcah, they recognized the voice of the young Levite man, so they went over to him and asked: “Who brought you here? What are you doing in this place? What is keeping you here?”
He replied to them: “Thus and so Miʹcah did for me, and he hired me to serve as priest for him.”
Then they said to him: “Please ask God whether our journey will be successful.”
The priest said to them: “Go in peace. Jehovah is with you on your journey.”
So the five men went on and came to Laʹish. They saw how the people in it were dwelling in self-reliance in the manner of the Si·doʹni·ans. They were quiet and unsuspecting, and no oppressive conqueror was in the land to disturb them. They were far away from the Si·doʹni·ans, and they had no dealings with anyone else.
When they returned to their brothers at Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol, their brothers said to them: “How did it go?”
They replied: “Let us go up against them, for we have seen that the land is very good. Why are you hesitant? Do not delay to go in to take possession of the land.
When you arrive, you will find an unsuspecting people, and the land is spacious. God has given it into your hand, a place where there is no lack of anything on the earth.”
Then 600 men armed for battle from the family of the Danʹites departed from Zoʹrah and Eshʹta·ol.
They went up and camped at Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim in Judah. That is why that place, which is west of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, is called Maʹha·neh-dan to this day.
They went from there to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and came to the house of Miʹcah.
Then the five men who had gone to spy out the land of Laʹish said to their brothers: “Did you know that there are in these houses an ephʹod, teraphim statues, a carved image, and a metal statue? Think about what you should do.”
So they stopped there and came to the house of the young Levite man at the house of Miʹcah and asked how he was.
All the while the 600 men of Dan, armed for battle, stood at the entrance of the gate.
The five men who had gone to spy out the land went inside to take the carved image, the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the metal image. (The priest was standing at the entrance of the gate with the 600 men armed for battle.)
They went into the house of Miʹcah and took the carved image, the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the metal image. The priest said to them: “What are you doing?”
But they said to him: “Be quiet. Put your hand over your mouth, and come with us to be a father and a priest for us. Which is better—for you to be a priest to the house of one man or to become a priest to a tribe and family in Israel?”
So the priest was satisfied, and he took the ephʹod, the teraphim statues, and the carved image and went off with the people.
Then they turned to go on their way, putting the children, the livestock, and the valuable things ahead of them.
They had gone some distance away from the house of Miʹcah when the men who lived in the houses near the house of Miʹcah gathered together and caught up with the Danʹites.
When they cried out to the Danʹites, they turned to face them and said to Miʹcah: “What is the matter? Why have you been gathered together?”
So he said: “You have taken my gods that I made, and you have gone off with the priest too. What do I have left? How, then, can you ask me, ‘What is the matter with you?’”
The Danʹites replied: “Do not raise your voice against us; otherwise, angry men may assault you, and that would cost you your life and the lives of your household.”
So the Danʹites went on their way; and Miʹcah, seeing that they were stronger than he was, turned and went back to his house.
After they took what Miʹcah had made, as well as his priest, they went to Laʹish, to a people quiet and unsuspecting. They struck them down with the sword and burned the city with fire.
There was no one to rescue it, for it was far from Siʹdon and they had no dealings with anyone else and it was in the valley plain that belonged to Beth-reʹhob. Then they rebuilt the city and settled in it.
Furthermore, they named the city Dan after the name of their father, Dan, who was born to Israel. But Laʹish was the city’s former name.
After that the Danʹites set up the carved image for themselves, and Jonʹa·than the son of Gerʹshom, the son of Moses, and his sons became priests to the tribe of the Danʹites until the day that the inhabitants of the land went into exile.
And they set up the carved image that Miʹcah had made, and it remained there all the days that the house of the true God was in Shiʹloh.
But the Israelites again did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, so Jehovah gave them into the hand of Midʹi·an for seven years.
The hand of Midʹi·an dominated over Israel. Because of Midʹi·an, the Israelites made hiding places for themselves in the mountains, in the caves, and in the places difficult to approach.
If Israel sowed seed, Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners would attack them.
They would camp against them and ruin the produce of the land all the way to Gazʹa, and they left nothing for Israel to eat and no sheep or bull or donkey.
For they would come up with their livestock and tents as numerous as the locusts, and they and their camels could not be numbered, and they would come into the land to destroy it.
So Israel became greatly impoverished on account of Midʹi·an; and the Israelites called to Jehovah for help.
When the Israelites called to Jehovah for help because of Midʹi·an,
Jehovah sent to the Israelites a prophet who said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I brought you up from Egypt and thus brought you out of the house of slavery.
So I rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from all your oppressors and drove them out from before you and gave you their land.
And I said to you: “I am Jehovah your God. You must not fear the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling.” But you did not obey me.’”
Later Jehovah’s angel came and sat under the big tree that was in Ophʹrah, which belonged to Joʹash the Abi-ezʹrite. His son Gidʹe·on was beating out wheat in the winepress in order to hide it from Midʹi·an.
Jehovah’s angel appeared to him and said: “Jehovah is with you, you mighty warrior.”
At this Gidʹe·on said to him: “Pardon me, my lord, but if Jehovah is with us, why has all of this come upon us? Where are all his wonderful acts that our fathers related to us, saying, ‘Did Jehovah not bring us up out of Egypt?’ Now Jehovah has deserted us and given us into Midʹi·an’s hand.”
Jehovah faced him and said: “Go with the strength you have, and you will save Israel out of Midʹi·an’s hand. Is it not I who send you?”
Gidʹe·on answered him: “Pardon me, Jehovah. How can I save Israel? Look! My clan is the least in Ma·nasʹseh, and I am the most insignificant in my father’s house.”
But Jehovah said to him: “Because I will be with you, you will strike down Midʹi·an as if they were one man.”
Then he said to him: “If, now, I have found favor in your eyes, show me a sign that you are the one speaking with me.
Please do not depart from here until I return with my gift and set it before you.” So he said: “I will stay here until you return.”
And Gidʹe·on went in and prepared a young goat and made unleavened bread from an eʹphah of flour. He put the meat in the basket and the broth in the cooking pot; then he brought them out to him and served them under the big tree.
The angel of the true God now said to him: “Take the meat and the unleavened bread and place them on the big rock there, and pour out the broth.” And he did so.
Then Jehovah’s angel stretched out the tip of the staff that was in his hand and touched the meat and the unleavened bread, and fire flared up from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread. Jehovah’s angel then vanished from his sight.
Gidʹe·on now realized that it was Jehovah’s angel. At once Gidʹe·on said: “Alas, Sovereign Lord Jehovah, for I have seen Jehovah’s angel face-to-face!”
But Jehovah said to him: “Peace be with you. Have no fear; you will not die.”
So Gidʹe·on built an altar there to Jehovah, and it is called Je·hoʹvah-shaʹlom down to this day. It is still in Ophʹrah of the Abi-ezʹrites.
That night Jehovah said to him: “Take the young bull that belongs to your father, the second young bull that is seven years old, and tear down the altar of Baʹal that belongs to your father, and cut down the sacred pole next to it.
After you build an altar to Jehovah your God on top of this stronghold with the row of stones, take the second young bull and offer it as a burnt offering on the pieces of wood from the sacred pole that you cut down.”
So Gidʹe·on took ten men of his servants and did just as Jehovah told him. But he feared the household of his father and the men of the city too much to do it by day, so he did it at night.
When the men of the city got up early the next morning, they saw that the altar of Baʹal had been pulled down and the sacred pole beside it had been cut down and the second young bull had been offered up on the altar that had been built.
They asked one another: “Who did this?” After they investigated, they said: “Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash did this.”
So the men of the city said to Joʹash: “Bring your son out that he may die, because he pulled down the altar of Baʹal and cut down the sacred pole next to it.”
Joʹash then said to all those who confronted him: “Do you have to defend Baʹal? Do you have to save him? Whoever defends him should be put to death this morning. If he is a god, let him defend himself, since someone pulled down his altar.”
And he called Gidʹe·on Jer·ub·baʹal on that day, saying: “Let Baʹal defend himself, for someone has pulled down his altar.”
All Midʹi·an and Amʹa·lek and the Easterners joined forces; and they crossed over into the Valley of Jezʹre·el and camped.
Then Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gidʹe·on and he sounded the horn, and the Abi-ezʹrites rallied behind him.
He sent out messengers through all of Ma·nasʹseh, and they too rallied behind him. He also sent out messengers through Ashʹer, Zebʹu·lun, and Naphʹta·li, and they came up to meet him.
Then Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “If you are saving Israel by means of me, just as you have promised,
here I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew on the fleece only but all the ground around it is dry, then I will know that you will save Israel by means of me, just as you have promised.”
And that is how it happened. When he rose up early the next day and wrung the fleece, he squeezed off enough dew from the fleece to fill a large banquet bowl with water.
However, Gidʹe·on said to the true God: “Do not let your anger burn against me, but let me ask just once more. Let me, please, make just one more test with the fleece. Please let the fleece alone be dry while there is dew all over the ground.”
So that is what God did that night; only the fleece was dry, and there was dew all over the ground.
Then the men of Eʹphra·im said to him: “What have you done to us? Why did you not call us when you went to fight against Midʹi·an?” And they quarreled bitterly with him.
But he said to them: “What have I done compared with you? Are not the gleanings of Eʹphra·im better than the grape harvest of Abi-eʹzer?
It was into your hand that God gave Midʹi·an’s princes Oʹreb and Zeʹeb, and what have I done compared with you?” When he spoke this way, they calmed down.
Gidʹe·on then came to the Jordan and crossed it. He and the 300 men with him were tired, but they kept up the pursuit.
So he said to the men of Sucʹcoth: “Please give loaves of bread to the people following me, for they are tired and I am chasing after Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, the kings of Midʹi·an.”
But the princes of Sucʹcoth said: “Are the palms of Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna already in your hand so that we should give bread to your army?”
At this Gidʹe·on said: “Just for that, when Jehovah gives Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna into my hand, I will give you a thrashing with the thorns and the briars of the wilderness.”
And he went up from there to Pe·nuʹel and made the same request, but the men of Pe·nuʹel gave him the same answer as the men of Sucʹcoth.
So he said also to the men of Pe·nuʹel: “When I return in peace, I will pull down this tower.”
Now Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna were in Karʹkor with their armies, about 15,000 men. These were all who remained of the entire army of the Easterners, for 120,000 men armed with swords had fallen.
Gidʹe·on continued up by the way of the tent dwellers east of Noʹbah and Jogʹbe·hah and attacked the camp, which was off guard.
When Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna fled, he pursued and captured the two Midʹi·an·ite kings, Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, throwing the whole camp into a panic.
Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash then returned from the war by way of the pass that goes up to Heʹres.
En route he captured and interrogated a young man from Sucʹcoth. So the young man wrote out for him the names of the princes and elders of Sucʹcoth, 77 men.
With that he went to the men of Sucʹcoth and said: “Here are Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna about whom you taunted me, saying, ‘Are the palms of Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna already in your hand so that we should give bread to your exhausted men?’”
Then he took the elders of the city and with thorns and briars of the wilderness, he taught the men of Sucʹcoth a lesson.
And he pulled down the tower of Pe·nuʹel and killed the men of the city.
He asked Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna: “What sort of men did you kill in Taʹbor?” To this they said: “They were like you, each one looked like the son of a king.”
At that he said: “They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. As surely as Jehovah lives, if you had spared their lives, I would not have to kill you.”
Then he said to Jeʹther his firstborn: “Get up, kill them.” But the young man did not draw his sword; he was afraid, for he was still a young man.
So Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna said: “Get up yourself and slay us, for a man is judged by his mightiness.” So Gidʹe·on got up and killed Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna and took the crescent-shaped ornaments that were on the necks of their camels.
Later the men of Israel said to Gidʹe·on: “Rule over us, you and your son and your grandson as well, for you saved us out of the hand of Midʹi·an.”
But Gidʹe·on said to them: “I will not rule over you, nor will my son rule over you. Jehovah is the one who will rule over you.”
Gidʹe·on continued: “Let me make one request of you: that each of you give me a nose ring from his spoil.” (For they had gold nose rings because they were Ishʹma·el·ites.)
They replied: “We will surely give them.” With that they spread out a robe and each man threw a nose ring from his spoil on it.
The weight of the gold nose rings that he had requested amounted to 1,700 gold shekels, besides the crescent-shaped ornaments, the pendants, the purple wool garments worn by the kings of Midʹi·an, and the necklaces from the camels.
Gidʹe·on made it into an ephʹod and exhibited it in his city Ophʹrah; and all Israel committed spiritual prostitution with it there, and it served as a snare to Gidʹe·on and to his household.
Thus Midʹi·an was subdued before the Israelites, and they did not challenge them again; and the land had rest for 40 years in the days of Gidʹe·on.
So Jer·ub·baʹal the son of Joʹash returned to his home and stayed there.
Gidʹe·on became father to 70 sons, for he had many wives.
His concubine in Sheʹchem also bore him a son, and he named him A·bimʹe·lech.
And Gidʹe·on the son of Joʹash died at a good old age and was buried in the tomb of Joʹash his father in Ophʹrah of the Abi-ezʹrites.
As soon as Gidʹe·on died, the Israelites again committed spiritual prostitution with the Baʹals, and they appointed Baʹal-beʹrith as their god.
The Israelites did not remember Jehovah their God, who had rescued them from the hand of all their enemies around them;
nor did they show loyal love toward the household of Jer·ub·baʹal, that is Gidʹe·on, in return for all the good that he had done for Israel.
Now in the days when the judges administered justice, a famine occurred in the land; and a man went from Bethʹle·hem in Judah to reside as a foreigner in the fields of Moʹab, he along with his wife and his two sons.
The man’s name was E·limʹe·lech, his wife’s name was Na·oʹmi, and the names of his two sons were Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on. They were Ephʹrath·ites from Bethʹle·hem in Judah. And they came to the fields of Moʹab and remained there.
After some time E·limʹe·lech, Na·oʹmi’s husband, died, and she was left with her two sons.
The men later married Moʹab·ite women; one was named Orʹpah, and the other was named Ruth. They remained there for about ten years.
Then the two sons, Mahʹlon and Chilʹi·on, also died, and the woman was left without her two children and her husband.
So she started out with her daughters-in-law to return from the fields of Moʹab, for she had heard in Moʹab that Jehovah had turned his attention to his people by giving them food.
She left the place where she had been living with both of her daughters-in-law. As they were walking on the road to return to the land of Judah,
Na·oʹmi said to both of her daughters-in-law: “Go, return, each of you to your mother’s home. May Jehovah show loyal love to you, just as you have shown it to the men who have died and to me.
May Jehovah grant that each of you finds security in the home of your husband.” Then she kissed them, and they wept loudly.
They kept saying to her: “No, but we will go with you to your people.”
But Na·oʹmi said: “Return, my daughters. Why should you go with me? Can I still give birth to sons who could become your husbands?
Return, my daughters. Go, for I have grown too old to marry. Even if I could hope to find a husband tonight and could also bear sons,
would you keep waiting for them until they could grow up? Would you refrain from getting remarried for their sakes? No, my daughters, I feel very bitter for you, because the hand of Jehovah has turned against me.”
Again they wept loudly, after which Orʹpah kissed her mother-in-law and departed. But Ruth stuck with her.
So Na·oʹmi said: “Look! Your widowed sister-in-law has returned to her people and her gods. Return with your sister-in-law.”
But Ruth said: “Do not plead with me to abandon you, to turn back from accompanying you; for where you go I will go, and where you spend the night, I will spend the night. Your people will be my people, and your God my God.
Where you die I will die, and there I will be buried. May Jehovah do so to me and add to it if anything but death should separate me from you.”
When Na·oʹmi saw that Ruth insisted on going with her, she stopped trying to convince her.
And they both continued on their way until they came to Bethʹle·hem. As soon as they arrived in Bethʹle·hem, the whole city became stirred up over them, and women were saying: “Is this Na·oʹmi?”
She would say to the women: “Do not call me Na·oʹmi. Call me Maʹra, for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me.
I was full when I went, but Jehovah made me return empty-handed. Why should you call me Na·oʹmi, when it is Jehovah who opposed me and the Almighty who caused me calamity?”
This is how Na·oʹmi returned from the fields of Moʹab, along with her Moʹab·ite daughter-in-law Ruth. They came to Bethʹle·hem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
Na·oʹmi, her mother-in-law, now said to her: “My daughter, should I not look for a home for you, so that it may go well with you?
Is not Boʹaz our relative? He is the one whose young women you were with. Tonight he is winnowing barley at the threshing floor.
So wash yourself and rub on some perfumed oil; then dress up and go down to the threshing floor. Do not make your presence known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.
When he lies down, take note of the place where he lies down; then go and uncover his feet and lie down. He will tell you what you should do.”
At that she replied: “All that you say to me I will do.”
So she went down to the threshing floor and did all that her mother-in-law had instructed her to do.
Meanwhile, Boʹaz ate and drank and was feeling good at heart. Then he went to lie down at the end of the grain heap. After that she quietly came and uncovered his feet and lay down.
At midnight the man began to shiver, and he leaned forward and saw a woman lying at his feet.
He said: “Who are you?” She replied: “I am Ruth, your servant. Spread out your garment over your servant, for you are a repurchaser.”
At that he said: “May Jehovah bless you, my daughter. You have shown your loyal love more in this last instance than in the first instance, by not going after the young men, whether poor or rich.
And now, my daughter, have no fear. I will do for you everything that you say, for everyone in the city knows that you are an excellent woman.
While it is true that I am a repurchaser, there is a repurchaser more closely related than I am.
Stay here tonight, and if he will repurchase you in the morning, fine! Let him repurchase you. But if he does not want to repurchase you, I will then repurchase you myself, as surely as Jehovah lives. Lie down here until the morning.”
So she lay at his feet until the morning and then got up before it was light enough for anyone to be recognized. He then said: “Do not let it be known that a woman came to the threshing floor.”
He also said: “Bring the cloak that you are wearing, and hold it out.” So she held it out, and he put six measures of barley in it and put it on her, after which he went into the city.
She went her way to her mother-in-law, who now said: “How did it go for you, my daughter?” She told her everything that the man had done for her.
She added: “He gave me these six measures of barley and said to me, ‘Do not go empty-handed to your mother-in-law.’”
At that she said: “Sit here, my daughter, until you learn how the matter will turn out, for the man will not rest until he settles the matter today.”
Now Na·oʹmi had a relative on her husband’s side who was very wealthy; his name was Boʹaz, and he was of the family of E·limʹe·lech.
Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said to Na·oʹmi: “Let me go out, please, to the fields and glean among the ears of grain behind whoever looks on me with favor.” So Na·oʹmi said to her: “Go, my daughter.”
At that she went out and began to glean in the field behind the harvesters. By chance she came upon a plot of land belonging to Boʹaz, who was of the family of E·limʹe·lech.
Just then Boʹaz arrived from Bethʹle·hem and said to the harvesters: “Jehovah be with you.” And they replied: “Jehovah bless you.”
Boʹaz then asked the young man in charge of the harvesters: “To whom does this young woman belong?”
The young man in charge of the harvesters answered: “The young woman is a Moʹab·i·tess who returned with Na·oʹmi from the fields of Moʹab.
She asked, ‘Please, may I glean and gather among the cut-off ears of grain left behind by the harvesters?’ And she has been on her feet since she came this morning until just now, when she sat in the shelter for a short rest.”
Then Boʹaz said to Ruth: “Listen, my daughter. Do not go away to glean in another field, and do not go anywhere else; stay close by my young women.
Keep your eyes on the field that they harvest, and go with them. I have commanded the young men not to touch you. When you are thirsty, go to the water jars and drink from what the young men have drawn.”
At that she fell facedown and bowed down to the ground and said to him: “How have I found favor in your eyes, and why have you taken notice of me, when I am a foreigner?”
Boʹaz answered her: “A full report was made to me of all you have done for your mother-in-law after the death of your husband and how you left your father and your mother and the land of your relatives to go to a people whom you had not known before.
May Jehovah reward you for what you have done, and may there be a perfect wage for you from Jehovah the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to seek refuge.”
To this she said: “Let me find favor in your eyes, my lord, because you have comforted me and spoken reassuringly to your servant, although I am not even one of your servants.”
Boʹaz said to her at mealtime: “Come here, eat some of the bread, and dip your piece in the vinegar.” So she sat down beside the harvesters. He then handed her some roasted grain, and she ate and was satisfied, and she had something left over.
When she got up to glean, Boʹaz commanded his young men: “Let her glean even among the cut-off ears of grain, and do not mistreat her.
You should also be sure to pull out some ears of grain from the bundles for her and leave them behind for her to glean, and do not say anything to stop her.”
So she continued to glean in the field until evening. When she beat out what she had gleaned, it came to about an eʹphah of barley.
Then she took it and went into the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. Ruth also took out and gave to her the food that was left over after she had eaten her fill.
Her mother-in-law then said to her: “Where did you glean today? Where did you work? May the one who took notice of you be blessed.” So she told her mother-in-law about whom she had worked with, saying: “The name of the man I worked with today is Boʹaz.”
At that Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law: “May he be blessed by Jehovah, who has not failed in his loyal love toward the living and the dead.” Na·oʹmi continued: “The man is related to us. He is one of our repurchasers.”
Then Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess said: “He also told me, ‘Stay close by my young people until they have finished my entire harvest.’”
Na·oʹmi said to her daughter-in-law Ruth: “It is better, my daughter, for you to go out with his young women than to be harassed in another field.”
So she stayed close to the young women of Boʹaz and gleaned until the barley harvest and the wheat harvest came to an end. And she kept dwelling with her mother-in-law.
Now Boʹaz went up to the city gate and sat there. And look! the repurchaser whom Boʹaz had mentioned passed by. At that Boʹaz said: “Come here and sit down, So-and-so.” And he went over and sat down.
Then Boʹaz took ten of the city elders and said: “Sit down here.” So they sat down.
Boʹaz now said to the repurchaser: “Na·oʹmi, who has returned from the fields of Moʹab, must sell the plot of land that belonged to our brother E·limʹe·lech.
So I thought I should disclose it to you and say, ‘Buy it in front of the inhabitants and the elders of my people. If you will repurchase it, repurchase it. But if you will not repurchase it, tell me so that I will know, for you have the claim to repurchase it, and I am next in line after you.’” He replied: “I am willing to repurchase it.”
Then Boʹaz said: “On the day you buy the field from Na·oʹmi, you must also buy it from Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of the dead man, in order to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance.”
To this the repurchaser said: “I am unable to repurchase it, for I may ruin my own inheritance. Repurchase it for yourself with my right of repurchase, because I am not able to repurchase it.”
Now this was the custom of former times in Israel concerning the right of repurchase and exchange to validate every sort of transaction: A man had to remove his sandal and give it to the other party, and this was the manner of confirming an agreement in Israel.
So when the repurchaser said to Boʹaz, “Buy it for yourself,” he removed his sandal.
Then Boʹaz said to the elders and all the people: “You are witnesses today that I am buying from Na·oʹmi all that belonged to E·limʹe·lech and all that belonged to Chilʹi·on and Mahʹlon.
I am also acquiring Ruth the Moʹab·i·tess, the wife of Mahʹlon, as a wife to restore the name of the dead man to his inheritance, so that the name of the dead man will not be cut off from among his brothers and from the city gate of his home. You are witnesses today.”
At this all the people who were in the city gate and the elders said: “We are witnesses! May Jehovah grant the wife who is entering your house to be like Rachel and like Leʹah, both of whom built the house of Israel. May you prosper in Ephʹra·thah and make a good name in Bethʹle·hem.
May your house become like the house of Peʹrez, whom Taʹmar bore to Judah, through the offspring that Jehovah will give you by this young woman.”
So Boʹaz took Ruth and she became his wife. He had relations with her, and Jehovah let her conceive and she gave birth to a son.
Then the women said to Na·oʹmi: “Praised be Jehovah, who has not left you without a repurchaser today. May his name be proclaimed in Israel!
He has restored your life and will sustain you in your old age, because he has been born to your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons.”
Na·oʹmi took the child and held him to her bosom, and she cared for him.
Then the neighbor women gave him a name. They said, “A son has been born to Na·oʹmi,” and they named him Oʹbed. He is the father of Jesʹse, David’s father.
Now this is the family line of Peʹrez: Peʹrez became father to Hezʹron;
Hezʹron became father to Ram; Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab;
Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon; Nahʹshon became father to Salʹmon;
Salʹmon became father to Boʹaz; Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed;
Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse; and Jesʹse became father to David.
And the Phi·lisʹtines assembled their armies for war. They assembled at Soʹcoh, which belongs to Judah, and they camped between Soʹcoh and A·zeʹkah, in Eʹphes-damʹmim.
Saul and the men of Israel assembled and camped in the Valley of Eʹlah, and they drew up in battle formation to meet the Phi·lisʹtines.
The Phi·lisʹtines occupied the mountain on one side, and the Israelites occupied the mountain on the other side, with the valley between them.
Then a champion came out from the camps of the Phi·lisʹtines; his name was Go·liʹath, from Gath, and his height was six cubits and a span.
He had a helmet of copper on his head, and he was wearing a coat of mail of overlapping scales. The weight of the copper coat of mail was 5,000 shekels.
He had shin guards of copper on his legs and a javelin of copper slung between his shoulders.
The wooden shaft of his spear was like the beam of loom workers, and the iron blade of his spear weighed 600 shekels; and his shield-bearer was marching ahead of him.
Then he stood and called out to the battle line of Israel and said to them: “Why have you come out to draw up in battle formation? Am I not the Phi·lisʹtine, and are you not the servants of Saul? Choose a man for yourselves, and let him come down to me.
If he is able to fight with me and strike me down, we will then become your servants. But if I prevail against him and strike him down, you will become our servants and serve us.”
The Phi·lisʹtine then said: “I do taunt the battle line of Israel this day. Give me a man, and let us fight it out!”
When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Phi·lisʹtine, they became terrified and greatly afraid.
Now David was the son of the Ephʹrath·ite from Bethʹle·hem of Judah named Jesʹse, who had eight sons and who in the days of Saul was already an old man.
The three oldest sons of Jesʹse had followed Saul to the war. The names of his three sons who went to war were E·liʹab the firstborn, his second son A·binʹa·dab, and the third Shamʹmah.
David was the youngest, and the three oldest followed Saul.
David was going back and forth from Saul to tend the sheep of his father at Bethʹle·hem.
Meanwhile, the Phi·lisʹtine would come forward and take his position each morning and each evening for 40 days.
Then Jesʹse said to his son David: “Take, please, this eʹphah of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread, and carry them quickly to your brothers in the camp.
And take these ten portions of cheese to the chief of the thousand; also, you should check on the welfare of your brothers and bring back some token from them.”
They were with Saul and all the other men of Israel in the Valley of Eʹlah, fighting against the Phi·lisʹtines.
So David got up early in the morning and left someone in charge of the sheep; then he packed up and went just as Jesʹse had commanded him. When he came to the camp enclosure, the army was going out to the battle line, shouting a battle cry.
Israel and the Phi·lisʹtines drew up so that one battle line faced the other battle line.
David immediately left his baggage in the care of the baggage keeper and ran to the battle line. When he arrived, he began asking about the welfare of his brothers.
While he was speaking with them, there came the champion named Go·liʹath, the Phi·lisʹtine from Gath. He came out from the battle line of the Phi·lisʹtines, and he spoke the same words as before, and David heard him.
When all the men of Israel saw the man, they fled from him, terrified.
The men of Israel were saying: “Have you seen this man who is coming out? He comes to taunt Israel. The king will give great riches to the man who strikes him down, he will give him his own daughter, and he will give the house of his father exemption in Israel.”
David began to say to the men who were standing near him: “What will be done for the man who strikes down that Phi·lisʹtine over there and takes away reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtine that he should taunt the battle line of the living God?”
Then the people told him the same thing as before: “This is what will be done for the man who strikes him down.”
When his oldest brother E·liʹab heard him speak to the men, he became angry with David and said: “Why have you come down? And with whom did you leave those few sheep in the wilderness? I well know your presumptuousness and the bad intentions of your heart; you came down just to see the battle.”
To this David said: “What have I done now? I was only asking a question!”
So he turned from him toward someone else and asked the same thing as before, and the people gave him the same reply as before.
The words that David had spoken were overheard and reported to Saul. So he sent for him.
David said to Saul: “Let no one lose heart because of him. Your servant will go and fight with this Phi·lisʹtine.”
But Saul said to David: “You are not able to go fight against this Phi·lisʹtine, for you are but a boy, and he has been a soldier from his youth.”
David then said to Saul: “Your servant became a shepherd of his father’s flock, and a lion came, also a bear, and each carried off a sheep from the flock.
I went out after it and struck it down and rescued it from its mouth. When it rose up against me, I grabbed it by its fur and struck it down and put it to death.
Your servant struck down both the lion and the bear, and this uncircumcised Phi·lisʹtine will become like one of them, for he has taunted the battle lines of the living God.”
Then David added: “Jehovah, who rescued me from the claws of the lion and the bear, he is the one who will rescue me from the hand of this Phi·lisʹtine.” At this Saul said to David: “Go, and may Jehovah be with you.”
Saul now clothed David with his garments. He put a copper helmet on his head, after which he clothed him with a coat of mail.
Then David strapped on his sword over his garments and tried to go but could not, for he was not used to them. David said to Saul: “I am unable to go in these things, for I am not used to them.” So David took them off.
He then took his staff in his hand and chose five smooth stones from the streambed and placed them in the pouch of his shepherd’s bag, and his sling was in his hand. And he began approaching the Phi·lisʹtine.
The Phi·lisʹtine came closer and closer to David, and his shield-bearer was ahead of him.
When the Phi·lisʹtine looked and saw David, he sneered at him in contempt because he was just a ruddy and handsome boy.
So the Phi·lisʹtine said to David: “Am I a dog, so that you are coming against me with sticks?” With that the Phi·lisʹtine cursed David by his gods.
The Phi·lisʹtine said to David: “Just come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the field.”
David replied to the Phi·lisʹtine: “You are coming against me with sword and spear and javelin, but I am coming against you in the name of Jehovah of armies, the God of the battle line of Israel, whom you have taunted.
This very day Jehovah will surrender you into my hand, and I will strike you down and cut off your head; and on this day I will give the corpses of the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines to the birds of the heavens and to the wild beasts of the earth; and people of all the earth will know that there is a God in Israel.
And all those gathered here will know that it is not with the sword or the spear that Jehovah saves, for the battle belongs to Jehovah, and he will give all of you into our hand.”
Then the Phi·lisʹtine rose and drew steadily closer to meet David, but David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Phi·lisʹtine.
David thrust his hand into his bag and took a stone from there and slung it. He struck the Phi·lisʹtine in the forehead, and the stone sank into his forehead and he fell facedown on the ground.
So David prevailed over the Phi·lisʹtine with a sling and a stone; he struck down the Phi·lisʹtine and put him to death, though there was no sword in David’s hand.
David continued running and stood over him. Then he took hold of the Phi·lisʹtine’s sword and pulled it out of its sheath and made sure that he was dead by cutting off his head with it. When the Phi·lisʹtines saw that their mighty one had died, they fled.
At that the men of Israel and of Judah rose and broke into shouting and pursued the Phi·lisʹtines all the way from the valley to the gates of Ekʹron, and the slain of the Phi·lisʹtines lay fallen along the road from Shaʹa·raʹim, as far as Gath and Ekʹron.
After the Israelites returned from hotly pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, they pillaged their camps.
Then David took the head of the Phi·lisʹtine and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put the Phi·lisʹtine’s weapons in his own tent.
At the moment that Saul saw David go out to meet the Phi·lisʹtine, he said to Abʹner, the chief of the army: “Whose son is this boy, Abʹner?” Abʹner replied: “As surely as you live, O king, I do not know!”
The king said: “Find out whose son the young man is.”
So as soon as David returned from striking down the Phi·lisʹtine, Abʹner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of the Phi·lisʹtine in his hand.
Saul now said to him: “Whose son are you, boy?” to which David said: “The son of your servant Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite.”
Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa.
The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons.
The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was severely wounded by the archers.
Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and run me through and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died with him.
Thus Saul, his three sons, his armor-bearer, and all his men died together on that day.
When the people of Israel who were in the region of the valley and in the region of the Jordan saw that the men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon the cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.
The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa.
So they cut off his head and stripped off his armor and sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news in the houses of their idols and among the people.
Then they put his armor in the house of the Ashʹto·reth images and fastened his corpse to the wall of Beth-shan.
When the inhabitants of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad heard what the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul,
all the warriors rose and traveled all night and took the bodies of Saul and his sons off the wall of Beth-shan. They returned to Jaʹbesh and burned them there.
Then they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.
Saul later spoke to Jonʹa·than his son and to all his servants about putting David to death.
Since Saul’s son Jonʹa·than was very fond of David, Jonʹa·than told David: “My father Saul wants to have you put to death. Please be on your guard in the morning, and go to a secret place and remain hidden.
I will go out and stand next to my father in the field where you will be. I will talk about you to my father, and if I learn anything, I will be sure to tell you.”
So Jonʹa·than spoke well of David to his father Saul. He said to him: “The king should not sin against his servant David, for he has not sinned against you and what he has done for you has benefited you.
He risked his life to strike down the Phi·lisʹtine, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory for all Israel. You saw it, and you were overjoyed. So why should you sin against innocent blood in having David put to death for no reason?”
Saul listened to Jonʹa·than, and Saul swore: “As surely as Jehovah is living, he will not be put to death.”
Afterward Jonʹa·than called David and told him all these things. So Jonʹa·than brought David to Saul, and he continued to serve him as before.
In time war broke out again, and David went out and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines and struck them down with a great slaughter, and they fled from before him.
And a bad spirit from Jehovah came upon Saul when he was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, while David was playing music on the harp.
Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he eluded Saul, who drove the spear into the wall. David fled and escaped during that night.
Saul later sent messengers to David’s house to watch it and to kill him in the morning, but David’s wife Miʹchal told him: “If you do not escape tonight, tomorrow you will be a dead man.”
Immediately Miʹchal let David down through the window, so that he could run away and escape.
Miʹchal took the teraphim statue and placed it on the bed, and she put a net of goat hair at the place of his head, and she covered it with a garment.
Saul now sent messengers to take David, but she said: “He is sick.”
So Saul sent the messengers to see David and told them: “Bring him to me on his bed to have him put to death.”
When the messengers came in, there was the teraphim statue on the bed and a net of goat hair where his head would have been.
Saul said to Miʹchal: “Why did you trick me like this and send my enemy away so that he could escape?” Miʹchal replied to Saul: “He said to me, ‘Send me away, or I will kill you!’”
Now David had run away and escaped, and he came to Samuel at Raʹmah. He told him all that Saul had done to him. Then he and Samuel went away, and they stayed in Naiʹoth.
In time it was reported to Saul: “Look! David is in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.”
At once Saul sent messengers to seize David. When they saw the elderly ones of the prophets prophesying and Samuel standing and presiding over them, the spirit of God came to be upon Saul’s messengers, and they began behaving as prophets as well.
When they told it to Saul, he immediately sent other messengers, and they too began behaving as prophets. So Saul sent messengers again, a third group, and they too began behaving as prophets.
Finally he also went to Raʹmah. When he reached the great cistern that is in Seʹcu, he asked: “Where are Samuel and David?” They replied: “There in Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.”
While Saul was on his way from there to Naiʹoth in Raʹmah, the spirit of God came upon him as well, and he walked along behaving as a prophet until he came into Naiʹoth in Raʹmah.
He also stripped off his garments, and he too behaved as a prophet before Samuel, and he lay there naked all that day and all that night. That is why they say: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
Then Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite came up and camped against Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad. All the men of Jaʹbesh said to Naʹhash: “Make a covenant with us, and we will serve you.”
Naʹhash the Amʹmon·ite said to them: “I will make it with you on this condition: that all your right eyes be bored out. I will do this to humiliate all Israel.”
The elders of Jaʹbesh replied to him: “Give us seven days’ time so that we can send messengers into all the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to rescue us, we will surrender to you.”
In time the messengers came to Gibʹe·ah of Saul and spoke these words in the hearing of the people, and all the people wept at the top of their voice.
But Saul was coming from the field behind the herd, and Saul said: “What is the matter with the people? Why are they weeping?” So they related to him the words of the men of Jaʹbesh.
The spirit of God empowered Saul when he heard these words, and he burned with anger.
So he took a pair of bulls and cut them into pieces, and he sent these into all the territory of Israel by the hand of the messengers, who said: “Whoever does not follow Saul and Samuel should expect this to be done to his cattle!” And the fear of Jehovah fell upon the people, so that they came out with one accord.
Then he counted them in Beʹzek, and there were 300,000 Israelites and 30,000 men of Judah.
They now said to the messengers who had come: “This is what you should say to the men of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad, ‘Tomorrow when the sun gets hot, you will be saved.’” With that the messengers came and told the men of Jaʹbesh, and they were overjoyed.
So the men of Jaʹbesh said: “Tomorrow we will surrender to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to you.”
On the next day, Saul divided the people into three bands, and they made their way into the middle of the camp during the morning watch and struck down the Amʹmon·ites until the day grew hot. Those who survived were scattered, so that no two of them were left together.
Then the people said to Samuel: “Who was saying, ‘Is Saul to be king over us?’ Hand the men over, and we will put them to death.”
However, Saul said: “Not a man should be put to death on this day, for today Jehovah has rescued Israel.”
Samuel later said to the people: “Come and let us go to Gilʹgal to reconfirm the kingship.”
So all the people went to Gilʹgal, and in Gilʹgal they made Saul king before Jehovah. Then they offered communion sacrifices there before Jehovah, and Saul and all the men of Israel celebrated with great joy.
In time the men of Ziph came to Saul at Gibʹe·ah, saying: “Is David not hiding on the hill of Hach·iʹlah facing Je·shiʹmon?”
So Saul rose up and went down to the wilderness of Ziph with 3,000 chosen men of Israel to look for David in the wilderness of Ziph.
Saul camped on the hill of Hach·iʹlah, which faces Je·shiʹmon, by the road. David was then living in the wilderness, and he learned that Saul had come into the wilderness after him.
So David sent spies to verify that Saul had indeed come.
David later went to the place where Saul had encamped, and David saw the place where Saul and Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of his army, were lying asleep; Saul lay asleep in the camp enclosure with the troops camping all around him.
Then David said to A·himʹe·lech the Hitʹtite and A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, the brother of Joʹab: “Who will go down with me into the camp to Saul?” A·bishʹai replied: “I will go down with you.”
So David and A·bishʹai made their way to the troops by night, and they found Saul lying asleep in the camp enclosure with his spear stuck into the ground next to his head; Abʹner and the troops were lying all around him.
A·bishʹai now said to David: “Today God has surrendered your enemy into your hand. And now, please, let me pin him to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.”
However, David said to A·bishʹai: “Do not harm him, for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent?”
David continued: “As surely as Jehovah is living, Jehovah himself will strike him down, or his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and perish.
It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah! So now take, please, the spear next to his head and the water jug, and let us be on our way.”
So David took the spear and the water jug from next to Saul’s head, and they went away. No one saw or noticed them or woke up, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Jehovah had fallen upon them.
Then David crossed to the other side and stood on the top of the mountain some distance away, with a considerable space between them.
David called out to the troops and to Abʹner the son of Ner, saying: “Abʹner, will you not answer?” Abʹner answered: “Who are you who calls to the king?”
David said to Abʹner: “Are you not a man? And who is like you in Israel? So why did you not keep watch over your lord the king? For one of the soldiers came in to do away with your lord the king.
What you have done is not good. As surely as Jehovah is living, you deserve to die, because you have not kept watch over your lord, the anointed of Jehovah. Now look around! Where are the king’s spear and the water jug that were next to his head?”
Then Saul recognized the voice of David and said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” David replied: “It is my voice, my lord the king.”
He added: “Why is my lord chasing after his servant, for what have I done, and what am I guilty of?
My lord the king, please, listen to the words of his servant: If it is Jehovah who incited you against me, let him accept my grain offering. But if men have incited you, they are cursed before Jehovah, because they have driven me away today from being united with Jehovah’s inheritance, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods!’
And now do not let my blood fall to the ground away from the presence of Jehovah, for the king of Israel has gone out to look for a single flea, as if he were chasing a partridge on the mountains.”
In turn Saul said: “I have sinned. Come back, my son David, for I will do you no more harm, because you regarded my life as precious this day. Yes, I have acted foolishly and have made a terrible mistake.”
David answered: “Here is the spear of the king. Let one of the young men come over and take it.
It is Jehovah who will repay each one for his own righteousness and his own faithfulness, for today Jehovah gave you into my hand, but I was unwilling to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah.
Look! Just as your life was precious to me this day, so may my life be precious in the eyes of Jehovah, and may he rescue me out of all distress.”
Saul replied to David: “May you be blessed, my son David. You will surely do great things, and you will surely prevail.” Then David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
Now there was a man of Ra·math·aʹim-zoʹphim of the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im whose name was El·kaʹnah, the son of Je·roʹham, the son of E·liʹhu, the son of Toʹhu, the son of Zuph, an Eʹphra·im·ite.
He had two wives; one was named Hanʹnah, and the other was named Pe·ninʹnah. Pe·ninʹnah had children, but Hanʹnah had no children.
That man went up from his city year after year to worship and to sacrifice to Jehovah of armies in Shiʹloh. That is where the two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, served as priests to Jehovah.
One day when El·kaʹnah offered a sacrifice, he gave portions to his wife Pe·ninʹnah as well as to all her sons and her daughters,
but to Hanʹnah he gave a special portion, because Hanʹnah was the one he loved; but Jehovah had not given her children.
Moreover, her rival wife taunted her relentlessly in order to upset her because Jehovah had not given her children.
That is what she would do year after year; whenever Hanʹnah went up to the house of Jehovah, her rival would taunt her so much that she would weep and not eat.
But her husband El·kaʹnah said to her: “Hanʹnah, why do you weep, and why do you not eat, and why are you so sad? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”
Then Hanʹnah got up after they had finished eating and drinking in Shiʹloh. At the time, Eʹli the priest was sitting on the seat by the doorpost of the temple of Jehovah.
Hanʹnah was extremely bitter, and she began to pray to Jehovah and to weep uncontrollably.
And she made this vow: “O Jehovah of armies, if you look upon the affliction of your servant and remember me and you do not forget your servant and give to your servant a male child, I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life, and no razor will touch his head.”
While she prayed for a long time before Jehovah, Eʹli was watching her mouth.
Hanʹnah was speaking in her heart, only her lips were trembling, but her voice was not heard. So Eʹli thought she was drunk.
Eʹli said to her: “How long will you stay drunk? Stop drinking your wine.”
At this Hanʹnah answered: “No, my lord! I am a woman under great stress; I have not drunk wine or anything alcoholic, but I am pouring out my soul before Jehovah.
Do not take your servant for a worthless woman, for I have been speaking until now out of my great anguish and distress.”
Then Eʹli answered: “Go in peace, and may the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of him.”
To this she said: “Let your servant find favor in your eyes.” And the woman went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.
Then they got up early in the morning and bowed before Jehovah, after which they returned to their house in Raʹmah. El·kaʹnah had sexual relations with his wife Hanʹnah, and Jehovah gave attention to her.
Within a year Hanʹnah became pregnant and gave birth to a son and named him Samuel, because, as she said, “it is from Jehovah that I have asked him.”
In time El·kaʹnah went up with all his household to offer the yearly sacrifice to Jehovah and to present his vow offering.
But Hanʹnah did not go up, for she said to her husband: “As soon as the boy is weaned, I will bring him; then he will appear before Jehovah and remain there from then on.”
El·kaʹnah her husband then said to her: “Do what you think is best. Stay at home until you wean him. May Jehovah carry out what you have said.” So the woman stayed at home and nursed her son until she weaned him.
As soon as she had weaned him, she took him up to Shiʹloh, along with a three-year-old bull, one eʹphah of flour, and a large jar of wine, and she came to the house of Jehovah in Shiʹloh and brought the young boy with her.
Then they slaughtered the bull and brought the boy to Eʹli.
With that she said: “Pardon me, my lord! As surely as you live, my lord, I am the woman who was standing with you in this place to pray to Jehovah.
It was for this boy that I prayed, and Jehovah granted my petition that I asked of him.
I, in turn, now lend him to Jehovah. For all his days, he is lent to Jehovah.” And he bowed down there to Jehovah.
So the men of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim came and took the Ark of Jehovah up into the house of A·binʹa·dab on the hill, and they sanctified his son El·e·aʹzar to guard the Ark of Jehovah.
A long time elapsed, 20 years in all, from the day of the Ark’s coming to Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, and all the house of Israel began to seek after Jehovah.
Samuel then said to all the house of Israel: “If you are returning to Jehovah with all your heart, put away the foreign gods and the Ashʹto·reth images from among you, and direct your heart unswervingly to Jehovah and serve only him, and he will rescue you from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
At that the Israelites got rid of the Baʹals and the Ashʹto·reth images and served only Jehovah.
Then Samuel said: “Gather all Israel together at Mizʹpah, and I will pray to Jehovah in your behalf.”
So they gathered together at Mizʹpah, and they drew water and poured it out before Jehovah and kept a fast on that day. There they said: “We have sinned against Jehovah.” And Samuel began serving as judge over the Israelites in Mizʹpah.
When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that the Israelites had gathered together at Mizʹpah, the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines went up against Israel. When the Israelites heard of it, they were afraid because of the Phi·lisʹtines.
So the Israelites said to Samuel: “Do not stop calling to Jehovah our God to help us and to save us from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
Then Samuel took a suckling lamb and offered it up as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah; and Samuel called to Jehovah for help in behalf of Israel, and Jehovah answered him.
As Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Phi·lisʹtines advanced for battle against Israel. Jehovah now caused it to thunder loudly on that day against the Phi·lisʹtines, and He threw them into confusion, and they were defeated before Israel.
At that the men of Israel went out from Mizʹpah and pursued the Phi·lisʹtines, striking them down as far as south of Beth-car.
Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizʹpah and Jeshʹa·nah and named it Eb·en·eʹzer, for he said: “Until now Jehovah has helped us.”
Thus the Phi·lisʹtines were subdued, and they did not come again into the territory of Israel; and the hand of Jehovah continued against the Phi·lisʹtines all the days of Samuel.
Also, the cities that the Phi·lisʹtines had taken from Israel were returned to Israel, from Ekʹron to Gath, and Israel recovered their territory from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines. There was also peace between Israel and the Amʹor·ites.
Samuel kept on judging Israel throughout his life.
Each year he traveled in a circuit to Bethʹel, Gilʹgal, and Mizʹpah, and he judged Israel in all these places.
But he would return to Raʹmah, because his house was there, and there he also judged Israel. He built an altar there to Jehovah.
In time Samuel died; and all Israel gathered together to mourn for him and to bury him at his house in Raʹmah. Then David rose and went down to the wilderness of Paʹran.
Now there was a man in Maʹon whose work was in Carʹmel. The man was very wealthy; he had 3,000 sheep and 1,000 goats, and he was then shearing his sheep at Carʹmel.
The man’s name was Naʹbal, and his wife’s name was Abʹi·gail. The wife was discerning and beautiful, but the husband, a Caʹleb·ite, was harsh, and he behaved badly.
David heard in the wilderness that Naʹbal was shearing his sheep.
So David sent ten young men to him, and David told the young men: “Go up to Carʹmel, and when you come to Naʹbal, ask him in my name about his welfare.
Then say, ‘May you live long and may you be well and may your household be well and may all that you have be well.
Now I hear that you are doing your shearing. When your shepherds were with us, we did not harm them, and they found nothing missing the whole time they were in Carʹmel.
Ask your young men, and they will tell you. May my young men find favor in your eyes, because we have come at a joyous time. Please give to your servants and to your son David whatever you can spare.’”
So David’s young men went and told all of this to Naʹbal in David’s name. When they finished,
Naʹbal answered David’s servants: “Who is David, and who is the son of Jesʹse? Nowadays many servants are breaking away from their masters.
Do I have to take my bread and my water and the meat that I butchered for my shearers and give it to men who come from who knows where?”
At that David’s young men returned and reported all these words to him.
David immediately said to his men: “Everyone strap on your sword!” So they all strapped on their swords, and David also strapped on his own sword, and about 400 men went up with David, while 200 men stayed with the baggage.
Meanwhile, one of the servants reported to Abʹi·gail, Naʹbal’s wife: “Look! David sent messengers from the wilderness to wish our master well, but he screamed insults at them.
Those men were very good to us. They never harmed us, and we did not miss a single thing the whole time we were together with them in the fields.
They were like a protective wall around us, both by night and by day, the whole time we were with them shepherding the flock.
Now decide what you are going to do, for disaster has been determined against our master and against all his house, and he is such a worthless man that no one can speak to him.”
So Abʹi·gail quickly took 200 loaves of bread, two large jars of wine, five dressed sheep, five seah measures of roasted grain, 100 cakes of raisins, and 200 cakes of pressed figs and put all of it on the donkeys.
Then she said to her servants: “Go on ahead of me; I will follow you.” But she said nothing to her husband Naʹbal.
While she was riding on the donkey and going down under cover of the mountain, just then David and his men were coming down toward her, and she met them.
Now David had been saying: “It was for nothing that I guarded everything that belongs to this fellow in the wilderness. Not a single thing belonging to him went missing, and yet he repays me evil for good.
May God do the same and more to the enemies of David if I allow a single male of his to survive until the morning.”
When Abʹi·gail caught sight of David, she hurried down off the donkey and threw herself facedown before David, bowing to the ground.
She then fell at his feet and said: “My lord, let the blame be on me; let your servant girl speak to you, and listen to the words of your servant girl.
Please, do not let my lord pay attention to this worthless Naʹbal, for he is just like his name. Naʹbal is his name, and senselessness is with him. But I, your servant girl, did not see my lord’s young men whom you sent.
And now, my lord, as surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, it is Jehovah who has held you back from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge with your own hand. May your enemies and those seeking injury to my lord become like Naʹbal.
Now let this gift that your servant girl has brought to my lord be given to the young men who are following my lord.
Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl, for Jehovah will without fail make for my lord a lasting house, because my lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah, and no evil has been found in you all your days.
When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life, the life of my lord will be wrapped securely in the bag of life with Jehovah your God, but the lives of your enemies he will hurl away like stones from a sling.
And when Jehovah has done for my lord all the good things he has promised and he appoints you as leader over Israel,
you will have no remorse or regret in your heart for shedding blood without cause and for letting the hand of my lord take revenge. When Jehovah confers good upon my lord, remember your servant girl.”
At this David said to Abʹi·gail: “Praise Jehovah the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me!
And blessed be your good sense! May you be blessed for restraining me this day from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge with my own hands.
Otherwise, as surely as Jehovah the God of Israel who held me back from harming you is living, if you had not come quickly to meet me, by morning there would not have remained a single male belonging to Naʹbal.”
With that David accepted from her what she had brought him and said to her: “Go up in peace to your house. See, I have listened to you, and I will grant your request.”
Abʹi·gail later went back to Naʹbal, who was feasting like a king in his house, and Naʹbal was in a good mood and was as drunk as could be. She did not tell him a single thing until the morning light.
In the morning, when Naʹbal was sober, his wife told him these things. And his heart became like a dead man’s, and he lay paralyzed like a stone.
About ten days later, Jehovah struck Naʹbal, and he died.
When David heard that Naʹbal had died, he said: “Praise Jehovah, who has pleaded my case of reproach from Naʹbal and has kept his servant from doing anything bad, and Jehovah has brought the badness of Naʹbal back on his own head!” Then David sent word to propose to Abʹi·gail to take her as his wife.
So David’s servants came to Abʹi·gail at Carʹmel and said to her: “David has sent us to you to take you as his wife.”
She immediately rose up and bowed with her face to the ground and said: “Here is your slave as a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.”
Then Abʹi·gail quickly rose up and rode on her donkey with five of her female servants walking behind her; she accompanied the messengers of David and became his wife.
David had also married A·hinʹo·am from Jezʹre·el, and both women became his wives.
But Saul had given his daughter Miʹchal, David’s wife, to Palʹti the son of Laʹish, who was from Galʹlim.
Saul was . . . years old when he became king, and for two years he reigned over Israel.
Saul chose 3,000 men out of Israel; 2,000 of these were with Saul at Michʹmash and in the mountainous region of Bethʹel and 1,000 were with Jonʹa·than at Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin. He sent the rest of the people away, each one to his tent.
Then Jonʹa·than struck down the garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines that was in Geʹba, and the Phi·lisʹtines heard about it. And Saul had the horn blown throughout all the land, saying: “Let the Hebrews hear!”
All Israel heard the news: “Saul has struck down a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines, and now Israel has become a stench among the Phi·lisʹtines.” So the people were summoned to follow Saul at Gilʹgal.
The Phi·lisʹtines also gathered together to fight against Israel, with 30,000 war chariots and 6,000 horsemen and troops as numerous as the grains of sand on the seashore; and they went up and camped in Michʹmash to the east of Beth-aʹven.
And the men of Israel saw that they were in trouble, because they were hard-pressed; so the people hid in the caves, the hollows, the crags, the cellars, and the cisterns.
Some of the Hebrews even crossed the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilʹe·ad. But Saul was still in Gilʹgal, and all the people following him were trembling.
He continued waiting for seven days until the designated time that Samuel had set, but Samuel did not come to Gilʹgal, and the people were scattering from him.
Finally Saul said: “Bring to me the burnt sacrifice and the communion sacrifices.” And he offered up the burnt sacrifice.
But as soon as he had finished offering up the burnt sacrifice, Samuel arrived. So Saul went out to meet him and bless him.
Then Samuel said: “What have you done?” Saul replied: “I saw that the people were deserting me, and you did not come within the designated time, and the Phi·lisʹtines were gathering together at Michʹmash.
So I said to myself, ‘Now the Phi·lisʹtines will come down against me at Gilʹgal, and I have not sought the favor of Jehovah.’ So I felt obligated to offer up the burnt sacrifice.”
At this Samuel said to Saul: “You have acted foolishly. You have not obeyed the commandment that Jehovah your God gave you. If you had, Jehovah would have made your kingdom firm over Israel forever.
But now your kingdom will not last. Jehovah will find a man agreeable to his heart, and Jehovah will commission him as a leader over his people, because you did not obey what Jehovah commanded you.”
Then Samuel rose and went his way up from Gilʹgal to Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin, and Saul took the count of the people; those still with him were about 600 men.
Saul, his son Jonʹa·than, and the people still with them were dwelling in Geʹba of Benjamin, and the Phi·lisʹtines had encamped at Michʹmash.
And the raiding parties would go out from the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines in three bands. One band would turn toward the road to Ophʹrah, to the land of Shuʹal;
another band would turn toward the road of Beth-hoʹron; and the third band would turn toward the road leading to the boundary that overlooks the valley of Ze·boʹim, toward the wilderness.
Now there was not a metalworker to be found in all the land of Israel, because the Phi·lisʹtines had said: “So that the Hebrews may not make a sword or a spear.”
And all the Israelites had to go down to the Phi·lisʹtines to get their plowshares, mattocks, axes, or sickles sharpened.
The price for sharpening was a pim for the plowshares, for the mattocks, for the three-toothed instruments, for the axes, and for fixing fast the oxgoad.
And on the day of battle, not a sword or a spear was found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonʹa·than; only Saul and his son Jonʹa·than had weapons.
Now a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines had gone out to the ravine pass of Michʹmash.
David later came to Nob to A·himʹe·lech the priest. A·himʹe·lech began to tremble when he met David, and he said to him: “Why are you by yourself and no one is with you?”
David replied to A·himʹe·lech the priest: “The king instructed me to do something, but he said, ‘Do not let anyone know anything about the mission on which I am sending you and about the instructions I have given you.’ I made an appointment with my young men to meet at a certain place.
Now if there are five loaves of bread at your disposal, just give them to me, or whatever is available.”
But the priest answered David: “There is no ordinary bread on hand, but there is holy bread—provided that the young men have kept away from women.”
David answered the priest: “Women have certainly been kept away from us as on previous occasions when I went out on a campaign. If the bodies of the young men are holy even when the mission is ordinary, how much more so today should they be holy!”
So the priest gave him the holy bread, because there was no bread there except the showbread, which had been removed from Jehovah’s presence to be replaced by fresh bread on the day it was taken away.
Now one of Saul’s servants was there on that day, detained before Jehovah. His name was Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite, the chief of Saul’s shepherds.
David then said to A·himʹe·lech: “Is there a spear or a sword here at your disposal? I did not take my own sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s mission was urgent.”
To this the priest said: “The sword of Go·liʹath the Phi·lisʹtine, whom you struck down in the Valley of Eʹlah, is here, wrapped up in a cloth behind the ephʹod. If you want to take it for yourself, take it, because it is the only one here.” David said: “There is none like it. Give it to me.”
That day David rose up and continued his flight from Saul, and he eventually came to King Aʹchish of Gath.
The servants of Aʹchish said to him: “Is this not David, the king of the land? Is he not the one they sang about when they danced, saying,‘Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands’?”
David took these words to heart, and he became very much afraid of King Aʹchish of Gath.
So he disguised his sanity in their presence and acted insane while among them. He was making marks on the doors of the gate and letting his saliva run down his beard.
Finally Aʹchish said to his servants: “You see that this man is crazy! Why bring him to me?
Do I have a shortage of crazy men that I need to have this one acting crazy before me? Should this man enter my house?”
Meanwhile, the boy Samuel was ministering to Jehovah before Eʹli, but word from Jehovah had become rare in those days; visions were not widespread.
One day Eʹli was lying down in his usual place, and his eyes had grown dim; he was not able to see.
The lamp of God had not yet been extinguished, and Samuel was lying in the temple of Jehovah, where the Ark of God was.
Jehovah then called Samuel. He answered: “Here I am.”
He ran to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call. Lie down again.” So he went and lay down.
Jehovah called once again: “Samuel!” At this Samuel got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said: “I did not call, my son. Lie down again.”
(Now Samuel had not yet come to know Jehovah, and the word of Jehovah had not yet been revealed to him.)
So Jehovah called again, a third time: “Samuel!” At that he got up and went to Eʹli and said: “Here I am, for you called me.” Eʹli then realized that it was Jehovah who was calling the boy.
So Eʹli said to Samuel: “Go, lie down, and if he calls you, you should say, ‘Speak, Jehovah, for your servant is listening.’” And Samuel went and lay down in his place.
Jehovah came and stood there, and he called as at the other times: “Samuel, Samuel!” At this Samuel said: “Speak, for your servant is listening.”
Jehovah said to Samuel: “Look! I am doing something in Israel that will make both ears of anyone who hears about it tingle.
On that day I will carry out toward Eʹli all that I said about his house, from start to finish.
You must tell him that I am bringing a lasting judgment on his house for the error that he has known about, for his sons are cursing God, but he has not rebuked them.
That is why I have sworn to the house of Eʹli that the error of the house of Eʹli will never be atoned for by sacrifices or by offerings.”
Samuel lay down until the morning; then he opened the doors of Jehovah’s house. Samuel was afraid to tell Eʹli of the vision.
But Eʹli called for Samuel: “Samuel, my son!” At this he said: “Here I am.”
He asked: “What message did he speak to you? Please, do not hide it from me. May God do so to you and add to it if you hide from me a single word of all that he said to you.”
So Samuel told him everything, and he did not hide anything from him. Eʹli said: “It is Jehovah. Let him do what is good in his eyes.”
Samuel continued growing up, and Jehovah himself was with him and did not let any of all his words go unfulfilled.
All Israel from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba became aware that Samuel had been confirmed as Jehovah’s prophet.
And Jehovah continued to appear in Shiʹloh, for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel in Shiʹloh by the word of Jehovah.
When David and his men came to Zikʹlag on the third day, the A·malʹek·ites had made a raid on the south and on Zikʹlag, and they had attacked Zikʹlag and burned it with fire.
They had taken captive the women and all who were in it, from the smallest to the greatest. They had not killed anyone, but they had carried them off and gone on their way.
When David and his men came to the city, they found it burned down, and their wives and their sons and their daughters had been carried off captive.
So David and the men with him began weeping loudly until they had no strength left to weep.
David’s two wives had also been carried off captive, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite.
David was very distressed, because the men were talking of stoning him, for all the men had become very bitter over the loss of their sons and daughters. But David strengthened himself by Jehovah his God.
David then said to A·biʹa·thar the priest, the son of A·himʹe·lech: “Please bring the ephʹod here.” So A·biʹa·thar brought the ephʹod to David.
David inquired of Jehovah: “Should I chase after this marauder band? Will I overtake them?” At this He said to him: “Go in pursuit, for you will certainly overtake them, and you will make the rescue.”
David immediately set out with the 600 men who were with him, and they went on as far as the Wadi Beʹsor, where some of the men stayed behind.
David kept up the chase with 400 men, but the 200 men who were too tired to cross the Wadi Beʹsor stayed behind.
They found an Egyptian man in the field and took him to David. They gave him food to eat and water to drink,
as well as a slice of a cake of pressed figs and two cakes of raisins. After he ate, he regained his strength, for he had not eaten any food or drunk any water for three days and three nights.
David now asked him: “To whom do you belong, and where are you from?” to which he said: “I am an Egyptian attendant, a slave of an A·malʹek·ite man, but my master left me because I got sick three days ago.
We made a raid on the south of the Cherʹe·thites and on the territory of Judah and on the south of Caʹleb, and Zikʹlag we burned with fire.”
At this David said to him: “Will you lead me down to this marauder band?” He replied: “If you swear to me by God that you will not put me to death and that you will not hand me over to my master, I will lead you down to this marauder band.”
So he led him down to where they were spread out all over the land, eating and drinking and celebrating because of all the great spoil that they had taken from the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and the land of Judah.
Then David struck them down from the morning darkness until the following evening; not a man escaped except 400 men who fled on camels.
David recovered all that the A·malʹek·ites had taken, and David rescued his two wives.
Nothing of theirs was missing, from the smallest to the greatest. They recovered their sons and daughters and the spoil; David recovered everything that they had taken.
So David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before their own livestock. They said: “This is David’s spoil.”
Then David came to the 200 men who had been too tired to go along with David and who had stayed behind by the Wadi Beʹsor, and they came out to meet David and the people with him. When David came near to the men, he asked them how they were.
However, every bad and worthless man among those who had gone with David said: “Since they did not go with us, we will not give them any of the spoil that we recovered except that each one may take his wife and his sons and go away.”
But David said: “You must not do this, my brothers, with what Jehovah has given us. He protected us and gave into our hand the marauder band that came against us.
Who would agree with you on this? The share of the one who went down into the battle will be the same as the share of the one who sat by the baggage. All will have a share together.”
And from that day forward, he kept it set as a regulation and a rule for Israel down to this day.
When David returned to Zikʹlag, he sent some of the spoil to the elders of Judah who were his friends, saying: “Here is a gift for you from the spoil of Jehovah’s enemies.”
He sent it to those who were in Bethʹel, to those in Raʹmoth of the Negʹeb, to those in Jatʹtir,
to those in A·roʹer, to those in Siphʹmoth, to those in Esh·te·moʹa,
to those in Raʹcal, to those in the cities of the Je·rahʹme·el·ites, to those in the cities of the Kenʹites,
to those in Horʹmah, to those in Borʹa·shan, to those in Aʹthach,
to those in Hebʹron, and to all the places that David and his men had frequented.
There was a man of Benjamin named Kish, the son of A·biʹel, the son of Zeʹror son of Be·coʹrath son of A·phiʹah, a Benʹja·min·ite and a very wealthy man.
He had a son named Saul, who was young and handsome—there was no man among the Israelites more handsome than he—and he stood head and shoulders taller than all the people.
When the donkeys belonging to Saul’s father Kish got lost, Kish said to his son Saul: “Please take with you one of the attendants and go look for the donkeys.”
They passed through the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and through the land of Shalʹi·shah, and they did not find them. They traveled through the land of Shaʹa·lim, but the donkeys were not there. They passed through the entire land of the Benʹja·min·ites, and they did not find them.
They came into the land of Zuph, and Saul said to his attendant who was with him: “Come, let us return, so that my father does not start worrying about us rather than the donkeys.”
But the attendant replied: “Look, there is a man of God in this city, a man who is held in honor. All that he says is sure to come true. Let us go there now. Perhaps he can tell us which way to go.”
At this Saul said to his attendant: “If we go, what can we take to the man? There is no bread in our bags; there is nothing to take as a gift to the man of the true God. What do we have?”
So the attendant answered Saul again: “Look! There is a quarter of a shekel of silver in my hand. I will give it to the man of the true God, and he will tell us which way to go.”
(In former times in Israel, this was what a man would say when going to seek God: “Come, and let us go to the seer.” For the prophet of today used to be called a seer in former times.)
Then Saul said to his attendant: “What you said is good. Let us go.” So they went to the city where the man of the true God was.
While they were going up the ascent to the city, they met girls going out to draw water. So they said to them: “Is the seer in this place?”
They answered: “He is. Look, he is just ahead of you. Hurry now, for today he has come to the city, because the people are making a sacrifice today on the high place.
As soon as you come into the city, you will find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. The people will not eat until he comes, for he is the one who blesses the sacrifice. Once that is done, those who are invited may eat. So now go up right away, and you will find him.”
So they went up to the city. As they were coming into the middle of the city, there was Samuel coming out to meet them to go up to the high place.
The day before Saul came, Jehovah had told Samuel:
“Tomorrow about this time, I will send to you a man from the land of Benjamin. You must anoint him as leader over my people Israel, and he will save my people from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines. For I have seen the affliction of my people, and their outcry has reached me.”
When Samuel saw Saul, Jehovah told him: “Here is the man of whom I said to you, ‘This is the one who will govern my people.’”
Then Saul approached Samuel in the middle of the gate and said: “Tell me, please, where is the house of the seer?”
Samuel answered Saul: “I am the seer. Go up ahead of me to the high place, and you will eat with me today. I will send you away in the morning, and I will tell you all that you want to know.
As for the donkeys that were lost three days ago, do not worry about them, for they have been found. And to whom does all that is desirable of Israel belong? Is it not to you and to the whole house of your father?”
At this Saul answered: “Am I not a Benʹja·min·ite of the smallest of the tribes of Israel, and my family the most insignificant of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? So why have you spoken to me in this way?”
Then Samuel took Saul and his attendant and brought them to the dining hall and gave them a place at the head of those invited; there were about 30 men.
Samuel said to the cook: “Bring the portion that I gave you and told you, ‘Set it aside.’”
At that the cook lifted up the leg and what was on it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said: “What has been reserved has been set before you. Eat, because they have reserved it for you for this occasion. For I told them, ‘I invited guests.’” So Saul ate with Samuel on that day.
Then they went down from the high place to the city, and he continued to speak with Saul on the housetop.
They rose early, and at daybreak Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying: “Get ready, so that I may send you away.” So Saul got ready and both he and Samuel went outside.
While they were descending toward the outskirts of the city, Samuel said to Saul: “Tell the attendant to go on ahead of us,” so he went on ahead. “But you, stand still now, so that I may let you hear the word of God.”
As soon as Saul returned from pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, they told him: “Look! David is in the wilderness of En-gedʹi.”
So Saul took 3,000 men chosen from all Israel and went to look for David and his men on the rocky cliffs of the mountain goats.
Saul came to the stone sheepfolds along the road, where there was a cave, and he went in to relieve himself while David and his men were sitting in the recesses at the back of the cave.
David’s men said to him: “This is the day on which Jehovah is saying to you, ‘Look! I am giving your enemy into your hand, and you can do to him whatever seems good to you.’” So David rose up and quietly cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat.
But afterward David’s heart kept striking him because he had cut off the edge of Saul’s sleeveless coat.
He said to his men: “It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint that I should do such a thing to my lord, the anointed of Jehovah, by lifting my hand against him, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.”
So David restrained his men with these words, and he did not allow them to attack Saul. As for Saul, he rose up from the cave and went on his way.
Then David got up and went out from the cave and called out after Saul: “My lord the king!” When Saul looked behind him, David bowed down low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.
David said to Saul: “Why do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘Look! David is seeking to harm you’?
This very day your own eyes have seen how Jehovah gave you into my hand in the cave. But when someone said to kill you, I had pity on you and said, ‘I will not lift my hand against my lord, for he is the anointed of Jehovah.’
And look, my father, yes, see the edge of your sleeveless coat in my hand; for when I cut off the edge of your sleeveless coat, I did not kill you. You can now see and understand that I do not intend to harm you or to rebel, and I have not sinned against you, whereas you are hunting me down to take my life.
May Jehovah judge between you and me, and may Jehovah take vengeance on you for me, but my hand will not come against you.
Just as the ancient proverb says, ‘From the wicked comes wickedness,’ but my hand will not come against you.
After whom has the king of Israel gone out? Whom are you chasing? A dead dog? A single flea?
May Jehovah be the judge, and he will judge between you and me, and he will see and will plead my case and judge me and rescue me from your hand.”
At the moment that David finished speaking these words to him, Saul said: “Is this your voice, my son David?” And Saul began to weep loudly.
He said to David: “You are more righteous than I am, for you have treated me well and I have repaid you with evil.
Yes, today you have told me of the good you did by not killing me when Jehovah surrendered me into your hand.
For what man finds his enemy and sends him on his way unharmed? Jehovah will reward you with good because of what you have done for me today.
And now look! I know that you will surely rule as king and that in your hand the kingdom of Israel will endure.
Now swear to me by Jehovah that you will not wipe out my descendants after me and that you will not annihilate my name out of my father’s house.”
So David swore to Saul, after which Saul went home. But David and his men went up to the stronghold.
However, David said in his heart: “One day I will perish by Saul’s hand. The best thing for me is to escape to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines; then Saul will give up looking for me in all the territory of Israel, and I will escape from his hand.”
So David rose up with the 600 men who were with him and went over to Aʹchish the son of Maʹoch, the king of Gath.
David stayed with Aʹchish in Gath, he and his men, each man with his household. With David were his two wives, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the Carʹmel·ite, Naʹbal’s widow.
When report was made to Saul that David had run away to Gath, he stopped searching for him.
Then David said to Aʹchish: “If I have found favor in your eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities of the countryside, so that I may live there. Why should your servant live in the royal city with you?”
So Aʹchish gave him Zikʹlag on that day. That is why Zikʹlag belongs to the kings of Judah down to this day.
The length of time that David lived in the countryside of the Phi·lisʹtines was a year and four months.
David would go up with his men to raid the Geshʹur·ites, the Girʹzites, and the A·malʹek·ites, for they were inhabiting the land that extended from Teʹlam as far as Shur and down to the land of Egypt.
When David would attack the land, he preserved neither man nor woman alive, but he took the flocks, herds, donkeys, camels, and clothing, after which he would return to Aʹchish.
Then Aʹchish would ask: “Where did you make a raid today?” David would reply: “Against the south of Judah” or “Against the south of the Je·rahʹme·el·ites” or “Against the south of the Kenʹites.”
David did not spare alive any man or woman to be brought to Gath, saying: “That they may not tell them about us and say, ‘This is what David did.’” (And that was his practice the whole time he lived in the countryside of the Phi·lisʹtines.)
So Aʹchish believed David, saying to himself: ‘He has certainly become a stench among his people Israel, so he will always be my servant.’
Then Hanʹnah said in prayer: “My heart rejoices in Jehovah;My horn is exalted by Jehovah. My mouth is opened wide against my enemies,For I rejoice in your acts of salvation.
There is no one holy like Jehovah,There is no one but you,And there is no rock like our God.
Do not keep speaking with haughtiness;Let nothing arrogant come from your mouth,For Jehovah is a God of knowledge,And by him deeds are rightly evaluated.
The bows of mighty men are shattered,But those who are stumbling are given strength.
The well-fed must hire themselves out for bread,But the hungry hunger no more. The barren has given birth to seven,But she who had many sons has become desolate.
Jehovah kills, and he preserves life;He brings down to the Grave, and he raises up.
Jehovah impoverishes, and he enriches;He abases, and he exalts.
He raises the lowly one from the dust;He lifts up the poor from the ash heap,To make them sit with princes,Giving them a seat of honor. To Jehovah belong earth’s supports,And he places the productive land upon them.
He guards the steps of his loyal ones,But the wicked will be silenced in darkness,For not by power does a man prevail.
Jehovah will shatter those fighting against him;He will thunder against them from the heavens. Jehovah will judge to the ends of the earth,He will give power to his kingAnd exalt the horn of his anointed one.”
Then El·kaʹnah went to his house in Raʹmah, but the boy became a minister of Jehovah before Eʹli the priest.
Now the sons of Eʹli were wicked men; they had no regard for Jehovah.
This is what they did with the due right of the priests from the people: Whenever any man was offering a sacrifice, an attendant of the priest came with a three-pronged fork in his hand when the meat was boiling,
and he would thrust it into the basin, the two-handled cooking pot, the cauldron, or the one-handled cooking pot. Whatever the fork brought up, the priest would take for himself. That is what they would do in Shiʹloh to all the Israelites coming there.
Also, even before the man sacrificing could make the fat smoke, an attendant of the priest would come and say to him: “Give the priest meat to roast. He will not take boiled meat from you, only raw meat.”
When the man would say to him: “Let them first be sure to make the fat smoke, then take for yourself whatever you desire,” he would say: “No, give it to me now; if not, I will take it by force!”
Thus the sin of the attendants came to be very great before Jehovah, for the men treated the offering of Jehovah with disrespect.
Now Samuel was ministering before Jehovah, wearing a linen ephʹod, though he was just a boy.
Also, his mother would make for him a little sleeveless coat, and she brought it up to him year after year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
And Eʹli blessed El·kaʹnah and his wife and said: “May Jehovah grant you a child from this wife in place of the one who was lent to Jehovah.” And they went back home.
Jehovah turned his attention to Hanʹnah, so that she could conceive; and she gave birth to three more sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel continued growing up before Jehovah.
Now Eʹli was very old, but he had heard about everything that his sons were doing to all Israel and how they would lie down with the women who served at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
He used to say to them: “Why do you keep doing things like these? For the things I am hearing about you from all the people are bad.
No, my sons, the report that I hear circulating among the people of Jehovah is not good.
If a man should sin against another man, someone may appeal to Jehovah for him; but if a man should sin against Jehovah, who can pray for him?” But they refused to listen to their father, for Jehovah had determined to put them to death.
Meanwhile, the boy Samuel kept growing in stature and in favor both with Jehovah and with the people.
A man of God came to Eʹli and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Did I not plainly reveal myself to your father’s house while they were in Egypt as slaves to the house of Pharʹaoh?
And he was chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to serve as my priest and to go up on my altar to make sacrifices, to offer incense, and to bear an ephʹod before me; and I gave to the house of your forefather all the offerings made by fire of the Israelites.
Why do you men scorn my sacrifice and my offering that I have commanded in my place of dwelling? Why do you keep honoring your sons more than me by fattening yourselves from the best portions of every offering of my people Israel?
“‘That is why the word of Jehovah the God of Israel is: “I did indeed say that your house and the house of your forefather would always walk before me.” But now Jehovah declares: “It is unthinkable, on my part, because those honoring me I will honor, but those despising me will be treated with contempt.”
Look! Days are coming when I will cut off your strength and that of your father’s house, so that no man in your house will live to old age.
And you will look upon a rival in my dwelling amid all the good that is done to Israel, and never again will there be an old man in your house.
The man of yours whom I do not cut off from serving at my altar will cause your eyes to fail and will bring you grief, but the greater number of your house will die by the sword of men.
And what happens to your two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, will be the sign for you: On one day both of them will die.
Then I will raise up for myself a faithful priest. He will act in harmony with what is my heart’s desire; and I will build for him a lasting house, and he will walk before my anointed one always.
Anyone who remains in your house will come and bow down to him for the payment of money and a loaf of bread, and will say: “Assign me, please, to one of the priestly offices to eat a piece of bread.”’”
Samuel then took the flask of oil and poured it out on Saul’s head. He kissed him and said: “Has not Jehovah anointed you as a leader over his inheritance?
When you leave me today, you will find two men near the tomb of Rachel in the territory of Benjamin at Zelʹzah, and they will say to you, ‘The donkeys that you went to look for have been found, but now your father has forgotten about the donkeys and is worried about you. He is saying: “What should I do about my son?”’
Go on from there until you come to the big tree of Taʹbor, where you will meet three men going up to the true God at Bethʹel, one carrying three young goats, one carrying three loaves of bread, and one carrying a large jar of wine.
They will ask about your welfare and give you two loaves, and you must accept the loaves from them.
After that you will come to the hill of the true God, where there is a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines. When you come to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place, and a stringed instrument and tambourine and flute and harp will be played ahead of them while they are prophesying.
The spirit of Jehovah will empower you, and you will prophesy along with them and be changed into a different person.
When these signs have taken place, do whatever your hand finds possible, because the true God is with you.
Then go down ahead of me to Gilʹgal, and I will go down to you there to offer up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices. You should wait for seven days until I come to you. Then I will let you know what you should do.”
As soon as Saul turned around to leave Samuel, God began changing his heart to be like that of someone else, and all these signs came true on that day.
So they went from there to the hill, and a group of prophets met him. At once the spirit of God empowered him, and he began to prophesy among them.
When all those who previously knew him saw him prophesying with the prophets, they said to one another: “What has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?”
Then a man from there said: “But who is their father?” So it became a saying: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
When he finished prophesying, he came to the high place.
The brother of Saul’s father later said to him and to his attendant: “Where did you go?” At that he said: “To look for the donkeys, but we saw that they were not there, so we went to Samuel.”
Saul’s uncle asked: “Please tell me, what did Samuel say to you?”
Saul replied to his uncle: “He told us that the donkeys had already been found.” But Saul did not tell him what Samuel said about the matter of the kingship.
Samuel then called the people together to Jehovah at Mizʹpah
and said to the Israelites: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘It was I who brought Israel up out of Egypt and who rescued you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you.
But today you have rejected your God who was your Savior out of all your evils and distresses, and you said: “No, you should appoint a king over us.” Now take your stand before Jehovah by your tribes and by your thousands.’”
So Samuel had all the tribes of Israel draw near, and the tribe of Benjamin was selected.
Then he had the tribe of Benjamin draw near by its families, and the family of the Matʹrites was selected. Finally Saul the son of Kish was selected. But when they went to look for him, he was nowhere to be found.
So they inquired of Jehovah: “Has the man come here yet?” Jehovah answered: “There he is hiding himself among the luggage.”
So they ran and brought him from there. When he stood in the middle of the people, he was head and shoulders taller than all the other people.
Samuel said to all the people: “Do you see the one whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none like him among all the people?” And all the people began to shout: “Long live the king!”
Samuel spoke to the people about the rightful due of kings and wrote it in a book and deposited it before Jehovah. Then Samuel sent all the people away, everyone to his house.
Saul also went to his home in Gibʹe·ah, accompanied by the warriors whose hearts Jehovah had touched.
But some worthless men said: “How will this one save us?” So they despised him, and they did not bring any gift to him. But he said nothing about it.
Jehovah eventually said to Samuel: “How long will you mourn for Saul now that I have rejected him from ruling as king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I will send you to Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite, because I have selected from among his sons a king for myself.”
But Samuel said: “How can I go? When Saul hears about it, he will kill me.” Jehovah replied: “Take a young cow with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah.’
Invite Jesʹse to the sacrifice; then I will make known to you what to do. You must anoint for me the one whom I designate to you.”
Samuel did what Jehovah said. When he came to Bethʹle·hem, the elders of the city were trembling at meeting him, and they said: “Does your coming mean peace?”
To this he said: “It means peace. I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.” Then he sanctified Jesʹse and his sons, after which he summoned them to the sacrifice.
As they came in and he saw E·liʹab, he said: “Surely here before Jehovah stands his anointed one.”
But Jehovah said to Samuel: “Do not pay attention to his appearance and how tall he is, for I have rejected him. For the way man sees is not the way God sees, because mere man sees what appears to the eyes, but Jehovah sees into the heart.”
Then Jesʹse called A·binʹa·dab and had him pass before Samuel, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
Next Jesʹse presented Shamʹmah, but he said: “Jehovah has not chosen this one either.”
So Jesʹse had seven of his sons pass before Samuel, but Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Jehovah has not chosen any of these.”
Finally Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Are these all of your boys?” To this he said: “The youngest has been left out until now; he is pasturing the sheep.” Then Samuel said to Jesʹse: “Send for him, because we will not sit down for the meal until he comes here.”
So he sent for him and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes, and handsome in appearance. Then Jehovah said: “Get up, anoint him, for this is the one!”
So Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the presence of his brothers. And the spirit of Jehovah began to empower David from that day forward. Samuel later rose and went his way to Raʹmah.
Now the spirit of Jehovah had departed from Saul, and a bad spirit from Jehovah terrorized him.
The servants of Saul said to him: “You see that a bad spirit from God is terrorizing you.
Let our lord, please, command your servants before you to look for a man who is skilled at playing the harp. Whenever a bad spirit from God comes upon you, he will play it, and you will feel better.”
So Saul said to his servants: “Find me, please, a man who plays well, and bring him to me.”
One of the attendants said: “Look! I have seen how a son of Jesʹse the Bethʹle·hem·ite plays skillfully, and he is a courageous, mighty warrior. He can speak well, and he is handsome, and Jehovah is with him.”
Saul then sent messengers to Jesʹse and said: “Send to me your son David, who is with the flock.”
So Jesʹse loaded a donkey with bread, a skin bottle of wine, and a young goat and sent them to Saul with his son David.
Thus David came to Saul and began serving him. Saul grew to love him very much, and he became his armor-bearer.
Saul sent a message to Jesʹse: “Please let David remain in my service, for he has found favor in my eyes.”
Whenever a bad spirit from God came upon Saul, David took the harp and played it, and Saul found relief and felt better, and the bad spirit would depart from him.
When the Phi·lisʹtines captured the Ark of the true God, they brought it from Eb·en·eʹzer to Ashʹdod.
The Phi·lisʹtines took the Ark of the true God and brought it into the house of Daʹgon and set it beside Daʹgon.
When the Ashʹdod·ites got up early the next day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. So they took Daʹgon and returned him to his place.
When they got up early in the morning on the following day, there was Daʹgon fallen facedown on the ground before the Ark of Jehovah. The head of Daʹgon and the palms of both his hands were cut off and were lying on the threshold. Only the fish part had been left intact.
That is why to this day, the priests of Daʹgon and all those who enter the house of Daʹgon do not walk on the threshold of Daʹgon in Ashʹdod.
The hand of Jehovah was heavy against the Ashʹdod·ites, and he devastated them by striking Ashʹdod and its territories with piles.
When the men of Ashʹdod saw what was happening, they said: “Do not let the Ark of the God of Israel remain with us, for his hand has dealt harshly with us and our god Daʹgon.”
So they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and asked them: “What should we do with the Ark of the God of Israel?” They replied: “Let the Ark of the God of Israel be moved to Gath.” So they moved the Ark of the God of Israel there.
After they moved it there, the hand of Jehovah came against the city, bringing great panic. He struck the men of the city, from small to great, and piles broke out on them.
So they sent the Ark of the true God to Ekʹron, but as soon as the Ark of the true God came to Ekʹron, the Ekʹron·ites began to cry out: “They have brought the Ark of the God of Israel to us to put us and our people to death!”
Then they sent for and gathered all the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines and said: “Send the Ark of the God of Israel away; let it return to its place so that we and our people may not be put to death.” For the terror of death had spread through the whole city; the hand of the true God had been very heavy there,
and the men who did not die had been struck with piles. And the city’s cry for help ascended to the heavens.
One day Jonʹa·than the son of Saul said to the attendant carrying his weapons: “Come and let us cross over to the Phi·lisʹtine outpost on the other side.” But he did not tell his father.
Saul was staying on the outskirts of Gibʹe·ah under the pomegranate tree in Migʹron, and there were about 600 men with him.
(And A·hiʹjah the son of A·hiʹtub, the brother of Ichʹa·bod, the son of Phinʹe·has, the son of Eʹli, the priest of Jehovah in Shiʹloh, was carrying the ephʹod.) And the people did not know that Jonʹa·than had gone.
Now between the passages that Jonʹa·than was trying to cross over to reach the outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines, there was a toothlike crag on one side and a toothlike crag on the other side; the name of the one was Boʹzez, and the name of the other was Seʹneh.
The one crag was a pillar on the north facing Michʹmash, and the other was on the south facing Geʹba.
So Jonʹa·than said to his armor-bearer: “Come and let us cross over to the outpost of these uncircumcised men. Perhaps Jehovah will act in our behalf, for nothing can hinder Jehovah from saving by many or by few.”
At this his armor-bearer said to him: “Do whatever your heart impels you to do. Turn wherever you wish, and I will follow you wherever your heart impels you.”
Then Jonʹa·than said: “We will cross over to those men and reveal our presence to them.
If they say to us, ‘Stand still until we come to you!’ we will stand where we are and not go up to them.
But if they say, ‘Come up against us!’ we will go up, because Jehovah will give them into our hand. This will be our sign.”
Then both of them revealed their presence to the outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines. The Phi·lisʹtines said: “Look! The Hebrews are coming out from the holes where they have been hiding.”
So the men of the outpost said to Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer: “Come up to us, and we will teach you a lesson!” At once Jonʹa·than said to his armor-bearer: “Follow me, for Jehovah will give them into the hand of Israel.”
And Jonʹa·than climbed up on his hands and feet, and his armor-bearer was behind him; and the Phi·lisʹtines began to fall before Jonʹa·than, and his armor-bearer was putting them to death behind him.
In the first attack that Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer made, they struck down about 20 men within about half the plowing line in an acre of field.
Then terror spread in the field camp and among all the people of the outpost, and even the raiding parties were terrified. The earth began quaking, and a terror from God ensued.
Saul’s watchmen in Gibʹe·ah of Benjamin saw that the turmoil was spreading in every direction.
Saul said to the people with him: “Take a count, please, and see who has left us.” When they took the count, they saw that Jonʹa·than and his armor-bearer were not there.
Saul now said to A·hiʹjah: “Bring the Ark of the true God near!” (For the Ark of the true God was with the Israelites at that time.)
And while Saul was speaking to the priest, the turmoil in the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines was growing greater and greater. Then Saul said to the priest: “Stop what you are doing.”
So Saul and all the people with him assembled and went into the battle, where they found that the Phi·lisʹtines had turned their swords against one another, and the confusion was very great.
Also, the Hebrews who had previously sided with the Phi·lisʹtines and who had come up with them into the camp were going over to Israel under Saul and Jonʹa·than.
All the men of Israel who had hidden in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im heard that the Phi·lisʹtines had fled, and they too joined in pursuing them in the battle.
So Jehovah saved Israel on that day, and the battle extended as far as Beth-aʹven.
But the men of Israel were hard-pressed on that day, for Saul had put the people under this oath: “Cursed is the man who eats any food before the evening and until I have taken vengeance on my enemies!” So none of the people ate any food.
And all the people came into the forest, and there was honey on the ground.
When the people came into the forest, they saw the honey dripping, but no one would put his hand to his mouth, because they feared the oath.
But Jonʹa·than had not heard his father put the people under an oath, so he stretched out the tip of the staff that was in his hand and dipped it into the honeycomb. When he drew his hand back to his mouth, his eyes brightened.
At this one of the people said: “Your father put the people under a strict oath, saying, ‘Cursed is the man who eats food today!’ That is why the people are so tired.”
However, Jonʹa·than said: “My father has brought great trouble on the land. Look at how my eyes brightened because I tasted this little bit of honey.
How much better if the people had eaten freely today from the spoil of their enemies that they found! For then the slaughter of the Phi·lisʹtines would have been even greater.”
On that day they kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines from Michʹmash to Aiʹja·lon, and the people became very tired.
So the people began rushing greedily at the spoil, and they took sheep and cattle and calves and slaughtered them on the ground, and they ate the meat along with the blood.
So it was reported to Saul: “Look! The people are sinning against Jehovah by eating meat with the blood.” At this he said: “You have acted faithlessly. Roll a large stone to me immediately.”
Saul then said: “Spread out among the people and say to them, ‘Each of you must bring his bull and his sheep and slaughter them here and then eat them. Do not sin against Jehovah by eating meat with the blood.’” So each of them brought his bull with him that night and slaughtered it there.
And Saul built an altar to Jehovah. This was the first altar he built to Jehovah.
Saul later said: “Let us go down after the Phi·lisʹtines by night and plunder them until the morning light. We will not leave a single survivor.” To this they said: “Do whatever seems good in your eyes.” Then the priest said: “Let us approach the true God here.”
And Saul inquired of God: “Should I go down after the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into the hand of Israel?” But God did not answer him on that day.
So Saul said: “Come here, all you chiefs of the people, and find out what sin has been committed today.
For as surely as Jehovah is alive, who rescued Israel, even if it turns out to be Jonʹa·than my son, he must die.” But none of the people would answer him.
Then he said to all Israel: “You will be on one side, and my son Jonʹa·than and I will be on the other side.” At this the people said to Saul: “Do whatever seems good in your eyes.”
Saul then said to Jehovah: “O God of Israel, answer with the Thumʹmim!” Then Jonʹa·than and Saul were selected, and the people went free.
Saul now said: “Cast lots to decide between me and my son Jonʹa·than.” And Jonʹa·than was selected.
Then Saul said to Jonʹa·than: “Tell me, what have you done?” So Jonʹa·than told him: “I merely tasted a little honey on the tip of the staff in my hand. Here I am! I am ready to die!”
At this Saul said: “Thus may God do and may he add to it if you do not die, Jonʹa·than.”
But the people said to Saul: “Should Jonʹa·than die—the one who brought this great victory to Israel? It is unthinkable! As surely as Jehovah is alive, not even a single hair of his head should fall to the ground, for it was with God that he acted this day.” With that the people rescued Jonʹa·than, and he did not die.
So Saul stopped pursuing the Phi·lisʹtines, and the Phi·lisʹtines went to their own territory.
Saul secured the kingship over Israel and fought against all his enemies on every side, against the Moʹab·ites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Eʹdom·ites, the kings of Zoʹbah, and the Phi·lisʹtines; and wherever he went he defeated them.
And he fought bravely and conquered the A·malʹek·ites and rescued Israel from the hand of their plunderers.
The sons of Saul were Jonʹa·than, Ishʹvi, and Malʹchi-shuʹa. And he had two daughters; the name of the older one was Meʹrab, and the name of the younger one, Miʹchal.
The name of Saul’s wife was A·hinʹo·am the daughter of A·himʹa·az. The name of the chief of his army was Abʹner the son of Ner, the uncle of Saul.
Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abʹner was the son of A·biʹel.
There was fierce warfare with the Phi·lisʹtines all the days of Saul. When Saul saw any strong or courageous man, he would recruit him into his service.
In those days the Phi·lisʹtines assembled their armies for war against Israel. So Aʹchish said to David: “You know, of course, that you and your men will go out into battle with me.”
At that David said to Aʹchish: “You surely know what your servant will do.” Aʹchish said to David: “That is why I will appoint you as my permanent bodyguard.”
Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned him and had buried him in Raʹmah, his own city. And Saul had removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land.
The Phi·lisʹtines assembled and went and set up camp in Shuʹnem. So Saul assembled all Israel, and they set up camp in Gil·boʹa.
When Saul saw the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.
Although Saul would inquire of Jehovah, Jehovah never answered him, either in dreams or by the Uʹrim or through the prophets.
Finally Saul said to his servants: “Find me a woman who is a spirit medium, and I will go and consult her.” His servants replied: “Look! There is a woman who is a spirit medium in En-dor.”
So Saul disguised himself and put on other garments and went to the woman by night with two of his men. He said: “Use divination, please, by acting as a spirit medium, and bring up for me the one whom I designate to you.”
However, the woman said to him: “You must know what Saul did, how he removed the spirit mediums and the fortune-tellers from the land. Why, then, are you trying to trap me to have me put to death?”
Saul then swore to her by Jehovah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, you will not incur any guilt in this matter!”
At this the woman said: “Whom should I bring up for you?” He replied: “Bring up Samuel for me.”
When the woman saw “Samuel,” she cried out at the top of her voice and said to Saul: “Why did you trick me? You are Saul!”
The king said to her: “Do not be afraid, but what do you see?” The woman replied to Saul: “I see one like a god coming up out of the earth.”
At once he asked her: “What does he look like?” to which she said: “It is an old man coming up, and he is clothed in a sleeveless coat.” At that Saul realized that it was “Samuel,” and he bowed low with his face to the ground and prostrated himself.
Then “Samuel” said to Saul: “Why have you disturbed me by having me brought up?” Saul replied: “I am in great trouble. The Phi·lisʹtines are fighting against me, and God has departed from me and no longer answers me, either through the prophets or in dreams; so that is why I am calling on you to let me know what I should do.”
And “Samuel” said: “Why do you inquire of me now that Jehovah has departed from you and has become your adversary?
Jehovah will do for himself what he foretold through me: Jehovah will rip the kingdom out of your hands and give it to one of your fellow men, David.
Because you did not obey the voice of Jehovah and you did not execute his burning anger against the A·malʹek·ites, that is why Jehovah is doing this to you this day.
Jehovah will also give both Israel and you into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. Jehovah will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
At once Saul fell full length on the ground and became very much afraid because of “Samuel’s” words. And there was no strength left in him, because he had not eaten food all day and all night.
When the woman came to Saul and saw that he had been greatly disturbed, she said to him: “Here your servant has obeyed what you said, and I risked my life and did what you told me to do.
Now, please, listen to what your servant has to say. Let me set before you a piece of bread; then eat so that you will have some strength to go on your way.”
But he refused and said: “I am not going to eat.” However, his servants and also the woman kept urging him. Finally he listened to them and got up from the ground and sat on the bed.
The woman had a fattened calf in the house, so she quickly slaughtered it and took flour and kneaded dough and baked it into unleavened bread.
She served them to Saul and his servants, and they ate. After that they rose up and left during the night.
So David went from there, escaping to the cave of A·dulʹlam. When his brothers and his father’s entire house heard of it, they went down there to him.
And all those who were in trouble and in debt and who had a grievance gathered to him, and he became their chief. There were about 400 men with him.
David later went from there to Mizʹpeh in Moʹab and said to the king of Moʹab: “Please let my father and mother stay with you until I know what God will do for me.”
So he left them with the king of Moʹab, and they stayed with him the whole time that David was in the stronghold.
In time Gad the prophet said to David: “Do not stay in the stronghold. Go from there into the land of Judah.” So David left and went into the forest of Heʹreth.
Saul heard that David and the men with him had been found. Saul was then sitting in Gibʹe·ah under the tamarisk tree on the high place with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were stationed around him.
Then Saul said to his servants stationed around him: “Listen, please, you Benʹja·min·ites. Will the son of Jesʹse also give fields and vineyards to all of you? Will he appoint all of you as chiefs of thousands and chiefs of hundreds?
All of you have conspired against me! No one informed me when my own son made a covenant with the son of Jesʹse! Not one of you has sympathy for me and informs me that my own son has incited my own servant against me to ambush me, as is now the case.”
Then Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite, who was stationed there over the servants of Saul, answered: “I saw the son of Jesʹse come to Nob to A·himʹe·lech the son of A·hiʹtub.
And he inquired of Jehovah for him and gave him provisions. He even gave him the sword of Go·liʹath the Phi·lisʹtine.”
At once the king sent for A·himʹe·lech son of A·hiʹtub the priest and all the priests of his father’s house, who were in Nob. So all of them came to the king.
Saul now said: “Listen, please, you son of A·hiʹtub!” to which he replied: “Here I am, my lord.”
Saul said to him: “Why have you conspired against me, you and the son of Jesʹse, by giving him bread and a sword and by making an inquiry of God for him? He opposes me and waits in ambush, as is now the case.”
At this A·himʹe·lech answered the king: “Who among all your servants is as trustworthy as David? He is the king’s son-in-law and a chief over your bodyguard and honored in your house.
Was today the first time I inquired of God for him? What you are saying is unthinkable on my part! Do not let the king hold anything against his servant and against my father’s entire house, for your servant did not know a single thing about any of this.”
But the king said: “You will surely die, A·himʹe·lech, you along with all your father’s house.”
With that the king said to the guards stationed around him: “Turn and kill the priests of Jehovah, because they have sided with David! They knew that he was a runaway, and they did not inform me!” But the king’s servants did not want to lift their hands to assault the priests of Jehovah.
Then the king said to Doʹeg: “You turn and assault the priests!” Immediately Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite went and assaulted the priests himself. He killed on that day 85 men wearing the linen ephʹod.
He also struck Nob, the city of the priests, with the sword; man as well as woman, child as well as infant, bull, donkey, and sheep, he put to the sword.
However, one son of A·himʹe·lech the son of A·hiʹtub, whose name was A·biʹa·thar, escaped and ran away to follow David.
A·biʹa·thar told David: “Saul has killed the priests of Jehovah.”
At this David said to A·biʹa·thar: “I knew on that day, when Doʹeg the Eʹdom·ite was there, that he would be sure to tell Saul. I am personally responsible for the death of everyone in your father’s house.
Stay with me. Do not be afraid, for whoever seeks your life seeks my life; you are under my protection.”
Then Samuel said to Saul: “Jehovah sent me to anoint you as king over his people Israel; now listen to what Jehovah has to say.
This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘I will call to account the A·malʹek·ites for what they did to Israel when they opposed them along their way coming up from Egypt.
Now go, and strike down the A·malʹek·ites, and devote them to destruction along with all that they have. You must not spare them; you are to put them to death, man as well as woman, child as well as infant, bull as well as sheep, camel as well as donkey.’”
Saul summoned the people and counted them in Te·laʹim: There were 200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah.
Saul advanced as far as the city of Amʹa·lek and set an ambush by the valley.
Saul then said to the Kenʹites: “Go, depart from among the A·malʹek·ites, so that I do not sweep you away with them. For you showed loyal love to all the people of Israel at the time they came up out of Egypt.” So the Kenʹites departed from the midst of Amʹa·lek.
After that Saul struck down the A·malʹek·ites from Havʹi·lah as far as Shur, which is next to Egypt.
He caught Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek alive, but all the other people he devoted to destruction with the sword.
However, Saul and the people spared Aʹgag and the best of the flock, the herd, the fattened animals, the rams, and all that was good. They did not want to devote them to destruction. But all the goods that were worthless and unwanted, these they devoted to destruction.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Samuel:
“I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned away from following me and he has not carried out my words.” Samuel became very upset, and he kept crying out to Jehovah all night long.
When Samuel got up early in the morning to meet Saul, Samuel was told: “Saul went to Carʹmel, and there he erected a monument for himself. Then he turned around and went down to Gilʹgal.”
When Samuel finally came to him, Saul said to him: “May Jehovah bless you. I have carried out the word of Jehovah.”
But Samuel said: “Then what is this sound of the flock in my ears and the sound of the cattle that I hear?”
To this Saul said: “They were brought from the A·malʹek·ites, because the people spared the best of the flock and the herd for sacrificing them to Jehovah your God; but what was left we devoted to destruction.”
At this Samuel said to Saul: “Stop! Let me tell you what Jehovah said to me last night.” So he said to him: “Speak!”
Samuel continued: “Were you not insignificant in your own eyes when you were made head of the tribes of Israel and when Jehovah anointed you as king over Israel?
Jehovah later sent you on a mission and said, ‘Go, and devote the sinful A·malʹek·ites to destruction. Fight against them until you have exterminated them.’
So why did you not obey the voice of Jehovah? Instead, you rushed greedily toward the spoil and did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah!”
However, Saul said to Samuel: “But I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah! I went on the mission to which Jehovah sent me, and I brought back Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek, and I devoted the A·malʹek·ites to destruction.
But the people took sheep and cattle from the spoil, the best of what was devoted to destruction, to sacrifice to Jehovah your God at Gilʹgal.”
Samuel then said: “Does Jehovah take as much pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Look! To obey is better than a sacrifice, and to pay attention than the fat of rams;
for rebelliousness is the same as the sin of divination, and pushing ahead presumptuously the same as using magical power and idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of Jehovah, he has rejected you from being king.”
Then Saul said to Samuel: “I have sinned, for I have overstepped the order of Jehovah and your words, because I feared the people and listened to what they said.
And now, please, pardon my sin, and return with me so that I may bow down to Jehovah.”
But Samuel said to Saul: “I will not return with you, for you have rejected the word of Jehovah, and Jehovah has rejected you from continuing as king over Israel.”
As Samuel was turning to go, Saul grabbed hold of the hem of his sleeveless coat, but it ripped away.
At this Samuel said to him: “Jehovah has ripped away the royal rule of Israel from you today, and he will give it to one of your fellow men who is better than you.
Moreover, the Excellency of Israel will not prove false or change his mind, for He is not a mere man that he should change his mind.”
At this he said: “I have sinned. But honor me, please, in front of the elders of my people and in front of Israel. Return with me, and I will bow down to Jehovah your God.”
So Samuel returned behind Saul, and Saul bowed down to Jehovah.
And Samuel said: “Bring Aʹgag the king of Amʹa·lek near to me.” Then Aʹgag went to him reluctantly, for Aʹgag had been saying to himself: ‘Surely the threat of death is past.’
However, Samuel said: “Just as your sword has bereaved women of children, so your mother will be most bereaved among women.” With that Samuel hacked Aʹgag to pieces before Jehovah at Gilʹgal.
Samuel now went to Raʹmah, and Saul went up to his own house at Gibʹe·ah of Saul.
Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death, for Samuel went into mourning for Saul. And Jehovah regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.
And the word of Samuel went out to all Israel. Then Israel went out to meet the Phi·lisʹtines in battle; they camped beside Eb·en·eʹzer, and the Phi·lisʹtines were encamped at Aʹphek.
The Phi·lisʹtines drew up in battle formation to meet Israel, but the battle went badly and Israel was defeated by the Phi·lisʹtines, who struck down about 4,000 men from the battle line in the field.
When the people returned to the camp, the elders of Israel said: “Why did Jehovah allow us to be defeated today by the Phi·lisʹtines? Let us take the ark of Jehovah’s covenant with us from Shiʹloh, so that it may be with us and save us from the hand of our enemies.”
So the people sent men to Shiʹloh, and they carried from there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of armies, who sits enthroned above the cherubs. The two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, were also there with the ark of the covenant of the true God.
As soon as the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came into the camp, all the Israelites broke out into loud shouting, so that the earth shook.
When the Phi·lisʹtines heard the sound of the shouting, they said: “Why is there such loud shouting in the camp of the Hebrews?” Finally they learned that the Ark of Jehovah had come into the camp.
The Phi·lisʹtines became afraid, for they said: “God has come into the camp!” So they said: “Too bad for us, for nothing like this has ever happened before!
Too bad for us! Who will save us from the hand of this majestic God? This is the God who struck Egypt with every sort of slaughter in the wilderness.
Be courageous and act like men, you Phi·lisʹtines, so that you may not serve the Hebrews just as they have served you. Act like men and fight!”
So the Phi·lisʹtines fought and Israel was defeated, and each one fled to his tent. The slaughter was very great; on Israel’s side, 30,000 foot soldiers fell.
Moreover, the Ark of God was captured, and the two sons of Eʹli, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, died.
A man of Benjamin ran from the battle line and arrived at Shiʹloh on that day with his garments ripped apart and dirt on his head.
When the man arrived, Eʹli was sitting on the seat by the roadside watching, because his heart was trembling over the Ark of the true God. The man went into the city to report the news, and the whole city began crying out.
When Eʹli heard the sound of the outcry, he asked: “What does the sound of this turmoil mean?” The same man hurried in and reported the news to Eʹli.
(Now Eʹli was 98 years old, and his eyes stared straight ahead, and he could not see.)
Then the man said to Eʹli: “I am the one who came from the battle line! Just today I fled from the battle line.” At this he asked: “What happened, my son?”
So the bearer of the news related: “Israel has fled from the Phi·lisʹtines, and there was a great defeat among the people; also your own two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, have died, and the Ark of the true God has been captured.”
At the moment he mentioned the Ark of the true God, Eʹli fell backward from his seat beside the gate, and his neck was broken and he died, for he was old and heavy. He had judged Israel for 40 years.
His daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinʹe·has, was pregnant and close to giving birth. When she heard the report that the Ark of the true God had been captured and that her father-in-law and her husband had died, she doubled over and unexpectedly went into labor and gave birth.
As she was dying, the women standing by her said: “Do not be afraid, for you have given birth to a son.” She did not answer and did not pay attention to it.
But she named the boy Ichʹa·bod, saying: “Glory has gone away from Israel into exile,” referring to the capture of the Ark of the true God and what happened to her father-in-law and her husband.
She said: “Glory has gone away from Israel into exile, because the Ark of the true God has been captured.”
Then David ran away from Naiʹoth in Raʹmah. However, he came to Jonʹa·than and said: “What have I done? What is my offense, and how have I sinned against your father for him to seek my life?”
At this Jonʹa·than said to him: “It is unthinkable! You will not die. Look! My father will not do anything, great or small, without disclosing it to me. Why should my father hide this matter from me? This will not happen.”
But David swore further and said: “Your father surely knows that I have found favor in your eyes and would say, ‘Do not let Jonʹa·than know this or he will be upset.’ But as surely as Jehovah is living and as surely as you are living, there is only a step between me and death!”
Then Jonʹa·than said to David: “Whatever you say, I will do for you.”
David said to Jonʹa·than: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and I am certainly expected to sit with the king to eat; you must send me away, and I will hide in the field until the evening on the third day.
If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David begged me for permission to go quickly to his city Bethʹle·hem, because there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.’
If his response is, ‘That is fine,’ it means peace to your servant. But if he becomes angry, you can be sure that he is determined to harm me.
Show loyal love to your servant, for you have brought your servant into Jehovah’s covenant with you. But if I am guilty, put me to death yourself. Why turn me over to your father?”
To this Jonʹa·than said: “It is unthinkable to suggest that about you! If I learn that my father is determined to harm you, would I not tell you?”
Then David said to Jonʹa·than: “Who will tell me whether your father gives you a harsh answer?”
Jonʹa·than said to David: “Come, let us go out into the field.” So both of them went out into the field.
And Jonʹa·than said to David: “Let Jehovah the God of Israel be a witness that I will sound out my father about this time tomorrow or by the third day. If he is favorably disposed toward David, will I not then send you word and disclose it to you?
But if my father intends to harm you, may Jehovah do that and more to Jonʹa·than if I do not disclose it to you and send you away in peace. May Jehovah be with you, just as he was with my father.
And will you not show me the loyal love of Jehovah while I am alive and even when I die?
Never withdraw your loyal love from my household, even when Jehovah wipes out all the enemies of David from the face of the earth.”
So Jonʹa·than made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “Jehovah will require it and call David’s enemies to account.”
So Jonʹa·than had David swear again by his love for him, for he loved him as he loved himself.
Jonʹa·than then said to him: “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, for your seat will be vacant.
By the third day, you will be missed even more, and you must go to the place where you hid the other day and stay near the stone here.
I will then shoot three arrows to one side of it, as though I were shooting at a target.
When I send the attendant, I will say, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I say to the attendant, ‘Look! The arrows are on this side of you, get them,’ then you may come back, for as surely as Jehovah is living, it means everything is peaceful for you and there is no danger.
But if I should say to the boy, ‘Look! The arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for Jehovah has sent you away.
As for the promise that we have made, you and I, may Jehovah be between us forever.”
So David hid in the field. When the new moon came, the king took his seat at the meal to eat.
The king was sitting in his usual seat by the wall. Jonʹa·than was facing him, and Abʹner was sitting at Saul’s side, but David’s place was vacant.
Saul did not say anything that day, for he said to himself: ‘Something has happened so that he is not clean. Yes, he must be unclean.’
And the day after the new moon, on the second day, David’s place continued vacant. Saul then said to Jonʹa·than his son: “Why has the son of Jesʹse not come to the meal either yesterday or today?”
Jonʹa·than answered Saul: “David begged me for permission to go to Bethʹle·hem.
He said, ‘Please permit me to go, because we have a family sacrifice in the city, and my own brother summoned me. So if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me slip away to see my brothers.’ That is why he has not come to the king’s table.”
Then Saul became enraged with Jonʹa·than, and he said to him: “You son of a rebellious woman, do you think I do not know that you are choosing to side with the son of Jesʹse, to your own shame and to the shame of your mother?
As long as the son of Jesʹse is alive on the earth, you and your kingship will not be firmly established. So now send someone to bring him to me, for he must die.”
However, Jonʹa·than said to Saul his father: “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?”
At that Saul hurled the spear at him to strike him, so Jonʹa·than knew that his father was determined to put David to death.
Jonʹa·than immediately rose up from the table in the heat of anger, and he did not eat any food on the second day after the new moon, for he was upset over David and his own father had humiliated him.
In the morning Jonʹa·than went out to the field for the appointment with David, and a young attendant was with him.
And he said to his attendant: “Please run and find the arrows that I shoot.” The attendant ran, and Jonʹa·than shot the arrow beyond him.
When the attendant reached the place where Jonʹa·than had shot the arrow, Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Is not the arrow beyond you?”
Jonʹa·than called out to the attendant: “Hurry! Go quickly! Do not delay!” And Jonʹa·than’s attendant picked up the arrows and came back to his master.
The attendant did not understand anything about the matter; only Jonʹa·than and David knew what was meant.
Then Jonʹa·than gave his weapons to his attendant and told him: “Go, take them to the city.”
When the attendant left, David rose up from a place nearby that was to the south. Then he fell with his face to the ground and bowed three times, and they kissed each other and wept for each other, but David wept the most.
Jonʹa·than said to David: “Go in peace, since we have both sworn in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘May Jehovah be between you and me and between your offspring and my offspring forever.’” Then David rose up and left, and Jonʹa·than went back to the city.
Finally Samuel said to all Israel: “Here I have done all that you asked of me, and I appointed a king to reign over you.
Now here is the king who is leading you! As for me, I have grown old and gray, and my sons are here with you, and I have led you from my youth until this day.
Here I am. Testify against me before Jehovah and before his anointed one: Whose bull or whose donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded or crushed? From whose hand have I accepted a bribe to make me look the other way? If I have, I will restore it to you.”
To this they said: “You have not defrauded us or crushed us or accepted anything at all from anyone’s hand.”
So he said to them: “Jehovah is a witness against you, and his anointed one is a witness this day that you have found nothing to accuse me of.” To this they said: “He is a witness.”
So Samuel said to the people: “Jehovah, who used Moses and Aaron and who brought your forefathers up out of the land of Egypt, is a witness.
And now take your positions, and I will judge you before Jehovah in view of all the righteous acts that Jehovah has done for you and for your forefathers.
“As soon as Jacob had come into Egypt and your forefathers began calling to Jehovah for help, Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron to lead your forefathers out of Egypt and to cause them to dwell in this place.
But they forgot Jehovah their God, and he sold them into the hand of Sisʹe·ra the chief of the army of Haʹzor and into the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines and into the hand of the king of Moʹab, and they fought against them.
And they called to Jehovah for help and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have left Jehovah to serve the Baʹals and the Ashʹto·reth images; now rescue us out of the hand of our enemies so that we may serve you.’
Then Jehovah sent Jer·ub·baʹal and Beʹdan and Jephʹthah and Samuel and rescued you from the hand of the enemies all around you, so that you could live in security.
When you saw that Naʹhash, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, had come against you, you kept saying to me, ‘No, we are determined to have a king over us!’ even though Jehovah your God is your King.
Now here is the king whom you have chosen, the one you asked for. Look! Jehovah has appointed a king over you.
If you fear Jehovah and serve him and obey his voice and you do not rebel against the order of Jehovah, and both you and the king who reigns over you follow Jehovah your God, fine.
But if you do not obey the voice of Jehovah and you rebel against the order of Jehovah, the hand of Jehovah will be against you and your fathers.
Now take your positions and see this great thing that Jehovah is doing before your eyes.
Is it not the wheat harvest today? I will call on Jehovah to make it thunder and rain; then know and understand what an evil thing you have done in the eyes of Jehovah in asking for a king for yourselves.”
At that Samuel called to Jehovah, and Jehovah made it thunder and rain on that day, so that all the people were greatly in fear of Jehovah and of Samuel.
And all the people said to Samuel: “Pray to Jehovah your God for your servants, as we do not want to die, for we have added to all our sins another evil by asking for a king.”
So Samuel said to the people: “Do not be afraid. You have indeed done all this evil. Only do not turn away from following Jehovah, and serve Jehovah with all your heart.
Do not turn away to follow the empty things, which are of no benefit and cannot rescue, because they are empty.
For the sake of his great name, Jehovah will not abandon his people, for Jehovah has taken it upon himself to make you his people.
As for me, it is unthinkable for me to sin against Jehovah by ceasing to pray in your behalf, and I will continue to instruct you in the good and right way.
Only fear Jehovah, and serve him faithfully with all your heart, for see what great things he has done for you.
But if you flagrantly do what is bad, you will be swept away, both you and your king.”
As soon as David had finished speaking to Saul, Jonʹa·than and David became bound together in close friendship, and Jonʹa·than began to love him as himself.
From that day, Saul kept David with him, and he did not allow him to return to his father’s house.
And Jonʹa·than and David made a covenant, because he loved him as himself.
Jonʹa·than took off the sleeveless coat that he wore and gave it to David, along with his gear, his sword, his bow, and his belt.
David began going out and was successful wherever Saul would send him. So Saul put him in charge of the fighting men, and this pleased all the people and the servants of Saul.
When David and the others would return from striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, the women would come out from all the cities of Israel with song and dances to meet King Saul with tambourines, with rejoicing, and with lutes.
The women who were celebrating would sing: “Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands.”
Saul became very angry, and this song displeased him, for he said: “They have credited David with tens of thousands, but to me they have credited thousands. The only thing left to give him is the kingship!”
From that day on, Saul was always looking at David suspiciously.
The next day a bad spirit from God gripped Saul, and he started to act strangely inside the house, while David was playing music on the harp as on other occasions. Saul had a spear in his hand,
and he hurled the spear, saying to himself: ‘I will pin David to the wall!’ But David escaped from him twice.
Then Saul was afraid of David because Jehovah was with him but had departed from Saul.
So Saul removed him from his presence and appointed him as chief of a thousand, and David would lead the army into battle.
David continued to have success in all he did, and Jehovah was with him.
And when Saul saw that he was very successful, he became afraid of him.
But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he would lead them in their campaigns.
Saul later said to David: “Here is my oldest daughter Meʹrab. I will give her to you as a wife. However, you should continue to display your courage for me and fight the wars of Jehovah.” For Saul said to himself: ‘Do not let my hand come against him. Let the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines strike him.’
At this David said to Saul: “Who am I and who are my relatives, my father’s family in Israel, for me to become son-in-law to the king?”
However, when the time came to give Saul’s daughter Meʹrab to David, she had already been given to be the wife of Aʹdri·el the Me·holʹath·ite.
Now Saul’s daughter Miʹchal was in love with David, and it was reported to Saul, and this pleased him.
So Saul said: “I will give her to him to serve as a snare to him, so that the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines may come upon him.” Saul then said to David a second time: “You will form a marriage alliance with me today.”
Further, Saul ordered his servants: “Speak to David secretly and say, ‘Look! The king is pleased with you, and all his servants are fond of you. So now form a marriage alliance with the king.’”
When Saul’s servants told David these things, David said: “Is it a trivial matter to you to form a marriage alliance with the king when I am a man poor and lightly esteemed?”
Then Saul’s servants reported to him: “These are the words that David spoke.”
At that Saul said: “This is what you should say to David, ‘The king does not want any bride price except 100 foreskins of the Phi·lisʹtines, to take revenge on the enemies of the king.’” For Saul was scheming to have David fall by the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines.
So his servants reported these words to David, and it was pleasing to David to form a marriage alliance with the king. Before the allotted time,
David went with his men and struck down 200 Phi·lisʹtine men, and David brought the full number of their foreskins to the king, to form a marriage alliance with the king. Therefore, Saul gave him his daughter Miʹchal as a wife.
Saul realized that Jehovah was with David and that his daughter Miʹchal loved him.
This made Saul even more afraid of David, and Saul became an enemy of David for the rest of his life.
The princes of the Phi·lisʹtines would go out to battle, but as often as they went out, David was more successful than all the servants of Saul; and his name was highly esteemed.
In time David was told: “The Phi·lisʹtines are fighting against Keiʹlah, and they are raiding the threshing floors.”
So David inquired of Jehovah: “Should I go and strike down these Phi·lisʹtines?” Jehovah said to David: “Go, strike down the Phi·lisʹtines and rescue Keiʹlah.”
But the men of David said to him: “Look! We are afraid while here in Judah; how much more so if we go to Keiʹlah against the battle line of the Phi·lisʹtines!”
So David inquired once again of Jehovah. Jehovah now answered him: “Rise up; go down to Keiʹlah because I will give the Phi·lisʹtines into your hand.”
So David went with his men to Keiʹlah and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines; he carried off their livestock and struck them down with a great slaughter, and David rescued the inhabitants of Keiʹlah.
Now when A·biʹa·thar the son of A·himʹe·lech ran away to David at Keiʹlah, he had an ephʹod with him.
Saul was told: “David has come to Keiʹlah.” Then Saul said: “God has handed him over to me, for he has trapped himself by entering a city with gates and bars.”
So Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keiʹlah and besiege David and his men.
When David learned that Saul was plotting against him, he said to A·biʹa·thar the priest: “Bring the ephʹod here.”
Then David said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, your servant has indeed heard that Saul intends to come to Keiʹlah to destroy the city because of me.
Will the leaders of Keiʹlah surrender me into his hand? Will Saul come down as your servant has heard? O Jehovah the God of Israel, please tell your servant.” To this Jehovah said: “He will come down.”
David asked: “Will the leaders of Keiʹlah surrender me and my men into Saul’s hand?” Jehovah replied: “They will surrender you.”
At once David rose up with his men, about 600 in number, and they left Keiʹlah and moved about wherever they could. When Saul was told that David had escaped from Keiʹlah, he did not go out after him.
David stayed in the wilderness in places difficult to approach, in the mountainous region of the wilderness of Ziph. Saul searched for him constantly, but Jehovah did not give him into his hand.
David was aware that Saul had gone out to seek his life while David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Hoʹresh.
Jonʹa·than the son of Saul now went out to David at Hoʹresh, and he helped him find strength in Jehovah.
He said to him: “Do not be afraid, for my father Saul will not find you; you will be king over Israel, and I will become second to you; and my father Saul also knows that.”
Then the two of them made a covenant before Jehovah, and David stayed in Hoʹresh, and Jonʹa·than went to his home.
The men of Ziph later went up to Saul at Gibʹe·ah and said: “Is not David hiding near us in the places difficult to approach at Hoʹresh, on the hill of Hach·iʹlah, which is south of Je·shiʹmon?
Whenever it pleases you to come down, O king, come, and we will surrender him into the hand of the king.”
At this Saul said: “May you be blessed by Jehovah, for you have shown compassion to me.
Please go and try to find out exactly where he is and who saw him there, for I have been told that he is very cunning.
Carefully ascertain where all his hiding places are and return to me with the evidence. I will then go with you, and if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.”
So they left and went to Ziph ahead of Saul, while David and his men were in the wilderness of Maʹon, in the Arʹa·bah to the south of Je·shiʹmon.
Then Saul came with his men to look for him. When David was told, he at once went down to the crag and stayed in the wilderness of Maʹon. When Saul heard this, he chased after David into the wilderness of Maʹon.
As Saul came to one side of the mountain, David and his men were on the other side of the mountain. David was hurrying to get away from Saul, but Saul and his men were closing in on David and his men to capture them.
But a messenger came to Saul, saying: “Come quickly, for the Phi·lisʹtines have made a raid on the land!”
At that Saul stopped chasing after David and went to confront the Phi·lisʹtines. That is why that place was named the Crag of the Divisions.
Then David made his way up from there and stayed in the places difficult to approach at En-gedʹi.
The Ark of Jehovah was in Phi·lisʹtine territory for seven months.
The Phi·lisʹtines called the priests and the diviners and asked: “What should we do with the Ark of Jehovah? Let us know how we should send it back to its place.”
They replied: “If you send the ark of the covenant of Jehovah the God of Israel away, do not send it back without an offering. You should by all means return to him a guilt offering. Only then will you be healed, and it will be made known to you why his hand has not turned away from you.”
So they asked: “What guilt offering should we send to him?” They said: “According to the number of the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines, send five golden piles and five golden mice, for the same scourge has afflicted every one of you and your lords.
You should make images of your piles and images of your mice that are bringing the land to ruin, and you should honor the God of Israel. Perhaps he will lighten the weight of his hand that is on you and your god and your land.
Why should you harden your heart as Egypt and Pharʹaoh hardened their hearts? When He dealt harshly with them, they had to send Israel away, and they departed.
Now prepare a new wagon and two cows that have calves and have never been under a yoke. Then hitch the cows to the wagon, but take their calves back home, away from them.
Take the Ark of Jehovah and place it on the wagon, and put the golden articles that you are sending to him as a guilt offering in a box next to it. Then send it on its way
and watch: If it goes up the road to Beth-sheʹmesh, to its own territory, then he is the one who has done this great evil to us. But if not, we will know that it was not his hand that struck us; it happened to us by coincidence.”
The men did accordingly. They took two cows that had calves and hitched them to the wagon, and the calves they penned up at home.
Then they put the Ark of Jehovah on the wagon, as well as the box containing the golden mice and the images of their piles.
And the cows went straight ahead on the road to Beth-sheʹmesh. They stayed on the one highway, mooing as they went; they did not turn either to the right or to the left. All the while the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were walking behind them as far as the boundary of Beth-sheʹmesh.
The people of Beth-sheʹmesh were reaping the wheat harvest in the valley plain. When they raised their eyes and saw the Ark, they were overjoyed at seeing it.
The wagon came into the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite and stopped there near a large stone. So they chopped up the wood of the wagon, and they offered the cows as a burnt offering to Jehovah.
The Levites took down the Ark of Jehovah and the box that was with it, which contained the golden articles, and they put them on the large stone. The men of Beth-sheʹmesh offered up burnt offerings and made sacrifices on that day to Jehovah.
When the five lords of the Phi·lisʹtines saw it, they returned to Ekʹron on that day.
Now these are the golden piles that the Phi·lisʹtines sent as a guilt offering to Jehovah: one for Ashʹdod, one for Gazʹa, one for Ashʹke·lon, one for Gath, one for Ekʹron.
And the number of the golden mice corresponded to the number of all the cities of the Phi·lisʹtines that belonged to the five lords—both the fortified cities and the villages in the open country. And the large stone upon which they rested the Ark of Jehovah serves as a witness down to this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-sheʹmite.
But God struck down the men of Beth-sheʹmesh, because they had looked upon the Ark of Jehovah. He struck down 50,070 among the people, and the people began mourning because Jehovah had struck them down with a great slaughter.
So the men of Beth-sheʹmesh asked: “Who will be able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God, and to whom will he go away from us?”
So they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, saying: “The Phi·lisʹtines have returned the Ark of Jehovah. Come down and take it up with you.”
The Phi·lisʹtines assembled all their armies at Aʹphek, while the Israelites were camping by the spring in Jezʹre·el.
And the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines were passing by with their hundreds and their thousands, and David and his men were marching at the rear with Aʹchish.
But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines said: “Why are these Hebrews here?” Aʹchish replied to the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines: “This is David, the servant of King Saul of Israel, who has been with me for a year or more. I have not found any fault in him from the day he deserted to me until today.”
But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines became indignant at him, and they said to him: “Make the man go back. Let him return to the place where you assigned him. Do not let him go down with us into the battle, so that he will not turn against us during the battle. For what better way to put himself in favor with his lord than with the heads of our men?
Is this not the David about whom they sang when they danced, saying: ‘Saul has struck down his thousands,And David his tens of thousands’?”
So Aʹchish summoned David and said to him: “As surely as Jehovah is living, you are upright, and I am pleased to have you go on the campaign with my army, for I have not found any fault with you from the day you came to me until today. But the lords do not trust you.
So return in peace, and do not do anything to displease the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
However, David said to Aʹchish: “Why, what have I done? What fault have you found in your servant from the day that I came to you until today? Why should I not come with you and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?”
Aʹchish answered David: “From my standpoint, you have been as good as an angel of God. But the princes of the Phi·lisʹtines have said, ‘Do not let him go up with us into the battle.’
Now get up early in the morning with the servants of your lord who came with you; rise up and leave early in the morning as soon as it is light.”
So David and his men rose up early in the morning to return to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, and the Phi·lisʹtines went up to Jezʹre·el.
When Samuel had grown old, he appointed his sons as judges for Israel.
The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second, A·biʹjah; they were judges in Beʹer-sheʹba.
But his sons did not walk in his ways; they were inclined to pursue dishonest profit, they accepted bribes, and they perverted justice.
In time all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Raʹmah.
They said to him: “Look! You have grown old, but your sons are not walking in your ways. Now appoint for us a king to judge us like all the other nations.”
But it displeased Samuel when they said: “Give us a king to judge us.” Then Samuel prayed to Jehovah,
and Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to everything the people say to you; for it is not you whom they have rejected, but it is I whom they have rejected as their king.
They are doing just as they have done from the day I brought them up out of Egypt until this day; they keep forsaking me and serving other gods, and that is what they are doing to you.
Now listen to them. However, you should solemnly warn them; tell them what the king who rules over them will have the right to demand.”
So Samuel told the people who were asking him for a king all the words of Jehovah.
He said: “This is what the king who rules over you will have the right to demand: He will take your sons and put them in his chariots and make them his horsemen, and some will have to run before his chariots.
And he will appoint for himself chiefs over thousands and chiefs over fifties, and some will do his plowing, reap his harvest, and make his weapons of war and equipment for his chariots.
He will take your daughters to be ointment mixers, cooks, and bakers.
He will take the best of your fields, your vineyards, and your olive groves, and he will give them to his servants.
He will take the tenth of your grainfields and your vineyards, and he will give it to his court officials and his servants.
And he will take your male and female servants, your best herds, and your donkeys, and he will use them for his work.
He will take the tenth of your flocks, and you will become his servants.
The day will come when you will cry out because of the king you have chosen for yourselves, but Jehovah will not answer you in that day.”
However, the people refused to listen to what Samuel told them, and they said: “No, we are determined to have a king over us.
Then we will be like all the other nations, and our king will judge us and lead us and fight our battles.”
After Samuel heard all the words of the people, he repeated them in the hearing of Jehovah.
Jehovah said to Samuel: “Listen to them, and appoint a king to reign over them.” Samuel then said to the men of Israel: “Each of you should return to his city.”
A·hithʹo·phel then said to Abʹsa·lom: “Please let me choose 12,000 men and rise up and chase after David tonight.
I will come upon him when he is weary and powerless, and I will throw him into a panic; and all the people who are with him will flee, and I will strike down only the king.
Then I will bring all the people back to you. The return of all the people depends on what happens with the man you are seeking. Then all the people will be at peace.”
The proposal was just right in the eyes of Abʹsa·lom and all the elders of Israel.
However, Abʹsa·lom said: “Please call Huʹshai the Arʹchite as well, and let us hear what he has to say.”
So Huʹshai came in to Abʹsa·lom. Then Abʹsa·lom said to him: “This is the advice A·hithʹo·phel gave. Should we act on his advice? If not, you tell us.”
At this Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “The advice that A·hithʹo·phel gave is not good in this instance!”
Huʹshai continued: “You well know that your father and his men are mighty, and they are desperate, like a bear that has lost her cubs in the field. Moreover, your father is a warrior, and he will not spend the night with the people.
At this very moment he is hiding in one of the caves or in some other place; and if he attacks first, those hearing of it will say, ‘The people following Abʹsa·lom have been defeated!’
Even the courageous man whose heart is like that of a lion will surely melt in fear, for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man and that the men with him are courageous.
I give this advice: Let all Israel be gathered to you, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, as many as the grains of sand by the sea, and you should lead them into the fight.
We will come against him wherever he is found, and we will come upon him just like the dew that falls on the ground; and not one of them will survive, not he nor any of the men with him.
If he retreats into a city, all Israel will carry ropes to that city, and we will drag it down into the valley until not even a pebble is left.”
Then Abʹsa·lom and all the men of Israel said: “The advice of Huʹshai the Arʹchite is better than the advice of A·hithʹo·phel!” For Jehovah had determined to frustrate the sound advice of A·hithʹo·phel, so that Jehovah could bring disaster on Abʹsa·lom.
Huʹshai later said to Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests: “This is what A·hithʹo·phel has advised Abʹsa·lom and the elders of Israel, and this is what I have advised.
Now quickly send word to David and warn him: ‘Do not stay at the fords of the wilderness tonight, but cross over without fail, or the king and all the people with him may be wiped out.’”
Jonʹa·than and A·himʹa·az were staying at En-roʹgel; so a servant girl went off and told them and they went to tell King David, for they did not dare to be seen entering the city.
However, a young man saw them and told Abʹsa·lom. So the two of them quickly went off and came to the house of a man in Ba·huʹrim who had a well in his courtyard. They went down into it,
and the man’s wife spread a covering over the top of the well and covered it with cracked grain; no one knew about it.
The servants of Abʹsa·lom came to the woman at her house and asked: “Where are A·himʹa·az and Jonʹa·than?” The woman replied: “They passed by toward the water.” Then the men searched for them but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem.
After the men were gone, they came up out of the well and went and informed King David. They said to him: “Rise up and quickly cross the water, for this is what A·hithʹo·phel advised against you.”
Immediately David and all the people with him rose up and crossed the Jordan. By daybreak, there was no one left who had not crossed the Jordan.
When A·hithʹo·phel saw that his advice had not been acted on, he saddled a donkey and went to his house in his hometown. After he gave instructions to his household, he hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the burial place of his forefathers.
Meanwhile, David went to Ma·ha·naʹim, and Abʹsa·lom crossed the Jordan with all the men of Israel.
Abʹsa·lom put A·maʹsa in charge of the army in place of Joʹab; A·maʹsa was the son of a man named Ithʹra the Israelite, who had relations with Abʹi·gail the daughter of Naʹhash, the sister of Ze·ruʹiah, Joʹab’s mother.
Israel and Abʹsa·lom camped in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
As soon as David came to Ma·ha·naʹim, Shoʹbi the son of Naʹhash from Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el from Lo-deʹbar, and Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite from Ro·geʹlim
brought beds, basins, clay pots, wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, broad beans, lentils, parched grain,
honey, butter, sheep, and cheese. They brought all of this out for David and the people with him to eat, for they said: “The people are hungry and tired and thirsty in the wilderness.”
It was reported to Joʹab: “The king is weeping and mourning for Abʹsa·lom.”
So the victory on that day was turned into mourning for all the people, because they heard that the king was grieving over his son.
The people quietly returned to the city that day like people who are ashamed because they fled in the battle.
The king covered his face and kept crying out with a loud voice: “My son Abʹsa·lom! Abʹsa·lom my son, my son!”
Then Joʹab went in to the king at the house and said: “Today you have put to shame all your servants who this day saved your life and the lives of your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your concubines.
You love those who hate you and hate those who love you, for you have made it clear today that your chiefs and servants mean nothing to you, because I am sure that if only Abʹsa·lom were alive today and the rest of us were dead, it would be all right with you.
Now get up, go out and reassure your servants, because by Jehovah I swear that if you do not go out, not a man will remain with you tonight. This will be worse for you than all the injury that has come upon you from your youth until now.”
So the king rose up and sat in the city gate, and all the people were informed: “Now the king is sitting in the gate.” Then all the people came before the king. But Israel had fled, each to his home.
All the people in all the tribes of Israel were disputing, saying: “The king saved us from our enemies, and he rescued us from the Phi·lisʹtines; but now he has fled the land because of Abʹsa·lom.
And Abʹsa·lom, whom we anointed over us, has died in the battle. So now, why are you doing nothing to bring the king back?”
King David sent this message to Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests: “Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, ‘Why should you be the last ones to bring the king back to his house, when the word of all Israel has come to the king at his house?
You are my brothers; you are my own bone and flesh. Why should you be the last ones to bring the king back?’
And you should say to A·maʹsa, ‘Are you not my own bone and flesh? So may God do to me and add to it if you will not become my army chief from now on instead of Joʹab.’”
So he won over the hearts of all the men of Judah as one man, and they sent word to the king: “Come back, you and all your servants.”
The king started back and reached the Jordan, and the people of Judah came to Gilʹgal to meet the king and to escort him across the Jordan.
Then Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra, the Benʹja·min·ite from Ba·huʹrim, hurried down with the men of Judah to meet King David,
and there were 1,000 men from Benjamin with him. Also Ziʹba, the attendant of the house of Saul, with his 15 sons and 20 servants, rushed down to the Jordan ahead of the king.
He crossed the ford to bring the king’s household across and to do whatever he desired. But Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra fell down before the king when he was about to cross the Jordan.
He said to the king: “Do not let my lord hold me guilty, and do not remember the wrong your servant did on the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem. May the king not take it to heart,
for your servant well knows that I have sinned; so today I have been the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king.”
At once A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah said: “Should not Shimʹe·i be put to death for this, because he cursed the anointed of Jehovah?”
But David said: “What does this have to do with you, you sons of Ze·ruʹiah, that you should act against me today? Should anyone be put to death today in Israel? For do I not know that today I am king over Israel?”
Then the king said to Shimʹe·i: “You will not die.” And the king gave him his oath.
Me·phibʹo·sheth, the grandson of Saul, also came down to meet the king. He had not cared for his feet or trimmed his mustache or washed his garments from the day the king left until the day he returned in peace.
When he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him: “Why did you not go with me, Me·phibʹo·sheth?”
To this he said: “My lord the king, my servant tricked me. For your servant had said, ‘Let me get my donkey saddled so that I may ride on it and go with the king,’ for your servant is crippled.
But he slandered your servant to my lord the king. However, my lord the king is like an angel of the true God, so do whatever seems good to you.
All the household of my father could have been doomed to death by my lord the king, and yet you placed your servant among those eating at your table. So what right do I have to cry out further to the king?”
However, the king said to him: “Why keep on speaking like this? I have decided that you and Ziʹba should share the field.”
At this Me·phibʹo·sheth said to the king: “Let him take it all, now that my lord the king has come to his house in peace.”
Then Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite came down from Ro·geʹlim to the Jordan to escort the king to the Jordan.
Bar·zilʹlai was very old, 80 years of age, and he supplied the king with food while he was staying in Ma·ha·naʹim, for he was a very wealthy man.
So the king said to Bar·zilʹlai: “Cross over with me, and I will supply you with food in Jerusalem.”
But Bar·zilʹlai said to the king: “How many days of my life are left that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
I am 80 years old today. Can I discern between good and bad? Can I, your servant, taste what I eat and drink? Can I still listen to the voice of male and female singers? So why should your servant be an added burden to my lord the king?
It is enough that your servant could bring the king to the Jordan. Why should the king repay me with this reward?
Let your servant return, please, and let me die in my city near the burial place of my father and my mother. But here is your servant Chimʹham. Let him cross over with my lord the king, and you may do for him what seems good to you.”
So the king said: “Chimʹham will go across with me, and I will do for him what seems good to you; whatever you ask of me I will do for you.”
All the people now began to cross the Jordan, and when the king crossed, the king kissed Bar·zilʹlai and blessed him; and Bar·zilʹlai returned home.
When the king went across to Gilʹgal, Chimʹham crossed with him. All the people of Judah and half the people of Israel brought the king across.
Then all the men of Israel approached the king and said to him: “Why did our brothers the men of Judah steal you away and bring the king and his household over the Jordan, along with all of David’s men?”
All the men of Judah answered the men of Israel: “Because the king is related to us. Why are you angry over this? Have we eaten anything at the king’s expense, or has a gift been given to us?”
However, the men of Israel answered the men of Judah: “We have ten parts in the king, so that we have a greater claim in David than you have. Why, then, have you treated us with contempt? Should we not have been first to bring our king back?” But the word of the men of Judah prevailed over that of the men of Israel.
At the start of the year, at the time when kings go on campaigns, David sent Joʹab and his servants and the entire army of Israel to bring the Amʹmon·ites to ruin, and they besieged Rabʹbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem.
One evening David got up from his bed and walked around on the rooftop of the king’s house. From the rooftop he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very beautiful.
David sent someone to inquire about the woman, and he reported: “Is this not Bath-sheʹba the daughter of E·liʹam and the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite?”
Then David sent messengers to bring her. So she came in to him, and he lay down with her. (This happened while she was purifying herself from her uncleanness.) Afterward, she returned to her house.
The woman became pregnant, and she sent a message to David: “I am pregnant.”
At this David sent a message to Joʹab: “Send to me U·riʹah the Hitʹtite.” So Joʹab sent U·riʹah to David.
When U·riʹah came to him, David asked him how Joʹab was getting along, how the troops were getting along, and how the war was going.
David then said to U·riʹah: “Go down to your house and relax.” When U·riʹah left the king’s house, the king’s courtesy gift was sent after him.
However, U·riʹah slept at the entrance of the king’s house with all the other servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his own house.
So David was told: “U·riʹah did not go down to his own house.” At that David said to U·riʹah: “Have you not just returned from a journey? Why did you not go down to your own house?”
U·riʹah replied to David: “The Ark and Israel and Judah are dwelling in temporary shelters, and my lord Joʹab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field. So should I go into my own house to eat and drink and lie down with my wife? As surely as you live and are alive, I will not do this thing!”
Then David said to U·riʹah: “Stay here also today, and tomorrow I will send you away.” So U·riʹah stayed in Jerusalem on that day and the following day.
David then sent for him to come and eat and drink with him, and he got him drunk. But in the evening, he went out to sleep on his bed with the servants of his lord, and he did not go down to his house.
In the morning David wrote a letter to Joʹab and sent it by the hand of U·riʹah.
He wrote in the letter: “Put U·riʹah in the front lines where the fighting is fiercest. Then retreat from behind him, so that he will be struck down and die.”
Joʹab had been carefully watching the city, and he stationed U·riʹah where he knew there were mighty warriors.
When the men of the city came out and fought against Joʹab, some of David’s servants fell, and U·riʹah the Hitʹtite was among those who died.
Joʹab now reported to David all the news about the war.
He instructed the messenger: “When you finish speaking to the king about all the news of the war,
the king may become angry and say to you, ‘Why did you have to go so near to the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot from the top of the wall?
Who struck down A·bimʹe·lech the son of Je·rubʹbe·sheth? Was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on him from the top of the wall, causing his death at Theʹbez? Why did you have to go so close to the wall?’ Then say, ‘Your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.’”
So the messenger went and told David everything that Joʹab had sent him to tell.
Then the messenger told David: “Their men overpowered us, and they came out against us in the field; but we drove them back to the entrance of the city gate.
And the archers were shooting at your servants from the top of the wall, and some of the servants of the king died; your servant U·riʹah the Hitʹtite also died.”
At that David said to the messenger: “Say this to Joʹab: ‘Do not let this matter trouble you, for the sword devours one as well as another. Intensify your battle against the city and conquer it.’ And encourage him.”
When U·riʹah’s wife heard that her husband U·riʹah had died, she began to mourn her husband.
As soon as the mourning period was over, David sent for her and brought her to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But what David had done was very displeasing to Jehovah.
After Saul’s death, when David had returned from defeating the A·malʹek·ites, David stayed at Zikʹlag for two days.
On the third day, a man came from the camp of Saul with his garments ripped apart and dirt on his head. When he approached David, he fell down to the ground and prostrated himself.
David asked him: “Where are you coming from?” He replied: “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.”
David asked him: “How did things turn out? Please tell me.” To this he said: “The people have fled from the battle and many have fallen and died. Even Saul and his son Jonʹa·than have died.”
Then David asked the young man who brought him the news: “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonʹa·than are dead?”
The young man replied: “By chance I was on Mount Gil·boʹa, and there was Saul supporting himself on his spear, and the chariots and horsemen had caught up with him.
When he turned around and saw me, he called me, and I said, ‘Here I am!’
He asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I replied, ‘I am an A·malʹek·ite.’
Then he said, ‘Please stand over me and put me to death, for I am in great agony, but I am still alive.’
So I stood over him and put him to death, for I knew that he could not survive after he had fallen down wounded. Then I took the crown that was on his head and the bracelet that was on his arm, and I brought them here to my lord.”
At this David took hold of his garments and ripped them apart, and so did all the men who were with him.
And they wailed and wept and fasted until evening for Saul, for his son Jonʹa·than, for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.
David asked the young man who brought him the news: “Where are you from?” He said: “I am the son of a foreign resident, an A·malʹek·ite.”
Then David said to him: “Why did you not fear to lift your hand to do away with the anointed of Jehovah?”
With that David called one of the young men and said: “Step forward and strike him.” So he struck him down, and he died.
David said to him: “Your blood is on your own head, because your own mouth testified against you by saying, ‘I myself put the anointed of Jehovah to death.’”
Then David chanted this dirge over Saul and his son Jonʹa·than
and said that the people of Judah should be taught the dirge called “The Bow,” which is written in the book of Jaʹshar:
“The beauty, O Israel, lies slain upon your high places. How the mighty have fallen!
Do not tell it in Gath;Do not announce it in the streets of Ashʹke·lon,Or the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines will rejoice,Or the daughters of the uncircumcised men will exult.
You mountains of Gil·boʹa,May there be no dew or rain upon you,Nor fields producing holy contributions,Because there the shield of mighty ones was defiled,The shield of Saul is no longer anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of mighty ones,The bow of Jonʹa·than did not turn back,And the sword of Saul would not return without success.
Saul and Jonʹa·than, beloved and cherished during their life,And in death they were not separated. Swifter than the eagles they were,Mightier than the lions.
O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,Who clothed you in scarlet and finery,Who put gold ornaments upon your clothing.
How the mighty have fallen in battle! Jonʹa·than lies slain upon your high places!
I am distressed over you, my brother Jonʹa·than;You were very dear to me. More wonderful was your love to me than the love of women.
How the mighty have fallenAnd the weapons of war have perished!”
When the king was settled in his own house and Jehovah had given him rest from all his surrounding enemies,
the king said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the Ark of the true God sits in the midst of tent cloths.”
Nathan replied to the king: “Go and do whatever is in your heart, for Jehovah is with you.”
On that very night, the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying:
“Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Should you build me a house to dwell in?
For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought the people of Israel out of Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about in a tent and in a tabernacle.
During all the time that I went with all the Israelites, did I ever say one word to any of the tribal leaders of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people Israel, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’
Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel.
And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a great name for you like the name of the great men of the earth.
I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past,
from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will give you rest from all your enemies. “‘“Also, Jehovah has told you that Jehovah will make a house for you.
When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring after you, your own son, and I will firmly establish his kingdom.
He is the one who will build a house for my name, and I will firmly establish the throne of his kingdom forever.
I will become his father, and he will become my son. When he does wrong, I will reprove him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of men.
My loyal love will not be taken away from him the way I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you.
Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”
Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.
At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah? And what is my house that you have brought me this far?
As if this were not enough, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time; and this is instruction for all mankind, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
What more can your servant David say to you when you know me so well, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah?
For the sake of your word and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things and have revealed them to your servant.
That is why you are truly great, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. There is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this.
And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? God went and redeemed them as his people, making a name for himself by doing great and awe-inspiring things for them. You drove out the nations and their gods in behalf of your people, whom you redeemed to yourself from Egypt.
You established your people Israel as your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, have become their God.
“Now, O Jehovah God, carry out the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house for all time, and may you do just as you have promised.
May your name be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies is God over Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you.
For you, Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, have made a revelation to your servant by saying, ‘I will build a house for you.’ That is why your servant has the courage to pray this prayer to you.
And now, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the true God, and your words are truth, and you have promised these good things to your servant.
So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you; for you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, have promised, and with your blessing may the house of your servant be blessed forever.”
Now David’s son Abʹsa·lom had a beautiful sister named Taʹmar, and David’s son Amʹnon fell in love with her.
Amʹnon was so distressed that he became sick because of his sister Taʹmar, for she was a virgin and it seemed impossible for Amʹnon to do anything to her.
Now Amʹnon had a companion named Je·honʹa·dab, the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother; and Je·honʹa·dab was a very clever man.
So he said to him: “Why are you, the king’s son, so depressed every morning? Why not tell me?” Amʹnon replied to him: “I am in love with Taʹmar, the sister of my brother Abʹsa·lom.”
Je·honʹa·dab replied to him: “Lie down on your bed and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to see you, say to him, ‘Please, let my sister Taʹmar come and serve me some food. If she prepares the food given to the sick before my eyes, I will eat it from her hand.’”
So Amʹnon lay down and pretended to be sick, and the king came in to see him. Then Amʹnon said to the king: “Please, let my sister Taʹmar come in and bake two heart-shaped cakes before my eyes so that I may take food from her hand.”
At that David sent a message to Taʹmar at the house, saying: “Please go to the house of your brother Amʹnon and prepare food for him.”
So Taʹmar went to the house of her brother Amʹnon, where he was lying down. She took the dough and kneaded it into cakes before his eyes and cooked the cakes.
Then she took the pan and served him. But Amʹnon refused to eat and said: “Have everybody leave me!” So everybody left him.
Amʹnon now said to Taʹmar: “Bring the food into the bedroom, so that I may eat it from your hand.” So Taʹmar took the heart-shaped cakes that she had made and brought them to her brother Amʹnon in the bedroom.
When she brought them for him to eat, he grabbed her and said: “Come, lie down with me, my sister.”
But she said to him: “No, my brother! Do not humiliate me, for such a thing is not done in Israel. Do not do this disgraceful thing.
How could I live down my shame? And you will be regarded as one of the disgraceful men in Israel. Now speak, please, to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.”
But he refused to listen to her, and he overpowered her and humiliated her by raping her.
Then Amʹnon began hating her with a very intense hatred, so that his hatred for her became greater than the love he had felt for her. Amʹnon said to her: “Get up; go away!”
At this she said to him: “No, my brother, for sending me away now is worse than what you have done with me!” But he refused to listen to her.
With that he called his young attendant and said: “Get this person out of my presence, please, and lock the door behind her.”
(Now she was wearing a special robe, for those were the garments that the virgin daughters of the king wore.) So his attendant led her outside, and he locked the door behind her.
Then Taʹmar put ashes on her head, and she ripped apart the fine robe she was wearing; and she kept her hands on her head and walked off, crying out as she walked.
At this her brother Abʹsa·lom asked her: “Was it your brother Amʹnon who was with you? And now keep silent, my sister. He is your brother. Do not let your heart dwell on this matter.” Then Taʹmar lived in isolation at the house of her brother Abʹsa·lom.
When King David heard about all these things, he became very angry. But he would not hurt the feelings of Amʹnon his son, because he loved him, for he was his firstborn.
And Abʹsa·lom said nothing to Amʹnon, either bad or good; for Abʹsa·lom hated Amʹnon because he had humiliated his sister Taʹmar.
After two full years, Abʹsa·lom’s sheepshearers were at Baʹal-haʹzor, near Eʹphra·im, and Abʹsa·lom invited all the sons of the king.
So Abʹsa·lom came in to the king and said: “Your servant is having his sheep sheared. Please let the king and his servants go with me.”
But the king said to Abʹsa·lom: “No, my son. If all of us go, we will be a burden to you.” Although he kept urging him, he did not consent to go, but he blessed him.
Abʹsa·lom then said: “If not you, please let my brother Amʹnon go with us.” The king replied to him: “Why should he go with you?”
But Abʹsa·lom urged him, so he sent Amʹnon and all the king’s sons with him.
Then Abʹsa·lom ordered his attendants: “Watch, and when Amʹnon’s heart is in a cheerful mood from the wine, I will say to you, ‘Strike down Amʹnon!’ You must then put him to death. Do not be afraid. Is it not I who command you? Be strong and courageous.”
So Abʹsa·lom’s attendants did to Amʹnon exactly as Abʹsa·lom had ordered; then all the other sons of the king got up, and each one mounted his mule and fled.
While they were on the way, the report reached David: “Abʹsa·lom has struck down all the sons of the king, and not one of them survived.”
At this the king got up and ripped his clothes apart and lay on the ground, and all his servants were standing by with their garments ripped apart.
However, Je·honʹa·dab the son of Shimʹe·ah, David’s brother, said: “Do not let my lord think that they have killed all the young sons of the king, for only Amʹnon has died. This is by the order of Abʹsa·lom, who decided to do this from the day that Amʹnon humiliated his sister Taʹmar.
Now do not let my lord the king pay attention to the report that says, ‘All the king’s sons have died’; only Amʹnon has died.”
Meanwhile, Abʹsa·lom ran away. Later the watchman raised his eyes and saw that there were many people coming from the road behind him next to the mountain.
At this Je·honʹa·dab said to the king: “Look! The king’s sons have returned. It is just as your servant said.”
As he finished speaking, the king’s sons came in, weeping loudly; also the king and all his servants wept very bitterly.
But Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Talʹmai the son of Am·miʹhud the king of Geshʹur. David mourned his son for many days.
After Abʹsa·lom fled and went to Geshʹur, he stayed there for three years.
Finally King David longed to go to Abʹsa·lom, for he had become reconciled to the death of Amʹnon.
Now there was a famine in the days of David for three consecutive years, so David consulted Jehovah, and Jehovah said: “There is bloodguilt on Saul and on his house, because he put the Gibʹe·on·ites to death.”
So the king called the Gibʹe·on·ites and spoke to them. (Incidentally, the Gibʹe·on·ites were not Israelites but Amʹor·ites who remained, and the Israelites had sworn to spare them, but Saul sought to strike them down in his zeal for the people of Israel and Judah.)
David said to the Gibʹe·on·ites: “What should I do for you, and how can I make atonement, so that you will bless the inheritance of Jehovah?”
The Gibʹe·on·ites said to him: “It is not a matter of silver or gold for us in connection with Saul and his household; nor can we put any man to death in Israel.” At that he said: “Whatever you say, I will do for you.”
They said to the king: “The man who exterminated us and schemed to annihilate us from living anywhere in the territory of Israel—
let seven of his sons be given to us. We will hang their dead bodies before Jehovah in Gibʹe·ah of Saul, the chosen one of Jehovah.” The king then said: “I will hand them over.”
However, the king showed compassion for Me·phibʹo·sheth, the son of Jonʹa·than the son of Saul, because of the oath made before Jehovah between David and Jonʹa·than, the son of Saul.
So the king took Ar·moʹni and Me·phibʹo·sheth, the two sons of Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah whom she bore to Saul, and the five sons of Miʹchal the daughter of Saul whom she bore to Aʹdri·el the son of Bar·zilʹlai the Me·holʹath·ite.
Then he handed them over to the Gibʹe·on·ites, and they hung their dead bodies on the mountain before Jehovah. All seven of them died together; they were put to death in the first days of harvest, at the start of the barley harvest.
Then Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah took sackcloth and spread it out on the rock from the start of harvest until rain poured down from the heavens on the bodies; she did not allow the birds of the heavens to land on them by day nor the wild beasts of the field to come near by night.
David was told what Saul’s concubine Rizʹpah the daughter of Aʹiah had done.
So David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonʹa·than from the leaders of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad, who had stolen them from the public square of Beth-shan, where the Phi·lisʹtines had hung them on the day that the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Saul on Gil·boʹa.
He brought the bones of Saul and the bones of his son Jonʹa·than up from there, and they also gathered the bones of the men who had been executed.
Then they buried the bones of Saul and of Jonʹa·than his son in the land of Benjamin in Zeʹla in the tomb of Kish his father. After they did everything that the king had commanded, God listened to their entreaties for the land.
Once again there was war between the Phi·lisʹtines and Israel. So David and his servants went down and fought the Phi·lisʹtines, but David became exhausted.
A descendant of the Rephʹa·im named Ishʹbi-beʹnob, whose copper spear weighed 300 shekels and who was armed with a new sword, intended to strike David down.
At once A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah came to his aid and struck the Phi·lisʹtine down and put him to death. At that time the men of David swore this oath to him: “You must not go out with us to battle anymore! You must not extinguish the lamp of Israel!”
After this, war broke out again with the Phi·lisʹtines at Gob. At that time Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite struck down Saph, who was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im.
And war broke out again with the Phi·lisʹtines at Gob, and El·haʹnan the son of Jaʹa·re-orʹe·gim the Bethʹle·hem·ite struck down Go·liʹath the Gitʹtite, whose spear had a shaft like the beam of loom workers.
War broke out yet again at Gath, where there was a man of extraordinary size, with 6 fingers on each hand and 6 toes on each foot, 24 in all; and he too was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im.
He kept taunting Israel. So Jonʹa·than the son of Shimʹe·i, David’s brother, struck him down.
These four were descendants of the Rephʹa·im in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
The war between the house of Saul and the house of David dragged on; and David kept getting stronger, and the house of Saul grew steadily weaker.
Meanwhile, sons were born to David in Hebʹron. His firstborn was Amʹnon by A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el.
His second was Chilʹe·ab by Abʹi·gail, the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite; and the third was Abʹsa·lom the son of Maʹa·cah, the daughter of Talʹmai the king of Geshʹur.
The fourth was Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith, and the fifth was Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of A·biʹtal.
The sixth was Ithʹre·am by David’s wife Egʹlah. These were born to David in Hebʹron.
While the war between the house of Saul and the house of David continued, Abʹner kept strengthening his position in the house of Saul.
Now Saul had had a concubine whose name was Rizʹpah, the daughter of Aʹiah. Ish-boʹsheth later said to Abʹner: “Why did you have relations with the concubine of my father?”
Abʹner grew very angry over the words of Ish-boʹsheth and said: “Am I a dog’s head from Judah? Until this very day, I have shown loyal love toward the house of your father Saul and to his brothers and his friends, and I have not betrayed you into the hand of David; yet today you call me to account for an error concerning a woman.
May God do so to Abʹner and add to it if I do not do for David just as Jehovah swore to him:
to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and to establish the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba.”
He was not able to say one more word in reply to Abʹner, for he was afraid of him.
Abʹner immediately sent messengers to David, saying: “To whom does the land belong?” He added: “Make a covenant with me, and I will do whatever I can to turn all Israel to your side.”
To this he replied: “Good! I will make a covenant with you. The only thing I ask of you is that you do not try to see my face unless first you bring Miʹchal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to see me.”
Then David sent messengers to Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, saying: “Give me my wife Miʹchal, to whom I became engaged for 100 foreskins of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
So Ish-boʹsheth sent to take her from her husband, Palʹti·el the son of Laʹish.
But her husband kept walking with her, weeping as he followed her as far as Ba·huʹrim. Then Abʹner said to him: “Go, return!” At that he returned.
Meanwhile, Abʹner sent word to the elders of Israel, saying: “For some time you wanted to have David as king over you.
Now act, for Jehovah said to David: ‘By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel from the hand of the Phi·lisʹtines and from the hand of all their enemies.’”
Then Abʹner spoke to the people of Benjamin. Abʹner also went to speak privately to David at Hebʹron to tell him what Israel and the whole house of Benjamin had agreed upon.
When Abʹner came to David at Hebʹron with 20 men, David held a feast for Abʹner and for the men with him.
Then Abʹner said to David: “Let me go and gather all Israel together to my lord the king, so that they may make a covenant with you, and you will become king over all that you desire.” So David sent Abʹner off, and he went his way in peace.
Just then, David’s servants and Joʹab returned from a raid, bringing a great quantity of spoil back with them. Abʹner was no longer with David in Hebʹron, for he had sent him on his way in peace.
When Joʹab and all the army that was with him arrived, Joʹab was told: “Abʹner the son of Ner came to the king, and he sent him off, and he went his way in peace.”
So Joʹab went in to the king and said: “What have you done? Here Abʹner came to you. Why did you send him off so that he successfully got away?
You know Abʹner the son of Ner! He came here to fool you and to get to know your every move and to find out everything that you are doing.”
So Joʹab left David and sent messengers after Abʹner, and they brought him back from the cistern of Siʹrah; but David did not know anything about it.
When Abʹner returned to Hebʹron, Joʹab took him aside inside the gate to speak with him privately. However, there he stabbed him in the abdomen, and he died; this was for killing his brother Asʹa·hel.
When David heard about it later, he said: “I and my kingdom are forever innocent before Jehovah of the bloodguilt for Abʹner the son of Ner.
May it turn back on the head of Joʹab and on the entire house of his father. May Joʹab’s house never be without a man suffering from a discharge or a leper or a man working at the spindle or one falling by the sword or one in need of food!”
So Joʹab and his brother A·bishʹai killed Abʹner because he had put Asʹa·hel their brother to death in the battle at Gibʹe·on.
Then David said to Joʹab and all the people with him: “Rip your garments apart and tie on sackcloth and wail over Abʹner.” King David himself was walking behind the funeral bier.
They buried Abʹner in Hebʹron; and the king wept loudly at Abʹner’s tomb, and all the people gave way to weeping.
The king chanted over Abʹner and said: “Should Abʹner die the death of a senseless person?
Your hands had not been bound,And your feet were not in fetters. You fell like one falling before criminals.” At that all the people wept over him again.
Later all the people came to give David bread for consolation while it was still daytime, but David swore: “May God do so to me and add to it if before the sun sets I taste bread or anything at all!”
All the people took notice, and it pleased them. Like everything that the king did, it pleased all the people.
So all the people and all Israel knew on that day that the king was not responsible for having Abʹner the son of Ner put to death.
Then the king said to his servants: “Do you not know that a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel?
Today I am weak, although anointed as king, and these men, the sons of Ze·ruʹiah, are too brutal for me. May Jehovah repay the evildoer according to his own evil.”
David then said: “Is there anyone still left of the house of Saul to whom I may show loyal love for the sake of Jonʹa·than?”
Now there was a servant of the house of Saul named Ziʹba. So they called him to David, and the king asked him: “Are you Ziʹba?” He replied: “I am your servant.”
The king continued: “Is there anyone left of the house of Saul to whom I may extend God’s loyal love?” Ziʹba replied to the king: “There is still one son of Jonʹa·than; he is crippled in both feet.”
The king asked him: “Where is he?” Ziʹba replied to the king: “He is in the house of Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el at Lo-deʹbar.”
King David immediately sent for him and took him from the house of Maʹchir the son of Amʹmi·el at Lo-deʹbar.
When Me·phibʹo·sheth the son of Jonʹa·than the son of Saul came in to David, he at once fell facedown and prostrated himself. Then David said: “Me·phibʹo·sheth!” to which he replied: “Here is your servant.”
David said to him: “Do not be afraid, for I will certainly show loyal love to you for the sake of your father Jonʹa·than, and I will return to you all the land of Saul your grandfather, and you will always dine at my table.”
At that he prostrated himself and said: “What is your servant, that you have turned your attention to a dead dog like me?”
The king now sent for Ziʹba, Saul’s attendant, and said to him: “Everything that belonged to Saul and to all his house I give to the grandson of your master.
You will cultivate the land for him—you and your sons and your servants—and you will gather its produce to provide food for those who belong to the grandson of your master to eat. But Me·phibʹo·sheth, the grandson of your master, will always dine at my table.” Now Ziʹba had 15 sons and 20 servants.
Then Ziʹba said to the king: “Your servant will do all that my lord the king commands his servant to do.” So Me·phibʹo·sheth ate at David’s table like one of the sons of the king.
Now Me·phibʹo·sheth also had a young son named Miʹca; and all those who lived in Ziʹba’s house became servants of Me·phibʹo·sheth.
And Me·phibʹo·sheth lived in Jerusalem, for he always ate at the table of the king; and he was crippled in both feet.
The anger of Jehovah again blazed against Israel when one incited David against them, saying: “Go, take a count of Israel and Judah.”
So the king said to Joʹab the chief of the army who was with him: “Please go through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, and register the people, so that I may know the number of the people.”
But Joʹab said to the king: “May Jehovah your God multiply the people 100 times, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it, but why does my lord the king want to do such a thing?”
But the king’s word prevailed over Joʹab and the chiefs of the army. So Joʹab and the chiefs of the army went out from before the king to register the people of Israel.
They crossed the Jordan and camped at A·roʹer, to the right of the city in the middle of the valley, toward the Gadʹites, and on to Jaʹzer.
After that they went on to Gilʹe·ad and the land of Tahʹtim-hodʹshi and continued to Dan-jaʹan and went around to Siʹdon.
Then they went to the fortress of Tyre and all the cities of the Hiʹvites and of the Caʹnaan·ites, and finally they ended up in the Negʹeb of Judah at Beʹer-sheʹba.
Thus they went through all the land and came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and 20 days.
Joʹab now gave to the king the number of the people who were registered. Israel amounted to 800,000 warriors armed with swords, and the men of Judah were 500,000.
But David’s heart was struck with remorse after he had numbered the people. David then said to Jehovah: “I have sinned greatly by doing this. And now, Jehovah, please forgive your servant’s error, for I have acted very foolishly.”
When David got up in the morning, Jehovah’s word came to Gad the prophet, David’s visionary, saying:
“Go and say to David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I am giving you three options. Choose the one that I should bring on you.”’”
So Gad came in to David and told him: “Should seven years of famine come on your land? Or should you flee for three months from your adversaries while they pursue you? Or should there be three days of pestilence in your land? Now consider carefully what I should reply to the One who sent me.”
So David said to Gad: “It is very distressing to me. Let us fall, please, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercy is great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”
Then Jehovah sent a pestilence on Israel from the morning until the designated time, so that 70,000 of the people from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba died.
When the angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Jehovah felt regret over the calamity, and he said to the angel bringing destruction among the people: “It is enough! Now let your hand drop.” Jehovah’s angel was close to the threshing floor of A·rauʹnah the Jebʹu·site.
When David saw the angel who was striking the people down, he said to Jehovah: “I am the one who sinned, and I am the one who did wrong; but these sheep—what have they done? Let your hand, please, come against me and my father’s house.”
So Gad came in to David on that day and said to him: “Go up, set up for Jehovah an altar on the threshing floor of A·rauʹnah the Jebʹu·site.”
So David went up at the word of Gad, as Jehovah had commanded.
When A·rauʹnah looked down and saw the king and his servants coming toward him, A·rauʹnah immediately went out and bowed down to the king with his face to the ground.
A·rauʹnah asked: “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?” David replied: “To buy from you the threshing floor in order to build an altar to Jehovah, so that the scourge against the people may be halted.”
But A·rauʹnah said to David: “Let my lord the king take it and offer up what seems good to him. Here are cattle for the burnt offering and the threshing sledge and the equipment of the cattle for the wood.
All of this, O king, A·rauʹnah gives to the king.” Then A·rauʹnah said to the king: “May Jehovah your God show you favor.”
However, the king said to A·rauʹnah: “No, I must buy it from you for a price. I will not offer up to Jehovah my God burnt sacrifices that cost me nothing.” So David bought the threshing floor and the cattle for 50 silver shekels.
And David built an altar there to Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices. Jehovah then responded to the entreaty for the land, and the scourge against Israel was halted.
Afterward David inquired of Jehovah, saying: “Should I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” Jehovah said to him: “Go up.” David then asked: “Where should I go?” He replied: “To Hebʹron.”
So David went up there with his two wives, A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el and Abʹi·gail the widow of Naʹbal the Carʹmel·ite.
David also brought the men who were with him, each with his household, and they settled in the cities around Hebʹron.
Then the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David as king over the house of Judah. They told David: “The men of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad were the ones who buried Saul.”
So David sent messengers to the men of Jaʹbesh-gilʹe·ad and said to them: “May you be blessed by Jehovah, because you showed loyal love to your lord Saul by burying him.
May Jehovah show loyal love and faithfulness to you. I will also show you kindness because you have done this.
Now let your hands be strong and be courageous men, for your lord Saul is dead, and the house of Judah has anointed me as king over them.”
But Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of Saul’s army, had taken Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth and brought him across to Ma·ha·naʹim
and made him king over Gilʹe·ad, the Ashʹur·ites, Jezʹre·el, Eʹphra·im, Benjamin, and over all Israel.
Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, was 40 years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned for two years. The house of Judah, however, supported David.
The time that David was king in Hebʹron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
In time Abʹner the son of Ner and the servants of Ish-boʹsheth, Saul’s son, went out from Ma·ha·naʹim to Gibʹe·on.
Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah and the servants of David also went out and encountered them at the pool of Gibʹe·on; and one group sat on this side of the pool, and the other group on that side of the pool.
Finally Abʹner said to Joʹab: “Let the young men get up and engage in combat before us.” To this Joʹab said: “Let them get up.”
So they got up and crossed over by number, 12 for Benjamin and Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth and 12 from the servants of David.
They grabbed one another by the head and each of them thrust his sword into the side of his opponent, and they all fell down together. So that place, which is in Gibʹe·on, was called Helʹkath-haz·zuʹrim.
The fighting that ensued was extremely fierce that day, and Abʹner and the men of Israel were finally defeated before the servants of David.
Now the three sons of Ze·ruʹiah were there—Joʹab, A·bishʹai, and Asʹa·hel; and Asʹa·hel was as swift on his feet as a gazelle in the open field.
Asʹa·hel chased after Abʹner, and he would not veer to the right or to the left in his pursuit of Abʹner.
When Abʹner looked behind, he asked, “Is that you, Asʹa·hel?” to which he replied, “Yes, it is.”
Then Abʹner said to him: “Veer to your right or to your left and capture one of the young men, and take whatever you strip off him for yourself.” But Asʹa·hel did not want to stop chasing him.
So Abʹner said to Asʹa·hel once again: “Stop chasing me. Why should I strike you down? How could I look your brother Joʹab in the face?”
But he kept refusing to stop, so Abʹner struck him in the abdomen with the butt end of the spear, and the spear came out from his back; and he fell there and died on the spot. Everyone who came to the place where Asʹa·hel fell and died would stop and pause there.
Then Joʹab and A·bishʹai went in pursuit of Abʹner. As the sun was setting, they came to the hill of Amʹmah, which faces Giʹah on the way to the wilderness of Gibʹe·on.
There the Benʹja·min·ites gathered together behind Abʹner, and they formed one company and made a stand on the top of a certain hill.
Then Abʹner called out to Joʹab: “Is the sword going to devour endlessly? Do you not know that the outcome will only be bitterness? How long, then, will it be before you tell the people to turn back from pursuing their brothers?”
At that Joʹab said: “As surely as the true God is living, if you had not spoken, then only by the morning would the people have stopped pursuing their brothers.”
Joʹab now blew the horn, and his men stopped chasing after Israel, and the fighting ceased.
Abʹner and his men then marched through the Arʹa·bah all that night and crossed the Jordan and marched through the entire ravine and finally came to Ma·ha·naʹim.
After Joʹab turned back from pursuing Abʹner, he gathered all the people together. Of David’s servants, 19 were missing, in addition to Asʹa·hel.
But the servants of David had defeated the Benʹja·min·ites and the men of Abʹner, and 360 of their men had died.
They took Asʹa·hel and buried him in his father’s tomb, which is at Bethʹle·hem. Then Joʹab and his men marched all night long, and they reached Hebʹron at daybreak.
Later the king of the Amʹmon·ites died, and his son Haʹnun became king in his place.
At that David said: “I will show loyal love toward Haʹnun the son of Naʹhash as his father showed loyal love toward me.” So David sent his servants to offer him comfort over the loss of his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Amʹmon·ites,
the princes of the Amʹmon·ites said to Haʹnun their lord: “Do you think that David is honoring your father by sending comforters to you? Is it not to search through the city and to spy it out and to overthrow it that David has sent his servants to you?”
So Haʹnun took the servants of David and shaved off half their beards and cut their garments in half at their buttocks and sent them away.
When David was told, he at once sent men to meet them, because the men had been deeply humiliated; and the king told them: “Stay in Jerʹi·cho until your beards grow back, and then return.”
In time the Amʹmon·ites saw that they had become a stench to David, so the Amʹmon·ites sent and hired Syrians of Beth-reʹhob and Syrians of Zoʹbah, 20,000 foot soldiers; and the king of Maʹa·cah, with 1,000 men; and from Ishʹtob, 12,000 men.
When David heard about it, he sent Joʹab and the entire army, including his mightiest warriors.
And the Amʹmon·ites went out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the city gate while the Syrians of Zoʹbah and of Reʹhob, along with Ishʹtob and Maʹa·cah, were by themselves in the open field.
When Joʹab saw that the battle charges were coming against him from the front and the rear, he chose some of the best troops in Israel and drew them up in battle formation to meet the Syrians.
He put the rest of the men under the command of his brother A·bishʹai, in order to draw them up in battle formation to meet the Amʹmon·ites.
Then he said: “If the Syrians become too strong for me, then you must come to my rescue; but if the Amʹmon·ites become too strong for you, I will come to your rescue.
We must be strong and courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do what is good in his eyes.”
Then Joʹab and his men advanced to meet the Syrians in battle, and they fled from before him.
When the Amʹmon·ites saw that the Syrians had fled, they fled from A·bishʹai and went into the city. After that Joʹab returned from the Amʹmon·ites and came to Jerusalem.
When the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they regrouped.
So Had·ad·eʹzer sent for the Syrians in the region of the River, and then they came to Heʹlam, with Shoʹbach the chief of the army of Had·ad·eʹzer leading them.
When the report was made to David, he immediately gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to Heʹlam. The Syrians then drew up in battle formation to meet David and fought against him.
But the Syrians fled from Israel; and David killed 700 charioteers and 40,000 horsemen of the Syrians, and he struck down Shoʹbach the chief of their army, who died there.
When all the kings, the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer, saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they promptly made peace with Israel and became their subjects; and the Syrians were afraid to help the Amʹmon·ites anymore.
When David had passed a little beyond the summit, Ziʹba, the attendant of Me·phibʹo·sheth, was there to meet him with a couple of saddled donkeys, and on them were 200 loaves of bread, 100 cakes of raisins, 100 cakes of summer fruit, and a large jar of wine.
Then the king said to Ziʹba: “Why have you brought these things?” Ziʹba replied: “The donkeys are for the household of the king to ride, the bread and the summer fruit are for the young men to eat, and the wine is for those who get exhausted in the wilderness to drink.”
The king now said: “And where is the son of your master?” At this Ziʹba said to the king: “He is staying in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will give back the royal rule of my father to me.’”
The king then said to Ziʹba: “Look! Everything that belongs to Me·phibʹo·sheth is yours.” Ziʹba replied: “I bow down before you. May I find favor in your eyes, my lord the king.”
When King David reached Ba·huʹrim, a man of the family of Saul’s house named Shimʹe·i, the son of Geʹra, came out shouting curses as he approached.
He was throwing stones at David and at all the servants of King David, as well as at all the people and the mighty men on his right and on his left.
Shimʹe·i said as he cursed: “Get out, get out, you bloodguilty man! You worthless man!
Jehovah has brought back on you all the bloodguilt for the house of Saul, in whose place you have ruled as king, but Jehovah gives the kingship into the hand of Abʹsa·lom your son. Now calamity has overtaken you because you are a bloodguilty man!”
Then A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah said to the king: “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, please, and take off his head.”
But the king said: “What do I have to do with you, you sons of Ze·ruʹiah? Let him curse me, for Jehovah has said to him, ‘Curse David!’ So who should say, ‘Why are you doing this?’”
David then said to A·bishʹai and all his servants: “Here my own son, who came from my own body, is seeking my life, and how much more now a Benʹja·min·ite! Leave him alone so that he may curse me, for Jehovah told him to!
Perhaps Jehovah will see my affliction, and Jehovah will restore goodness to me instead of the curses shouted at me this day.”
With that David and his men kept going down the road while Shimʹe·i was walking alongside the mountain abreast of him, shouting curses and throwing stones and a lot of dust.
At length the king and all the people with him arrived at their destination exhausted, and they refreshed themselves.
Meanwhile, Abʹsa·lom and all the men of Israel arrived in Jerusalem, and A·hithʹo·phel was with him.
When Huʹshai the Arʹchite, David’s friend, came in to Abʹsa·lom, Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “Long live the king! Long live the king!”
At this Abʹsa·lom said to Huʹshai: “Is this your loyal love toward your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?”
So Huʹshai said to Abʹsa·lom: “No, I am on the side of the one who has been chosen by Jehovah, this people, and all the men of Israel. I will stay with him.
And again I say, Whom should I serve? Should it not be his son? Just as I served your father, so I will serve you.”
Abʹsa·lom then said to A·hithʹo·phel: “Give me your advice. What should we do?”
At that A·hithʹo·phel said to Abʹsa·lom: “Have relations with your father’s concubines, those whom he left behind to take care of the house. Then all Israel will hear that you have made yourself a stench to your father, and those who support you will be strengthened.”
So they pitched a tent for Abʹsa·lom on the roof, and Abʹsa·lom had relations with the concubines of his father before the eyes of all Israel.
In those days the advice that A·hithʹo·phel gave was considered as the word of the true God. That was how all the advice of A·hithʹo·phel was esteemed, both by David and by Abʹsa·lom.
In time all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebʹron and said: “Look! We are your own bone and flesh.
In times past while Saul was our king, you were the one who was leading Israel on its campaigns. And Jehovah said to you: ‘You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become leader over Israel.’”
So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebʹron, and King David made a covenant with them in Hebʹron before Jehovah. Then they anointed David as king over Israel.
David was 30 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 40 years.
In Hebʹron he reigned over Judah for 7 years and 6 months, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years over all Israel and Judah.
And the king and his men set out for Jerusalem against the Jebʹu·sites who were inhabiting the land. They taunted David: “You will never come in here! Even the blind and the lame will drive you away.” They thought, ‘David will never get in here.’
However, David captured the stronghold of Zion, which is now the City of David.
So David said on that day: “Those who attack the Jebʹu·sites should go through the water tunnel to strike down both ‘the lame and the blind,’ who are hateful to David!” That is why it is said: “The blind and the lame will never enter the house.”
Then David took up residence in the stronghold, and it was called the City of David; and David began to build all around from the Mound inward.
Thus David became greater and greater, and Jehovah the God of armies was with him.
King Hiʹram of Tyre sent messengers to David, also cedar timbers, woodworkers, and stonemasons for building walls, and they began to build a house for David.
And David knew that Jehovah had firmly established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of His people Israel.
David took more concubines and wives in Jerusalem after he came from Hebʹron, and more sons and daughters were born to David.
These are the names of those born to him in Jerusalem: Sham·muʹa, Shoʹbab, Nathan, Solʹo·mon,
Ibʹhar, E·liʹshu·a, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa,
E·lishʹa·ma, E·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.
When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that David had been anointed as king over Israel, all the Phi·lisʹtines came up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went down to the stronghold.
Then the Phi·lisʹtines came in and spread out in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
David inquired of Jehovah, saying: “Should I go up against the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into my hand?” At this Jehovah said to David: “Go up, for I will surely give the Phi·lisʹtines into your hand.”
So David came to Baʹal-pe·raʹzim, and David struck them down there. At that he said: “Jehovah has broken through my enemies before me, like a breach made by waters.” That is why he named that place Baʹal-pe·raʹzim.
The Phi·lisʹtines abandoned their idols there, and David and his men took them away.
Later the Phi·lisʹtines came up once again and spread out in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
David inquired of Jehovah, but He said: “Do not go directly up. Instead, go around behind them, and come against them in front of the baʹca bushes.
And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the baʹca bushes, then act decisively, for Jehovah will have gone out before you to strike down the army of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
So David did just as Jehovah commanded him, and he struck down the Phi·lisʹtines from Geʹba all the way to Geʹzer.
Now Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah learned that the king’s heart longed for Abʹsa·lom.
So Joʹab sent to Te·koʹa and summoned from there a clever woman and told her: “Act like you are in mourning, please, and put on garments of mourning, and do not rub yourself with oil. Behave like a woman who has been mourning over someone dead for a long time.
Then go in and speak to the king like this.” With that Joʹab put the words in her mouth.
The Te·koʹite woman went in to the king and fell with her face to the ground and prostrated herself and said: “Help me, O king!”
The king replied to her: “What is the matter?” To this she said: “Alas, I am a widow; my husband is dead.
And I, your servant, had two sons, and the two of them fought with each other in the field. There was no one to separate them, and one struck the other down and killed him.
Now the whole family has risen up against me, your servant, and they are saying, ‘Hand over the one who struck his brother, so that we may put him to death for the life of his brother whom he killed, even if it means wiping out the heir!’ They would extinguish the last glowing coal that I have left and leave to my husband neither a name nor a survivor on the surface of the earth.”
Then the king said to the woman: “Go to your home, and I will issue an order regarding you.”
At this the Te·koʹite woman said to the king: “O my lord the king, let the guilt be on me and on my father’s house, while the king and his throne are innocent.”
The king then said: “If anyone speaks further to you, bring him to me, and he will never trouble you again.”
But she said: “Please, let the king remember Jehovah your God, so that the avenger of blood does not bring ruin and annihilate my son.” To this he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, not one of your son’s hairs will fall to the ground.”
The woman now said: “Let your servant, please, speak a word to my lord the king.” So he said: “Speak!”
The woman said: “Why, then, have you thought to do something like this against the people of God? When the king speaks this way, he makes himself guilty, for the king does not bring back his own banished son.
We will surely die and be like waters that are poured out on the ground, which cannot be recovered. But God would not take away a life, and he considers reasons why the banished one should not always be banished from him.
I have come in to say this to my lord the king because the people made me afraid. So your servant said, ‘Let me speak, please, to the king. Perhaps the king will act on the request of his slave.
The king may listen and rescue his slave from the hand of the man seeking to annihilate me and my only son from the inheritance God gave us.’
Then your servant said, ‘May the word of my lord the king please give me relief,’ for my lord the king is just like an angel of the true God in distinguishing what is good from what is bad. May Jehovah your God be with you.”
The king now answered the woman: “Please do not hide from me anything I ask you.” The woman replied: “Let my lord the king speak, please.”
The king then asked: “Did Joʹab put you up to all of this?” The woman answered: “As surely as you are living, O my lord the king, it is just as my lord the king says, for it was your servant Joʹab who instructed me and put all these words in the mouth of your servant.
Your servant Joʹab has done this to change the appearance of things, but my lord has wisdom like that of the angel of the true God and knows all that is happening in the land.”
The king then said to Joʹab: “All right, I will do this thing. Go and bring back the young man Abʹsa·lom.”
At this Joʹab fell with his face to the ground and prostrated himself and praised the king. Joʹab said: “Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your eyes, O my lord the king, because the king has acted on the request of his servant.”
Then Joʹab got up and went to Geshʹur and brought Abʹsa·lom to Jerusalem.
However, the king said: “Let him return to his own house, but he may not see my face.” So Abʹsa·lom returned to his own house, and he did not see the face of the king.
Now in all Israel, no man was as highly praised for his handsome appearance as Abʹsa·lom. From the sole of his foot to the crown of his head, there was no flaw in him.
When he shaved his head—he had to shave it at the end of every year because it was so heavy for him—the hair of his head weighed 200 shekels by the royal stone weight.
To Abʹsa·lom were born three sons and one daughter, whose name was Taʹmar. She was a very beautiful woman.
And Abʹsa·lom continued living in Jerusalem for two full years, but he did not see the face of the king.
So Abʹsa·lom summoned Joʹab in order to send him to the king, but Joʹab would not come to him. Then he sent for him again, a second time, and he still refused to come.
Finally he said to his servants: “Joʹab’s plot of land is next to mine, and he has some barley there. Go and set it on fire.” So the servants of Abʹsa·lom set the plot of land on fire.
At this Joʹab got up and came to Abʹsa·lom’s house and said to him: “Why did your servants set my plot of land on fire?”
Abʹsa·lom replied to Joʹab: “Look! I sent this message to you, ‘Come and let me send you to the king to ask: “Why have I come from Geshʹur? It would have been better for me to stay there. Now let me see the face of the king, and if there is guilt in me, then he should put me to death.”’”
So Joʹab went in to the king and told him. Then he called Abʹsa·lom, who came in to the king and prostrated himself before him, falling with his face to the ground before the king. Then the king kissed Abʹsa·lom.
And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah rescued him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of Saul’s hand.
He said: “Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me.
My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge,My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refugeAnd my place to flee, my savior; you who save me from violence.
I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise,And I will be saved from my enemies.
The waves of death broke all around me;Flash floods of worthless men terrified me.
The ropes of the Grave surrounded me;The snares of death confronted me.
In my distress I called on Jehovah,To my God I kept calling. Then from his temple he heard my voice,And my cry for help reached his ears.
Back and forth the earth began to shake and rock;The foundations of the heavens trembledAnd shook back and forth because he had been angered.
Smoke ascended from his nostrils,And a consuming fire came from his mouth;Glowing coals blazed from him.
He made the heavens bend as he descended,And thick gloom was beneath his feet.
He rode on a cherub and came flying. He was visible on the wings of a spirit.
Then he put darkness around him as a shelter,In dark waters and thick clouds.
From the brightness before him fiery coals blazed.
Then Jehovah began to thunder from heaven;The Most High made his voice heard.
He shot his arrows and scattered them;Lightning, and he threw them into confusion.
The bed of the sea became visible;The foundations of the land were exposed by the rebuke of Jehovah,By the blast of the breath from his nostrils.
He reached down from on high;He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.
He rescued me from my strong enemy,From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.
They confronted me on the day of my disaster,But Jehovah was my support.
He brought me out into a place of safety;He rescued me because he was pleased with me.
Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness;He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.
All his judgments are before me;I will not deviate from his statutes.
I will remain blameless before him,And I will keep myself from error.
May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness,According to my innocence before him.
With someone loyal you act in loyalty;With the blameless, mighty man, you deal blamelessly;
With the pure you show yourself pure,But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.
For you save those who are humble,But your eyes are against the haughty, and you abase them.
For you are my lamp, O Jehovah;It is Jehovah who lights up my darkness.
With your help I can charge against a marauder band;By God’s power I can scale a wall.
The way of the true God is perfect;The saying of Jehovah is refined. He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.
For who is a God besides Jehovah? And who is a rock except our God?
The true God is my strong fortress,And he will make my way perfect.
He makes my feet like those of a deer;He makes me stand on high places.
He trains my hands for warfare;My arms can bend a bow of copper.
You give me your shield of salvation,And your humility makes me great.
You widen the path for my footsteps;My feet will not slip.
I will pursue my enemies and annihilate them;I will not return until they are wiped out.
And I will wipe them out and crush them, so that they will not rise up;They will fall under my feet.
You will equip me with strength for the battle;You will make my foes collapse under me.
You will make my enemies retreat from me;I will put an end to those who hate me.
They cry for help, but there is no one to save them;They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.
I will pound them as fine as the dust of the earth;I will pulverize and trample them like mud in the streets.
You will rescue me from the faultfinding of my people. You will safeguard me to be the head of nations;A people whom I have not known will serve me.
Foreigners will come cringing before me;What they hear about me will make them obey me.
Foreigners will lose courage;They will come trembling from their strongholds.
Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock! Let the God of the rock of my salvation be exalted.
The true God executes vengeance for me;He subdues the peoples under me;
He rescues me from my enemies. You lift me high above those who attack me;You save me from the man of violence.
That is why I will thank you, O Jehovah, among the nations,And to your name I will sing praises:
He performs great acts of salvation for his king;He displays loyal love to his anointed one,To David and his offspring forever.”
After all these things, Abʹsa·lom acquired for himself a chariot and horses and 50 men to run before him.
Abʹsa·lom would rise up early and stand at the side of the road to the city gate. Whenever any man had a legal case that was to come to the king for judgment, Abʹsa·lom would call him and say: “From what city are you?” and he would say: “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel.”
Abʹsa·lom would say to him: “See, your claims are right and proper, but there is no one from the king to hear your case.”
Abʹsa·lom would say: “If only I were appointed judge in the land! Then every man who has a legal case or judgment could come to me, and I would see that he receives justice.”
And when a man came near to bow down to him, Abʹsa·lom would extend his hand and grab hold of him and kiss him.
Abʹsa·lom would do this to all the Israelites who would come in to the king for judgment; so Abʹsa·lom kept stealing the hearts of the men of Israel.
At the end of four years, Abʹsa·lom said to the king: “Let me go, please, to Hebʹron to pay my vow that I made to Jehovah.
For your servant made this solemn vow when I was dwelling in Geshʹur in Syria: ‘If Jehovah will bring me back to Jerusalem, I will make an offering to Jehovah.’”
So the king said to him: “Go in peace.” With that he rose up and went to Hebʹron.
Abʹsa·lom now sent spies through all the tribes of Israel, saying: “As soon as you hear the sound of the horn, announce, ‘Abʹsa·lom has become king in Hebʹron!’”
Now 200 men from Jerusalem had gone there with Abʹsa·lom; they were invited and went unsuspectingly, unaware of what was happening.
Further, when he offered the sacrifices, Abʹsa·lom sent for A·hithʹo·phel the Giʹlon·ite, David’s adviser, from his city Giʹloh. The conspiracy kept gaining momentum, and the people who supported Abʹsa·lom were growing in number.
In time an informer came to David, saying: “The heart of the men of Israel has turned to Abʹsa·lom.”
At once David said to all his servants with him in Jerusalem: “Get up, and let us run away, for none of us will escape from Abʹsa·lom! Hurry, for fear he may quickly overtake us and bring disaster on us and strike the city with the sword!”
The king’s servants replied to the king: “Whatever my lord the king decides, your servants are ready to do.”
So the king went out with all his household following him, but the king left ten concubines to take care of the house.
And the king continued on his way out with all the people following, and they stopped at Beth-merʹhak.
All his servants leaving with him and all the Cherʹe·thites, the Pelʹe·thites, and the Gitʹtites, 600 men who had followed him from Gath, were passing by as the king reviewed them.
Then the king said to Itʹtai the Gitʹtite: “Why should you also go with us? Go back and dwell with the new king, for you are a foreigner and also an exile from your place.
Yesterday you came, so today should I make you wander with us, to go when I must go and where I must go? Go back and take your brothers with you, and may Jehovah show you loyal love and faithfulness!”
But Itʹtai answered the king: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as surely as my lord the king is living, wherever my lord the king may be, whether for death or for life, there your servant will be!”
At that David said to Itʹtai: “Go and cross over.” So Itʹtai the Gitʹtite crossed over, together with all his men and children.
Everyone in the land was weeping loudly while all these people crossed over, and the king was standing by the Kidʹron Valley; all the people were crossing over to the road leading to the wilderness.
Zaʹdok was also there and with him were all the Levites carrying the ark of the covenant of the true God; and they set the Ark of the true God down; and A·biʹa·thar went up, while all the people completed crossing over from the city.
But the king said to Zaʹdok: “Take the Ark of the true God back to the city. If I find favor in the eyes of Jehovah, he will also bring me back and let me see it and its dwelling place.
But if he should say, ‘I have found no pleasure in you,’ then let him do to me whatever seems good in his eyes.”
The king said to Zaʹdok the priest: “Are you not a seer? Return to the city in peace, and take the two sons of you men with you, A·himʹa·az your own son and Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar.
See, I will linger by the fords of the wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.”
So Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar took the Ark of the true God back to Jerusalem, and they remained there.
As David was going up the Mount of Olives, he was weeping as he went up; his head was covered, and he was walking barefoot. All the people with him also covered their heads and were weeping as they went up.
David was then told: “A·hithʹo·phel is among those conspiring with Abʹsa·lom.” At this David said: “Turn, please, the advice of A·hithʹo·phel into foolishness, O Jehovah!”
When David came to the summit where people used to bow down to God, Huʹshai the Arʹchite was there to meet him, with his robe ripped apart and dirt on his head.
However, David said to him: “If you go across with me, you will be a load on me.
But if you return to the city and you say to Abʹsa·lom, ‘I am your servant, O King. I was the servant of your father in the past, but now I am your servant,’ you can then frustrate the advice of A·hithʹo·phel for me.
Are not Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests there with you? You must tell Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar the priests everything that you hear from the house of the king.
Look! There with them are their two sons, A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok and Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar, and through them send to me everything that you hear.”
So Huʹshai, David’s friend, went into the city as Abʹsa·lom was entering into Jerusalem.
When Saul’s son Ish-boʹsheth heard that Abʹner had died in Hebʹron, his courage failed him and all the Israelites were disturbed.
There were two men in charge of the marauder bands that belonged to the son of Saul: one was named Baʹa·nah and the other Reʹchab. They were sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, of the tribe of Benjamin. (For Be·erʹoth too used to be counted as part of Benjamin.
The Be·erʹoth·ites ran away to Gitʹta·im, and they are foreign residents there down to this day.)
Now Saul’s son Jonʹa·than had a son whose feet were crippled. He was five years old when the report about Saul and Jonʹa·than came from Jezʹre·el, and his nurse picked him up and fled, but as she was fleeing in panic, he fell and was crippled. His name was Me·phibʹo·sheth.
The sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, Reʹchab and Baʹa·nah, went to the house of Ish-boʹsheth during the hot part of the day, as he was taking his midday rest.
They went into the house as if they were getting wheat, and they struck him in the abdomen; then Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah escaped.
When they had entered the house, he was lying on his bed in his bedroom, and they struck him and put him to death, after which they cut off his head. Then they took his head and walked all night long on the road to the Arʹa·bah.
And they brought the head of Ish-boʹsheth to David at Hebʹron and said to the king: “Here is the head of Ish-boʹsheth the son of Saul your enemy who sought your life. This day Jehovah gives to my lord the king revenge on Saul and his descendants.”
However, David answered Reʹchab and his brother Baʹa·nah, the sons of Rimʹmon the Be·erʹoth·ite, and said to them: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the one who rescued me out of all distress,
when someone reported to me, ‘Here Saul is dead,’ and he thought he was bringing me good news, I took hold of him and killed him in Zikʹlag. That was the messenger’s reward he received from me!
How much more so when wicked men have killed a righteous man in his own house on his bed! Should I not require his blood from your hands and rid the earth of you?”
David then ordered the young men to kill them. They cut off their hands and feet and hung them by the pool in Hebʹron. But they took the head of Ish-boʹsheth and buried it in the burial place of Abʹner in Hebʹron.
Now there was a troublemaker named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri, a Benʹja·min·ite. He blew the horn and said: “We have no share in David, and we have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Everyone to his gods, O Israel!”
At that all the men of Israel quit following David to follow Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri; but the men of Judah stuck to their king, from the Jordan to Jerusalem.
When David came to his house at Jerusalem, the king took the ten concubines he had left behind to take care of the house, and he put them in a house under guard. He supplied food to them, but he did not have any relations with them. They remained in confinement until the day of their death, living as if they were widows, even though they had a living husband.
The king now said to A·maʹsa: “Call the men of Judah together to me within three days, and you also should be here.”
So A·maʹsa went to call Judah together, but he came later than the set time that had been appointed for him.
Then David said to A·bishʹai: “Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri may do us more harm than Abʹsa·lom did. Take the servants of your lord and chase after him, so that he may not find fortified cities and escape from us.”
So the men of Joʹab, the Cherʹe·thites, the Pelʹe·thites, and all the mighty men went out after him; they left Jerusalem to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
When they were near the great stone in Gibʹe·on, A·maʹsa came to meet them. Now Joʹab was wearing his battle clothing, and he had a sword in its sheath strapped to his hip. When he stepped forward, the sword fell out.
Joʹab said to A·maʹsa: “Are you all right, my brother?” Then with his right hand, Joʹab took hold of A·maʹsa’s beard as if to kiss him.
A·maʹsa was not on guard against the sword that was in Joʹab’s hand, and Joʹab stabbed him with it in the abdomen, and his intestines spilled out on the ground. He did not have to stab him again; once was enough to kill him. Then Joʹab and his brother A·bishʹai chased after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
One of Joʹab’s young men stood by him and was saying: “Whoever is on Joʹab’s side and whoever belongs to David, let him follow Joʹab!”
All the while A·maʹsa was wallowing in his blood in the middle of the road. When the man saw that all the people were stopping, he moved A·maʹsa from the road to the field. Then he threw a garment over him, because he saw that everyone was stopping when they came up to him.
After he had removed him from the road, all the men followed Joʹab to chase after Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri.
Sheʹba passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah. The Bichʹrites gathered together and also went in after him.
Joʹab and his men came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maʹa·cah and raised up a siege rampart against the city, as it was standing within a rampart. And all the men with Joʹab were undermining the wall to knock it down.
And a wise woman called out from the city: “Listen, men, listen! Please tell Joʹab, ‘Come here, and let me speak to you.’”
So he went near to her, and the woman said: “Are you Joʹab?” He replied: “I am.” At this she said to him: “Listen to the words of your servant.” He said: “I am listening.”
She continued: “They would always say in the past, ‘Let them inquire in Abel, and that was the end of the matter.’
I represent the peaceable and faithful ones of Israel. You are seeking to destroy a city that is like a mother in Israel. Why should you do away with the inheritance of Jehovah?”
Joʹab answered: “It is unthinkable for me to do away with it and destroy it.
That is not the case at all. Rather, a man named Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im has rebelled against King David. If you hand over this one man, I will withdraw from the city.” Then the woman said to Joʹab: “Look! His head will be thrown over the wall to you!”
At once the wise woman went in to all the people, and they cut off the head of Sheʹba the son of Bichʹri and threw it to Joʹab. At that he blew the horn, and they dispersed from the city, each one to his home; and Joʹab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
Now Joʹab was in charge of all the army of Israel; Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites.
A·doʹram was over those conscripted for forced labor; Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was the recorder.
Sheʹva was the secretary; Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar were priests.
And Iʹra the Jaʹir·ite also became a chief minister for David.
So Jehovah sent Nathan to David. He came in to him and said: “There were two men in one city, the one rich and the other poor.
The rich man had very many sheep and cattle;
but the poor man had nothing but one small female lamb, which he had bought. He cared for it, and it grew up together with him and his sons. It would eat from the little food he had and drink from his cup and sleep in his arms. It became as a daughter to him.
Later a visitor came to the rich man, but he would not take any of his own sheep and cattle to prepare a meal for the traveler who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.”
At this David grew very angry against the man, and he said to Nathan: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the man who did this deserves to die!
And he should pay for the lamb four times over, because he did this and showed no compassion.”
Then Nathan said to David: “You are the man! This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I myself anointed you as king over Israel, and I rescued you from the hand of Saul.
I was willing to give you your master’s house and put your master’s wives in your arms, and I gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And as if that were not enough, I was willing to do much more for you.
Why did you despise the word of Jehovah by doing what is bad in his eyes? You struck down U·riʹah the Hitʹtite with the sword! Then you took his wife as your wife after you killed him by the sword of the Amʹmon·ites.
Now a sword will never depart from your own house, because you despised me by taking the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite as your wife.’
This is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing against you calamity from within your own house; and before your own eyes, I will take your wives and give them to another man, and he will lie down with your wives in broad daylight.
Although you acted in secret, I will do this in front of all Israel and in broad daylight.’”
David then said to Nathan: “I have sinned against Jehovah.” Nathan replied to David: “Jehovah, in turn, forgives your sin. You will not die.
Nevertheless, because you have treated Jehovah with utter disrespect in this matter, the son just born to you will certainly die.”
Then Nathan went to his own house. And Jehovah struck the child whom U·riʹah’s wife had borne to David, and he became sick.
David pleaded with the true God in behalf of the boy. David went on a strict fast and would go in and spend the night lying on the ground.
So the elders of his house stood over him and tried to raise him up from the ground, but he refused and would not eat with them.
On the seventh day the child died, but David’s servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead. They said: “While the child was alive we spoke to him, and he did not listen to us. So how can we tell him that the child has died? He may do something terrible.”
When David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he discerned that the child had died. David said to his servants: “Has the child died?” They replied: “He has died.”
So David got up from the ground. He washed, rubbed himself with oil, changed his clothing, and went to the house of Jehovah and prostrated himself. Afterward, he went to his house and asked for food to be brought to him, and he ate.
His servants asked him: “Why have you acted in this way? While the child was alive, you fasted and kept weeping; but as soon as the child died, you got up and ate food.”
He replied: “While the child was alive, I fasted and kept weeping because I said to myself, ‘Who knows whether Jehovah may show me favor and let the child live?’
Now that he has died, why should I fast? Can I bring him back? I will go to him, but he will not return to me.”
Then David comforted his wife Bath-sheʹba. He went in to her and lay down with her. In time she bore a son, and he was named Solʹo·mon. And Jehovah loved him,
and he sent word through Nathan the prophet to name him Jed·i·diʹah, for the sake of Jehovah.
Joʹab continued fighting against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and he captured the royal city.
So Joʹab sent messengers to David and said: “I have fought against Rabʹbah, and I have captured the city of waters.
Now gather the rest of the troops and encamp against the city and capture it. Otherwise, I will be the one to capture the city, and it will be credited to me.”
So David gathered all the troops and went to Rabʹbah and fought against it and captured it.
Then he took the crown of Malʹcam from its head. The weight of it was a talent of gold, along with precious stones, and it was placed on David’s head. He also took a vast amount of spoil from the city.
And he brought out the people who were in it and put them to work at sawing stones, at working with sharp iron instruments and with iron axes, and at brickmaking. That was what he did to all the cities of the Amʹmon·ites. Finally David and all the troops returned to Jerusalem.
Then David numbered the men who were with him and placed over them chiefs of thousands and chiefs of hundreds.
And David sent one third of the men under the command of Joʹab, one third under the command of Joʹab’s brother A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah, and one third under the command of Itʹtai the Gitʹtite. The king then said to the men: “I will also go out with you.”
But they said: “You must not go out, for if we flee, they would not care about us; and if half of us would die, they would not care about us, because you are worth 10,000 of us. Therefore, it would be better if you would send us help from the city.”
The king said to them: “Whatever seems best to you, I will do.” So the king stood next to the city gate, and all the men went out by hundreds and by thousands.
Then the king gave Joʹab and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai this order: “Deal gently with the young man Abʹsa·lom for my sake.” All the men heard it when the king gave all the chiefs the order about Abʹsa·lom.
The men went out to the field to meet Israel, and the battle took place in the forest of Eʹphra·im.
There the people of Israel were defeated by the servants of David, and a great slaughter took place on that day—20,000 men.
The battle spread through the whole region. Furthermore, the forest devoured more of the people than the sword did on that day.
Abʹsa·lom eventually found himself facing the servants of David. Abʹsa·lom was riding on a mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a large tree, and his head got entangled in the big tree, so that he was suspended in midair while the mule he had been riding kept going.
Then someone saw it and told Joʹab: “Look! I have seen Abʹsa·lom hanging in a big tree.”
Joʹab replied to the man who told him: “If you saw it, why did you not strike him down to the ground on the spot? Then I would have gladly given you ten pieces of silver and a belt.”
But the man said to Joʹab: “Even if I were handed 1,000 pieces of silver, I could not lift my hand against the king’s son, for we heard the king order you and A·bishʹai and Itʹtai, ‘Whoever you are, watch over the young man Abʹsa·lom.’
If I had disobeyed and taken his life, it could never have remained hidden from the king, and you would not have protected me.”
To this Joʹab said: “I am not going to waste any more time with you!” So he took three spikes in his hand and drove them through the heart of Abʹsa·lom while he was still alive in the midst of the big tree.
Then ten attendants who carried Joʹab’s weapons came and struck Abʹsa·lom until he was dead.
Joʹab now blew the horn, and the men returned from chasing after Israel; Joʹab called for them to halt.
They took Abʹsa·lom and threw him into a big pit in the forest and piled up over him a very big heap of stones. And all Israel fled to their homes.
Now Abʹsa·lom, while he was alive, had taken and set up for himself a pillar in the Valley of the King, for he said: “I have no son to preserve the memory of my name.” So he named the pillar after himself, and it is called Abʹsa·lom’s Monument to this day.
A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said: “Let me run, please, and break the news to the king, for Jehovah has given him justice by freeing him from his enemies.”
But Joʹab said to him: “You will not be a bearer of news this day. You may break the news on another day, but today you will not break the news, because the king’s own son has died.”
Then Joʹab said to a Cushʹite: “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” At that the Cushʹite bowed to Joʹab and ran off.
A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok said once again to Joʹab: “Whatever happens, please let me also run behind the Cushʹite.” However, Joʹab said: “Why should you run, my son, when there is no news for you to tell?”
Still he said: “Whatever happens, let me run.” So Joʹab said to him: “Run!” And A·himʹa·az ran by the way of the district of the Jordan, and he eventually overtook the Cushʹite.
Now David was sitting between the two city gates, and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate by the wall. He looked up and saw a man running by himself.
So the watchman called out and told the king. The king said: “If he is by himself, he has news to tell.” As he came steadily nearer,
the watchman saw another man running. The watchman then called to the gatekeeper: “Look! Another man running by himself!” The king said: “This one is also bringing news.”
The watchman said: “I can see that the first man runs like A·himʹa·az the son of Zaʹdok,” so the king said: “He is a good man, and he comes with good news.”
A·himʹa·az then called out to the king: “All is well!” With that he bowed to the king with his face to the ground. Then he said: “May Jehovah your God be praised, who has surrendered the men who rebelled against my lord the king!”
However, the king said: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this A·himʹa·az said: “I saw the great commotion when Joʹab sent the king’s servant and your servant, but I did not know what it was.”
So the king said: “Step aside, stand here.” At that he stepped aside and stood there.
Then the Cushʹite arrived, and the Cushʹite said: “Let my lord the king accept this news: Today Jehovah has brought justice by freeing you from the hand of all those who rebelled against you.”
But the king said to the Cushʹite: “Is everything all right with the young man Abʹsa·lom?” To this the Cushʹite said: “May all the enemies of my lord the king and all those who rebelled against you to harm you become like the young man!”
This disturbed the king, and he went up to the roof chamber over the gateway and wept, saying as he walked: “My son Abʹsa·lom, my son, my son Abʹsa·lom! If only I had died instead of you, Abʹsa·lom my son, my son!”
These are the last words of David: “The word of David the son of Jesʹse,And the word of the man who was raised on high,The anointed of the God of Jacob,The pleasant singer of the songs of Israel.
The spirit of Jehovah spoke through me;His word was on my tongue.
The God of Israel spoke;To me the Rock of Israel said: ‘When the one ruling over mankind is righteous,Ruling in the fear of God,
It is like the morning light when the sun shines,A morning without clouds. It is like the brightness after the rain,Making grass sprout from the earth.’
Is not my house like that before God? For he has made an eternal covenant with me,Arranged in every detail and secured. Because it means my complete salvation and all my delight,Is that not why he makes it flourish?
But worthless men are all thrown away like thornbushes,For they cannot be taken with the hand.
When a man touches them,He should be fully armed with iron and the shaft of a spear,And they should be completely burned up with fire in their place.”
These are the names of David’s mighty warriors: Joʹsheb-bas·sheʹbeth a Tah·cheʹmo·nite, the head of the three. He brandished his spear over 800 slain at one time.
Next to him, El·e·aʹzar the son of Doʹdo the son of A·hoʹhi was among the three mighty warriors with David when they taunted the Phi·lisʹtines. They had gathered there for the battle, and when the men of Israel retreated,
he stood his ground and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines until his arm grew weary and his hand became stiff from gripping the sword. So Jehovah brought about a great victory on that day; and the people returned behind him to strip the slain.
Next to him was Shamʹmah the son of Aʹgee the Harʹa·rite. The Phi·lisʹtines gathered together at Leʹhi, where there was a plot of land full of lentils; and the people fled because of the Phi·lisʹtines.
But he took his stand in the middle of the field and defended it and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory.
Three of the 30 headmen went down during the harvest to David at the cave of A·dulʹlam, and a company of the Phi·lisʹtines was camped in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
David was then in the stronghold, and an outpost of the Phi·lisʹtines was in Bethʹle·hem.
Then David expressed his longing: “If only I could have a drink of the water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem!”
At that the three mighty warriors forced their way into the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines and drew water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem and brought it to David; but he refused to drink it and poured it out to Jehovah.
He said: “It is unthinkable on my part, O Jehovah, that I should do this! Should I drink the blood of the men going at the risk of their lives?” So he refused to drink it. These are the things that his three mighty warriors did.
A·bishʹai the brother of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was the head of another three; he brandished his spear over 300 slain, and he had a reputation like the three.
Although he was the most distinguished of the other three and he was their chief, he did not attain to the rank of the first three.
Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was a courageous man who performed many exploits in Kabʹze·el. He struck down the two sons of Arʹi·el of Moʹab, and he descended into a waterpit on a snowy day and killed a lion.
He also struck down an Egyptian man of extraordinary size. Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand, he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
These things Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da did, and he had a reputation like that of the three mighty warriors.
Although he was distinguished even more than the thirty, he did not attain to the rank of the three. However, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.
Asʹa·hel the brother of Joʹab was among the thirty: El·haʹnan the son of Doʹdo of Bethʹle·hem,
Shamʹmah the Haʹrod·ite, E·liʹka the Haʹrod·ite,
Heʹlez the Palʹtite, Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite,
Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite, Me·bunʹnai the Huʹshath·ite,
Zalʹmon the A·hoʹhite, Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite,
Heʹleb the son of Baʹa·nah the Ne·tophʹa·thite, Itʹtai the son of Riʹbai of Gibʹe·ah of the Benʹja·min·ites,
Be·naiʹah a Pirʹa·thon·ite, Hidʹdai of the wadis of Gaʹash,
Aʹbi-alʹbon the Arʹbath·ite, Azʹma·veth the Bar-huʹmite,
E·liʹah·ba the Sha·alʹbo·nite, the sons of Jaʹshen, Jonʹa·than,
Shamʹmah the Harʹa·rite, A·hiʹam the son of Shaʹrar the Harʹa·rite,
E·liphʹe·let the son of A·hasʹbai the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, E·liʹam the son of A·hithʹo·phel the Giʹlon·ite,
Hezʹro the Carʹmel·ite, Paʹa·rai the Arʹbite,
Iʹgal the son of Nathan of Zoʹbah, Baʹni the Gadʹite,
Zeʹlek the Amʹmon·ite, Naʹha·rai the Be·erʹoth·ite, the armor-bearer of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah,
Iʹra the Ithʹrite, Gaʹreb the Ithʹrite,
and U·riʹah the Hitʹtite—37 in all.
David again gathered all the best troops in Israel, 30,000 men.
Then David and all the men with him set out for Baʹal·e-juʹdah to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, before which people call on the name of Jehovah of armies, who sits enthroned above the cherubs.
However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon to transport it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, which was on the hill; and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo, the sons of A·binʹa·dab, were leading the new wagon.
So they transported the Ark of the true God from A·binʹa·dab’s house on the hill, and A·hiʹo was walking ahead of the Ark.
David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before Jehovah with all sorts of juniper-wood instruments, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals.
But when they came to the threshing floor of Naʹcon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out to the Ark of the true God and grabbed hold of it, for the cattle nearly upset it.
At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and the true God struck him down there for his irreverent act, and he died there beside the Ark of the true God.
But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day.
So David became fearful of Jehovah on that day and said: “How can the Ark of Jehovah come to me?”
David was not willing to bring the Ark of Jehovah to where he was in the City of David. Instead, David had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite.
The Ark of Jehovah remained at the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing Oʹbed-eʹdom and all his household.
The report was made to King David: “Jehovah has blessed the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all that belongs to him because of the Ark of the true God.” So David went to bring the Ark of the true God from the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom up to the City of David with rejoicing.
When the carriers of the Ark of Jehovah had marched six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened animal.
David was dancing around before Jehovah with all his might; all the while David wore a linen ephʹod.
David and all the house of Israel were bringing up the Ark of Jehovah with joyful shouting and with the sound of the horn.
But when the Ark of Jehovah came into the City of David, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal looked down through the window and saw King David leaping and dancing around before Jehovah; and she began to despise him in her heart.
So they brought the Ark of Jehovah in and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it. Then David offered up burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before Jehovah.
When David finished offering up the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of armies.
Further, he distributed to all the people, to the whole multitude of Israel, to each man and woman, a ring-shaped loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake, and then all the people left, each to his own house.
When David returned to bless his own household, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal came out to meet him. She said: “How glorious the king of Israel made himself when he uncovered himself today before the eyes of the slave girls of his servants, just as an empty-headed man openly uncovers himself!”
At this David said to Miʹchal: “My celebration was before Jehovah, who chose me rather than your father and all his household and who appointed me as leader over Jehovah’s people, Israel. Therefore, I will celebrate before Jehovah,
and I will humble myself even more than this and become low even in my own eyes. But by the slave girls whom you mentioned, I will be glorified.”
So Saul’s daughter Miʹchal had no children down to the day of her death.
Some time later, David defeated the Phi·lisʹtines and subdued them, and David took Methʹeg-amʹmah out of the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.
He defeated the Moʹab·ites and made them lie down on the ground and measured them with a line. He measured out two lines to be put to death, and one full line to be kept alive. And the Moʹab·ites became David’s servants and brought tribute.
David defeated Had·ad·eʹzer the son of Reʹhob the king of Zoʹbah as he was on his way to restore his authority at the Eu·phraʹtes River.
David captured 1,700 horsemen and 20,000 foot soldiers from him. Then David hamstrung all but 100 of the chariot horses.
When the Syrians of Damascus came to help King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah, David struck down 22,000 of the Syrians.
David then established garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became David’s servants and brought tribute. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went.
Moreover, David took the circular shields of gold from the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer and brought them to Jerusalem.
From Beʹtah and Be·roʹthai, cities of Had·ad·eʹzer, King David took a great quantity of copper.
Now King Toʹi of Haʹmath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Had·ad·eʹzer.
So Toʹi sent his son Joʹram to King David to ask about his welfare and to congratulate him because he had fought and defeated Had·ad·eʹzer (for Had·ad·eʹzer had often fought against Toʹi), and he brought articles of silver, gold, and copper.
King David sanctified these to Jehovah, along with the silver and the gold that he had sanctified from all the nations that he had subdued:
from Syria and Moʹab, from the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines, the A·malʹek·ites, and from the spoil of Had·ad·eʹzer the son of Reʹhob the king of Zoʹbah.
David also made a name for himself when he came back from striking down 18,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt.
He established garrisons in Eʹdom. In all Eʹdom he established garrisons, and all the Eʹdom·ites became David’s servants. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went.
David kept reigning over all Israel, and David was administering justice and righteousness for all his people.
Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was over the army, and Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was recorder.
Zaʹdok the son of A·hiʹtub and A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar were priests, and Se·raiʹah was secretary.
Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites. And David’s sons became chief ministers.
Now E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, an inhabitant of Gilʹe·ad, said to Aʹhab: “As surely as Jehovah the God of Israel whom I serve is living, during these years there will be no dew or rain except by my word!”
The word of Jehovah came to him, saying:
“Leave here, and turn eastward and hide at the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan.
You should drink from the stream, and I will command the ravens to supply you food there.”
He immediately went and did according to the word of Jehovah; he went and stayed by the Valley of Cheʹrith, east of the Jordan.
And the ravens were bringing him bread and meat in the morning and bread and meat in the evening, and he drank from the stream.
But after some days, the stream ran dry, because there was no rain in the land.
The word of Jehovah then came to him:
“Rise up, go to Zarʹe·phath, which belongs to Siʹdon, and stay there. Look! I will command a widow there to supply you with food.”
So he rose up and went to Zarʹe·phath. When he came to the entrance of the city, there was a widow gathering pieces of wood. So he called to her and said: “Please, bring me a little water in a cup so that I may drink.”
As she went to get it, he called to her: “Please, bring me a piece of bread in your hand.”
At this she said: “As surely as Jehovah your God is living, I have no bread, only a handful of flour in the large jar and a little oil in the small jar. Now I am gathering a few pieces of wood, and I will go in and make something for me and my son. After we have eaten, we will die.”
Then E·liʹjah said to her: “Do not be afraid. Go in and do as you said. But first make me a small round loaf of bread with what is there, and bring it out to me. Then you can make something afterward for you and your son.
For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘The large jar of flour will not run out, and the small jar of oil will not run dry until the day Jehovah makes it rain on the surface of the ground.’”
So she went and did as E·liʹjah said, and she together with him and her household ate for many days.
The large jar of flour did not run out, and the small jar of oil did not run dry, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through E·liʹjah.
After these things, the son of the woman who owned the house fell sick, and his sickness became so severe that he stopped breathing.
At this she said to E·liʹjah: “What do you have against me, O man of the true God? Have you come to remind me of my guilt and to put my son to death?”
But he said to her: “Give me your son.” Then he took him from her arms and carried him up to the roof chamber, where he was staying, and he laid him on his own bed.
He called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, are you also bringing harm to the widow with whom I am staying by putting her son to death?”
Then he stretched himself out over the child three times and called out to Jehovah: “O Jehovah my God, please, let this child’s life come back into him.”
Jehovah listened to E·liʹjah’s request, and the life of the child came back into him, and he revived.
E·liʹjah took the child and brought him down from the roof chamber into the house and gave him to his mother; and E·liʹjah said: “See, your son is alive.”
At that the woman said to E·liʹjah: “Now I know that you truly are a man of God and that Jehovah’s word in your mouth is truth.”
Then Aʹhab told Jezʹe·bel all that E·liʹjah had done and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword.
At that Jezʹe·bel sent a messenger to E·liʹjah, saying: “So may the gods do to me and add to it if by this time tomorrow I do not make you like each one of them!”
At that he became afraid, so he got up and ran for his life. He came to Beʹer-sheʹba, which belongs to Judah, and he left his attendant there.
He went a day’s journey into the wilderness and came and sat down under a broom tree, and he asked that he might die. He said: “It is enough! Now, O Jehovah, take my life away, for I am no better than my forefathers.”
Then he lay down and fell asleep under the broom tree. But suddenly an angel touched him and said to him: “Get up and eat.”
When he looked, there at his head was a round loaf on heated stones and a jug of water. He ate and drank and lay down again.
Later the angel of Jehovah came back a second time and touched him and said: “Get up and eat, for the journey will be too much for you.”
So he got up and ate and drank, and in the strength of that nourishment he went on for 40 days and 40 nights until he reached Hoʹreb, the mountain of the true God.
There he entered a cave and spent the night; and look! Jehovah’s word came to him, telling him: “What are you doing here, E·liʹjah?”
To this he said: “I have been absolutely zealous for Jehovah the God of armies; for the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, your altars they have torn down, and your prophets they have killed with the sword, and I am the only one left. Now they are seeking to take my life away.”
But He said: “Go out and stand on the mountain before Jehovah.” And look! Jehovah was passing by, and a great and strong wind was splitting mountains and breaking crags before Jehovah, but Jehovah was not in the wind. After the wind, there was an earthquake, but Jehovah was not in the earthquake.
After the earthquake, there was a fire, but Jehovah was not in the fire. After the fire, there was a calm, low voice.
As soon as E·liʹjah heard it, he wrapped his face in his official garment and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. Then a voice asked him: “What are you doing here, E·liʹjah?”
To this he said: “I have been absolutely zealous for Jehovah the God of armies; for the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, your altars they have torn down, and your prophets they have killed with the sword, and I am the only one left. Now they are seeking to take my life away.”
Jehovah said to him: “Return, and go to the wilderness of Damascus. When you arrive, anoint Hazʹa·el as king over Syria.
And you should anoint Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi as king over Israel, and you should anoint E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat from Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah as prophet to take your place.
Anyone escaping from Hazʹa·el’s sword, Jeʹhu will put to death; and anyone escaping from Jeʹhu’s sword, E·liʹsha will put to death.
And I still have left 7,000 in Israel, all whose knees have not bent down to Baʹal and whose mouths have not kissed him.”
So he went from there and found E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat while he was plowing with 12 pairs of bulls ahead of him, and he was with the 12th pair. So E·liʹjah went over to him and threw his official garment on him.
At that he left the bulls and ran after E·liʹjah and said: “Please, let me kiss my father and my mother. Then I will follow you.” He replied to him: “Go, return, for what have I done to stop you?”
So he went back and took a pair of bulls and sacrificed them, and he used the plowing gear to boil the meat of the bulls and gave it to the people, and they ate. After that he rose up and followed E·liʹjah and began to minister to him.
But King Solʹo·mon loved many foreign women besides the daughter of Pharʹaoh: Moʹab·ite, Amʹmon·ite, Eʹdom·ite, Si·doʹni·an, and Hitʹtite women.
They were from the nations about whom Jehovah had said to the Israelites: “You must not go in among them, and they should not come in among you, for they will surely incline your heart to follow their gods.” But Solʹo·mon clung to them and loved them.
And he had 700 wives who were princesses and 300 concubines, and his wives gradually inclined his heart.
In Solʹo·mon’s old age, his wives inclined his heart to follow other gods, and his heart was not complete with Jehovah his God like the heart of David his father.
And Solʹo·mon followed after Ashʹto·reth, the goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans, and Milʹcom, the disgusting god of the Amʹmon·ites.
And Solʹo·mon did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he did not follow Jehovah completely as David his father had done.
It was then that Solʹo·mon built a high place to Cheʹmosh, the disgusting god of Moʹab, on the mountain in front of Jerusalem and to Moʹlech, the disgusting god of the Amʹmon·ites.
That was what he did for all his foreign wives who were making sacrificial smoke and sacrificing to their gods.
Jehovah became furious at Solʹo·mon, because his heart had inclined away from Jehovah the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice
and had warned him about this very thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not obey what Jehovah had commanded.
Jehovah now said to Solʹo·mon: “Because you have done this and you have not kept my covenant and my statutes as I commanded you, I will surely rip the kingdom away from you, and I will give it to one of your servants.
However, for the sake of your father David, I will not do it in your lifetime. I will rip it out of the hand of your son,
but I will not rip away the entire kingdom. One tribe I will give to your son, for the sake of David my servant and for the sake of Jerusalem, which I have chosen.”
Jehovah then raised up a resister against Solʹo·mon, Haʹdad the Eʹdom·ite, of the royal family of Eʹdom.
When David defeated Eʹdom, Joʹab the chief of the army went up to bury the slain, and he tried to strike down every male in Eʹdom.
(For Joʹab and all Israel stayed there for six months until he had done away with every male in Eʹdom.)
But Haʹdad fled with some of his father’s Eʹdom·ite servants, and they went to Egypt; Haʹdad was then a young boy.
So they set out from Midʹi·an and came to Paʹran. They took men with them from Paʹran and came to Egypt, to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, assigned him a food allowance, and gave him land.
Haʹdad found favor in the eyes of Pharʹaoh, so much so that he gave him in marriage the sister of his own wife, Tahʹpe·nes the queen.
In time the sister of Tahʹpe·nes bore him a son, Ge·nuʹbath, and Tahʹpe·nes brought him up in the house of Pharʹaoh, and Ge·nuʹbath remained in the house of Pharʹaoh among the sons of Pharʹaoh.
Haʹdad heard in Egypt that David had been laid to rest with his forefathers and that Joʹab the chief of the army had died. So Haʹdad said to Pharʹaoh: “Send me away, so that I may go to my own land.”
But Pharʹaoh said to him: “What have you lacked with me that you now seek to go to your own land?” To this he said: “Nothing, but please send me away.”
God also raised up against Solʹo·mon another resister, Reʹzon the son of E·liʹa·da, who had fled from his lord, Had·ad·eʹzer the king of Zoʹbah.
He gathered men to himself and became chief of a marauder band when David defeated them. So they went to Damascus and settled there and began reigning in Damascus.
And he became a resister of Israel all the days of Solʹo·mon, adding to the harm done by Haʹdad, and he abhorred Israel while he reigned over Syria.
And there was Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, an Eʹphra·im·ite from Zerʹe·dah, a servant of Solʹo·mon’s whose mother’s name was Ze·ruʹah, a widow. He too began to rebel against the king.
This is why he rebelled against the king: Solʹo·mon had built the Mound and had closed up the gap of the City of David his father.
Now this Jer·o·boʹam was a capable man. When Solʹo·mon saw that the young man was a hard worker, he made him overseer over all the compulsory service of the house of Joseph.
During that time Jer·o·boʹam went out from Jerusalem, and the prophet A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite found him on the road. A·hiʹjah was wearing a new garment, and the two of them were by themselves in the field.
A·hiʹjah took hold of the new garment he was wearing and ripped it into 12 pieces.
Then he said to Jer·o·boʹam: “Take ten pieces for yourself, for this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Here I am ripping the kingdom out of the hand of Solʹo·mon, and I will give you ten tribes.
But one tribe will remain his for the sake of my servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel.
I will do this because they have left me and are bowing down to Ashʹto·reth the goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans, to Cheʹmosh the god of Moʹab, and to Milʹcom the god of the Amʹmon·ites, and they have not walked in my ways by doing what is right in my eyes and observing my statutes and my judgments as his father David did.
But I will not take the entire kingdom out of his hand, and I will keep him as a chieftain for all the days of his life, for the sake of David my servant whom I chose, because he obeyed my commandments and my statutes.
But I will take the kingship out of the hand of his son and give it to you, that is, ten tribes.
To his son I will give one tribe, so that David my servant may always have a lamp before me in Jerusalem, the city that I have chosen for myself as the place to put my name.
I will take you, and you will reign over all that you desire, and you will become king over Israel.
And if you obey all that I command you and walk in my ways and do what is right in my eyes by obeying my statutes and my commandments, just as David my servant did, I will also be with you. I will build you a lasting house, just as I have built for David, and I will give you Israel.
And I will humiliate the offspring of David because of this, but not always.’”
So Solʹo·mon tried to put Jer·o·boʹam to death, but Jer·o·boʹam fled to Egypt, to Shiʹshak the king of Egypt, and he remained in Egypt until Solʹo·mon’s death.
As for the rest of the history of Solʹo·mon, all that he did and his wisdom, is it not written in the book of the history of Solʹo·mon?
The length of Solʹo·mon’s reign in Jerusalem over all Israel was 40 years.
Then Solʹo·mon was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David his father; and his son Re·ho·boʹam became king in his place.
Now King David was old, advanced in years, and although they would cover him with garments, he could not get warm.
So his servants said to him: “Let a girl, a virgin, be found for my lord the king, and she will wait on the king as his nurse. She will lie in your arms so that my lord the king may feel warm.”
They searched throughout all the territory of Israel for a beautiful girl, and they found Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite and brought her in to the king.
The girl was extremely beautiful, and she became the king’s nurse and waited on him, but the king did not have sexual relations with her.
Meanwhile, Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith was exalting himself, saying: “I am going to be king!” He had a chariot made for himself with horsemen and 50 men to run before him.
But his father had never confronted him by saying: “Why have you done this?” He was also very handsome, and his mother had given birth to him after Abʹsa·lom.
He conferred with Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah and A·biʹa·thar the priest, and they offered Ad·o·niʹjah help and support.
But Zaʹdok the priest, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, Nathan the prophet, Shimʹe·i, Reʹi, and David’s mighty warriors did not support Ad·o·niʹjah.
Eventually Ad·o·niʹjah held a sacrifice of sheep, cattle, and fattened animals by the stone of Zoʹhe·leth, which is near En-roʹgel, and he invited all his brothers the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah the king’s servants.
But he did not invite Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah and the mighty warriors, or Solʹo·mon his brother.
Nathan then said to Bath-sheʹba, Solʹo·mon’s mother: “Have you not heard that Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith has become king, and our lord David does not know anything about it?
So now come, please, and let me advise you, so that you may save your own life and the life of your son Solʹo·mon.
Go in to King David and say to him, ‘Was it not you, my lord the king, who swore to your servant, saying: “Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne”? So why has Ad·o·niʹjah become king?’
While you are still there speaking with the king, I will come in after you and confirm your words.”
So Bath-sheʹba went in to the king, into his private room. The king was very old, and Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite was waiting on the king.
Then Bath-sheʹba bowed low and prostrated herself to the king, and the king said: “What is your request?”
She replied: “My lord, it was you who swore by Jehovah your God to your servant, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne.’
But look! Ad·o·niʹjah has become king, and my lord the king does not know anything about it.
He sacrificed bulls, fattened animals, and sheep in great quantity and invited all the sons of the king and A·biʹa·thar the priest and Joʹab the chief of the army; but he did not invite your servant Solʹo·mon.
And now, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon you to tell them who will sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
Otherwise, as soon as my lord the king is laid to rest with his forefathers, I and also my son Solʹo·mon will be considered traitors.”
And while she was still speaking to the king, Nathan the prophet came in.
At once the king was told: “Here is Nathan the prophet!” He came in before the king and prostrated himself to the king with his face to the ground.
Then Nathan said: “My lord the king, did you say, ‘Ad·o·niʹjah will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne’?
For today he has gone down to sacrifice bulls, fattened animals, and sheep in great quantity, and he has invited all the sons of the king and the chiefs of the army and A·biʹa·thar the priest. They are there eating and drinking with him, and they keep saying, ‘Long live King Ad·o·niʹjah!’
But he did not invite me, your servant, or Zaʹdok the priest, or Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, or your servant Solʹo·mon.
Has my lord the king authorized this without telling your servant who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?”
King David now answered: “Call Bath-sheʹba for me.” At that she came in and stood before the king.
The king then swore an oath: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the one who rescued me out of all distress,
just as I swore to you by Jehovah the God of Israel, saying, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon will become king after me, and he is the one who will sit on my throne in my place!’ that is what I will bring about this day.”
Then Bath-sheʹba bowed low with her face to the ground and prostrated herself to the king and said: “May my lord King David live forever!”
Immediately King David said: “Call for me Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da.” So they came in before the king.
The king said to them: “Take with you the servants of your lord, and have my son Solʹo·mon ride on my own mule, and lead him down to Giʹhon.
Zaʹdok the priest and Nathan the prophet will anoint him there as king over Israel; then blow the horn and say, ‘Long live King Solʹo·mon!’
Then follow him back, and he will come in and sit on my throne; and he will be king in my place, and I will commission him as leader over Israel and over Judah.”
At once Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da said to the king: “Amen! May Jehovah the God of my lord the king confirm it.
Just as Jehovah was with my lord the king, so let him be with Solʹo·mon, and may He make his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David.”
Then Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, and the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites went down and had Solʹo·mon ride on the mule of King David, and they brought him to Giʹhon.
Zaʹdok the priest now took the horn of oil out of the tent and anointed Solʹo·mon, and they began to blow the horn, and all the people began shouting: “Long live King Solʹo·mon!”
After that all the people followed him and went up, playing flutes and rejoicing greatly, so that the earth was split open by their noise.
Ad·o·niʹjah and all those invited by him heard it when they had finished eating. As soon as Joʹab heard the sound of the horn, he said: “Why is there such a noisy uproar in the city?”
While he was still speaking, Jonʹa·than the son of A·biʹa·thar the priest came. Then Ad·o·niʹjah said: “Come in, for you are a good man, and you must bring good news.”
But Jonʹa·than answered Ad·o·niʹjah: “No! Our lord King David has made Solʹo·mon king.
The king sent with him Zaʹdok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, and the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites, and they had him ride on the mule of the king.
Then Zaʹdok the priest and Nathan the prophet anointed him as king in Giʹhon. After that they came up from there rejoicing, and the city is in an uproar. That was the noise that you heard.
Moreover, Solʹo·mon has sat down on the royal throne.
Another thing, the servants of the king have come in to congratulate our lord King David, saying, ‘May your God make Solʹo·mon’s name more splendid than your name, and may He make his throne greater than your throne!’ At that the king bowed down on the bed.
And the king also said, ‘May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, who today has granted someone to sit on my throne and has allowed my own eyes to see it!’”
And all those invited by Ad·o·niʹjah became terrified, and each of them rose up and went his own way.
Ad·o·niʹjah was also afraid because of Solʹo·mon, so he got up and went and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar.
The report was made to Solʹo·mon: “Here Ad·o·niʹjah has become afraid of King Solʹo·mon; and he has taken hold of the horns of the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solʹo·mon first swear to me that he will not put his servant to death by the sword.’”
To this Solʹo·mon said: “If he behaves in a worthy manner, not a single hair of his will fall to the ground; but if what is bad is found in him, he will have to die.”
So King Solʹo·mon sent for him to be brought down from the altar. Then he came in and bowed down to King Solʹo·mon, after which Solʹo·mon said to him: “Go to your own house.”
And it took Solʹo·mon 13 years to build his own house, until his whole house was completed.
And he built the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non 100 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high on four rows of cedar pillars; and there were cedar beams on the pillars.
It was paneled above with cedar on the girders that rested on the pillars; they numbered 45, with 15 to a row.
There were three rows of framed windows, and each window was opposite another window in three tiers.
All the entrances and the doorposts had square frames, as did the front of the windows that were opposite each other in three tiers.
And he built the Hall of Pillars 50 cubits long and 30 cubits wide, and there was a porch in front of it with pillars and a canopy.
He also built the Hall of the Throne, where he would judge—the Hall of Judgment—and they paneled it with cedar from the floor to the rafters.
The house where he was to live, at the other courtyard, was set back from the Hall, and it was similar in workmanship. He also built a house similar to this Hall for Pharʹaoh’s daughter, whom Solʹo·mon had taken as a wife.
All of these were made of expensive stones hewn according to measure, trimmed with stonesaws inside and out, from the foundation up to the coping, and outside as far as the great courtyard.
And the foundation was laid with very large, expensive stones; some stones measured ten cubits, and other stones, eight cubits.
And above these were expensive stones, hewn according to measure, as well as cedar.
Around the great courtyard were three rows of hewn stone and a row of cedar beams, like that for the inner courtyard of the house of Jehovah and the porch of the house.
King Solʹo·mon sent for Hiʹram and brought him from Tyre.
He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and his father was a Tyrʹi·an coppersmith; and he had great skill, understanding, and experience for all kinds of work in copper. So he came to King Solʹo·mon and did all his work.
He cast the two pillars of copper; each pillar was 18 cubits high, and it took a measuring cord 12 cubits long to encircle each of the two pillars.
And he made two capitals cast in copper to put on the tops of the pillars. One capital was five cubits high, and the other capital was five cubits high.
The capital on top of each pillar had mesh network with wreathed chains; seven for the one capital and seven for the other capital.
And he made pomegranates in two rows around the one network to cover the capitals that were on the top of the pillars; he did the same for both capitals.
The capitals on top of the pillars at the porch were of a lily pattern four cubits high.
The capitals were on the two pillars, just above the rounded portion adjoining the network; and there were 200 pomegranates in rows all around on each capital.
He set up the pillars of the porch of the temple. He set up the right-hand pillar and named it Jaʹchin, and then he set up the left-hand pillar and named it Boʹaz.
And the top of the pillars were of a lily pattern. So the work of the pillars was completed.
Then he made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, 10 cubits from brim to brim and 5 cubits high, and it took a measuring line 30 cubits long to encircle it.
And there were ornamental gourds below its brim, completely encircling it, ten to a cubit all around the Sea, with two rows of the gourds cast in one piece with it.
It stood on 12 bulls, 3 facing north, 3 facing west, 3 facing south, and 3 facing east; and the Sea rested on them, and all their hindquarters were toward the center.
And its thickness was a handbreadth; and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It would hold 2,000 bath measures.
Then he made the ten carriages of copper. Each carriage was four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high.
And this was how the carriages were constructed: They had side panels, and the side panels were between the crossbars.
And on the side panels between the crossbars were lions, bulls, and cherubs, and the same design was on the crossbars. Above and beneath the lions and the bulls were wreaths in relief.
And each carriage had four copper wheels and copper axles, and its four cornerpieces served as supports for them. Beneath the basin were the supports, cast with wreaths at the side of each.
Its opening was inside the crown, extending upward one cubit; and its opening was round, making up a stand of one and a half cubits, and on its mouth were engravings. And their side panels were square, not round.
The four wheels were below the side panels, and the supports of the wheels were attached to the carriage, and the height of each wheel was one and a half cubits.
And the wheels were made like chariot wheels. Their supports, rims, spokes, and hubs were all of cast metal.
There were four supports on the four corners of each carriage; its supports were cast as part of the carriage.
On top of the carriage was a circular band half a cubit high, and on the top of the carriage, its framing pieces and its side panels were cast as part of it.
On the surfaces of its framing pieces and on its side panels he engraved cherubs, lions, and palm trees according to the amount of space on each, with wreaths all around.
This is how he made the ten carriages; they were all cast alike, with the same measure and shape.
He made ten copper basins; each could hold 40 bath measures. Each basin measured four cubits. There was one basin for each of the ten carriages.
Then he put five carriages on the right side of the house and five on the left side of the house, and he placed the Sea on the right side of the house, toward the southeast.
Hiʹram also made the basins, the shovels, and the bowls. So Hiʹram finished all the work that he did for King Solʹo·mon on the house of Jehovah:
the two pillars and the bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the two pillars; the two networks to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the pillars;
the 400 pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on the two pillars;
the ten carriages and the ten basins on the carriages;
the Sea and the 12 bulls beneath the Sea;
and the cans, the shovels, the bowls, and all the utensils, which Hiʹram made of polished copper for King Solʹo·mon for the house of Jehovah.
The king cast them in clay molds in the district of the Jordan, between Sucʹcoth and Zarʹe·than.
Solʹo·mon left all the utensils unweighed because they were in such great quantities. The weight of the copper was not ascertained.
Solʹo·mon made all the utensils for the house of Jehovah: the altar of gold; the gold table on which to put the showbread;
the lampstands of pure gold, five on the right and five on the left before the innermost room; and the blossoms, the lamps, and the snuffers, of gold;
the basins, the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and the fire holders, of pure gold; and the sockets for the doors of the inner house, that is, the Most Holy, and for the doors of the house of the temple, of gold.
So King Solʹo·mon completed all the work he had to do for the house of Jehovah. Solʹo·mon then brought in the things that David his father had made holy, and he put the silver, the gold, and the articles into the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.
By the word of Jehovah, a man of God came from Judah to Bethʹel while Jer·o·boʹam was standing by the altar to make sacrificial smoke.
Then he called out against the altar by the word of Jehovah and said: “O altar, altar! This is what Jehovah says: ‘Look! A son named Jo·siʹah will be born to the house of David! He will sacrifice on you the priests of the high places, those making sacrificial smoke on you, and he will burn human bones on you.’”
He gave a sign on that day, saying: “This is the sign that Jehovah has declared: Look! The altar will be ripped apart, and the ashes that are on it will be spilled out.”
As soon as the king heard the word that the man of the true God had called out against the altar at Bethʹel, Jer·o·boʹam stretched out his hand from the altar and said: “Seize him!” Immediately, the hand that he had stretched out against him dried up, and he could not draw it back.
Then the altar was ripped apart and the ashes were spilled out from the altar according to the sign that the man of the true God had given by the word of Jehovah.
The king now said to the man of the true God: “Please, beg for the favor of Jehovah your God, and pray in my behalf that my hand may be restored to me.” At this the man of the true God begged for the favor of Jehovah, and the king’s hand was restored to its former condition.
The king then said to the man of the true God: “Come home with me and take some food, and let me give you a gift.”
But the man of the true God said to the king: “Even if you gave me half your house, I would not come with you and eat bread or drink water in this place.
For this is what I was commanded by the word of Jehovah: ‘You must not eat bread or drink water, and you must not return by the way you came.’”
So he left by another way, and he did not return by the way he had come to Bethʹel.
There was a certain old prophet dwelling in Bethʹel, and his sons came home and related to him all the things that the man of the true God had done that day in Bethʹel and the words he had spoken to the king. After they related this to their father,
their father asked them: “Which way did he go?” So his sons showed him the way that the man of the true God from Judah had gone.
He now said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” They saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it.
He followed the man of the true God and found him sitting under a big tree. Then he said to him: “Are you the man of the true God who came from Judah?” He replied: “I am.”
He said to him: “Come home with me and eat bread.”
But he said: “I cannot go back with you or accept your invitation, nor may I eat bread or drink water with you in this place.
For I was told by the word of Jehovah, ‘You must not eat bread or drink water there. You must not return by the way you came.’”
At this he said to him: “I too am a prophet like you, and an angel told me by the word of Jehovah, ‘Have him come back with you to your house so that he may eat bread and drink water.’” (He deceived him.)
So he went back with him to eat bread and drink water in his house.
While they were sitting at the table, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet who had brought him back,
and he called out to the man of the true God from Judah, saying, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Because you rebelled against the order of Jehovah and did not keep the commandment that Jehovah your God gave you,
but you went back to eat bread and drink water in the place about which you were told, “Do not eat bread or drink water,” your dead body will not come into the tomb of your forefathers.’”
After the man of the true God ate bread and drank, the old prophet saddled the donkey for the prophet whom he had brought back.
Then he got on his way, but a lion came across him on the road and killed him. His dead body was thrown onto the road, and the donkey stood beside it; the lion was also standing beside the dead body.
There were men passing by who saw the dead body thrown onto the road and the lion standing beside the dead body. They came in and told about it in the city where the old prophet lived.
When the prophet who had brought him back from the road heard of it, he immediately said: “It is the man of the true God who rebelled against the order of Jehovah; so Jehovah gave him over to the lion, to maul and to kill him, according to the word of Jehovah that he spoke to him.”
He then said to his sons: “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled it.
Then he went on his way and found the dead body thrown onto the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside it. The lion had not eaten the dead body, nor had it mauled the donkey.
The prophet lifted up the dead body of the man of the true God and put him on the donkey, and he brought him back into his own city to mourn and bury him.
So he laid the dead body in his own tomb, and they kept crying out over him: “Too bad, my brother!”
After burying him, he told his sons: “When I die, you must bury me in the place where the man of the true God is buried. Lay my bones next to his bones.
The word that he called out by the word of Jehovah against the altar in Bethʹel and against all the houses of worship on the high places in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a is sure to take place.”
Even after this happened, Jer·o·boʹam did not turn back from his bad way, but he kept appointing priests for the high places from the people in general. He would install as priests anyone who so desired, saying: “Let him become one of the priests for the high places.”
This sin on the part of the household of Jer·o·boʹam led to their destruction and annihilation from the face of the earth.
After these things, an incident took place concerning a vineyard that belonged to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite; it was in Jezʹre·el, next to the palace of Aʹhab the king of Sa·marʹi·a.
Aʹhab said to Naʹboth: “Give me your vineyard for me to use as a vegetable garden, for it is near my house. Then I will give you a better vineyard to replace it. Or if you prefer, I will give you its value in money.”
But Naʹboth said to Aʹhab: “It is unthinkable, from Jehovah’s standpoint, for me to give you the inheritance of my forefathers.”
So Aʹhab came into his house, sullen and dejected over the answer that Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite had given him when he said: “I will not give you the inheritance of my forefathers.” Then he lay down on his bed, kept his face turned away, and refused to eat.
His wife Jezʹe·bel came in to him and asked him: “Why are you so sad that you refuse to eat?”
He replied to her: “Because I said to Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, ‘Give me your vineyard for money. Or if you prefer, let me give you another vineyard to replace it.’ But he said, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’”
His wife Jezʹe·bel said to him: “Are you not the one ruling as king over Israel? Get up, eat something, and let your heart be cheerful. I will give you the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.”
So she wrote letters in Aʹhab’s name and sealed them with his seal and sent the letters to the elders and the nobles who lived in Naʹboth’s city.
She wrote in the letters: “Proclaim a fast, and have Naʹboth sit at the head of the people.
And have two good-for-nothing men sit in front of him and testify against him, saying, ‘You have cursed God and the king!’ Then bring him out and stone him to death.”
So the men of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived in his city, did just as was written in the letters that Jezʹe·bel sent to them.
They proclaimed a fast and had Naʹboth sit at the head of the people.
Then two of the good-for-nothing men came in and sat down in front of him and began to testify against Naʹboth in front of the people, saying: “Naʹboth has cursed God and the king!” After that they brought him to the outskirts of the city and stoned him to death.
They now sent word to Jezʹe·bel, saying: “Naʹboth has been stoned to death.”
As soon as Jezʹe·bel heard that Naʹboth had been stoned to death, she said to Aʹhab: “Get up, take possession of the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite, which he refused to give you for money, for Naʹboth is no longer alive. He is dead.”
As soon as Aʹhab heard that Naʹboth was dead, Aʹhab got up to go down to the vineyard of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite to take possession of it.
But Jehovah’s word came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying:
“Get up, go down to meet Aʹhab the king of Israel, who is in Sa·marʹi·a. There he is in the vineyard of Naʹboth, where he has gone to take possession of it.
You must tell him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Have you murdered a man and also taken his property?”’ Then say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “In the place where the dogs licked up the blood of Naʹboth, the dogs will lick up your own blood.”’”
Aʹhab said to E·liʹjah: “So you have found me, O my enemy!” He replied: “I have found you. ‘Because you are determined to do what is bad in the eyes of Jehovah,
here I am bringing calamity upon you, and I will make a clean sweep after you and will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel.
And I will make your house like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah, for you have provoked my anger and have caused Israel to sin.’
Also concerning Jezʹe·bel, Jehovah has said: ‘The dogs will eat up Jezʹe·bel in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el.
Anyone belonging to Aʹhab who dies in the city the dogs will eat up, and anyone who dies in the field the birds of the heavens will eat up.
Indeed, there has never been anyone like Aʹhab, who was so determined to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, egged on by his wife Jezʹe·bel.
He acted in the most detestable way by going after the disgusting idols, just as all the Amʹor·ites had done, whom Jehovah drove out from before the Israelites.’”
As soon as Aʹhab heard these words, he ripped his garments apart and put sackcloth on his body; and he went on a fast and kept lying down in sackcloth and walking despondently.
Jehovah’s word then came to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite:
“Have you seen how Aʹhab has humbled himself on my account? Because he has humbled himself before me, I will not bring the calamity during his lifetime. I will bring the calamity upon his house in the days of his son.”
Solʹo·mon made a marriage alliance with Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. He married Pharʹaoh’s daughter and brought her to the City of David until he finished building his own house, and the house of Jehovah, and the wall around Jerusalem.
But the people were still sacrificing on the high places, because until that time a house for the name of Jehovah had not yet been built.
Solʹo·mon continued to love Jehovah by walking in the statutes of David his father, except that he was sacrificing and making offerings smoke on the high places.
The king went to Gibʹe·on to sacrifice there, for that was the most prominent high place. Solʹo·mon offered 1,000 burnt sacrifices on that altar.
In Gibʹe·on Jehovah appeared to Solʹo·mon in a dream by night, and God said: “Ask what you would like me to give you.”
At this Solʹo·mon said: “You have shown great loyal love toward your servant David my father as he walked before you in faithfulness and in righteousness and in uprightness of heart. You have continued to show him this great loyal love down to this day by giving him a son to sit on his throne.
And now, Jehovah my God, you have made your servant king in the place of David my father, though I am just a youth and I am inexperienced.
Your servant is among your people whom you have chosen, a people so vast that they cannot be numbered or counted.
So grant your servant an obedient heart to judge your people, to discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this numerous people of yours?”
It was pleasing to Jehovah that Solʹo·mon had requested this.
God then said to him: “Because you requested this and you did not request for yourself long life or riches or the death of your enemies, but you requested understanding to hear judicial cases,
I will do what you asked. I will give you a wise and understanding heart, so that just as there has never been anyone like you before, there will never be anyone like you again.
Furthermore, what you have not requested I will give you, both riches and glory, so that there will be no other king like you in your lifetime.
And if you walk in my ways by keeping my regulations and my commandments, just as David your father walked, I will also give you a long life.”
When Solʹo·mon awoke, he realized that it had been a dream. Then he went to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion offerings and spread a feast for all his servants.
At that time two prostitutes came in to the king and stood before him.
The first woman said: “Please, my lord, this woman and I live in one house, and I gave birth while she was in the house.
On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. We were together, just the two of us; there was no one else with us in the house.
During the night this woman’s son died, because she lay on him.
So she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side while your slave girl was asleep and laid him in her arms, and she laid her dead son in my arms.
When I got up in the morning to nurse my son, I saw that he was dead. So I examined him closely in the morning and saw that it was not my son whom I had given birth to.”
But the other woman said: “No, my son is the living one, and your son is the dead one!” But the first woman was saying: “No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one.” That is how they argued before the king.
Finally the king said: “This one says, ‘This is my son, the living one, and your son is the dead one!’ and that one says, ‘No, your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one!’”
The king said: “Bring me a sword.” So they brought a sword to the king.
The king then said: “Cut the living child in two, and give half to one woman and half to the other.”
At once the woman whose son was the living one pleaded with the king, for her compassions were stirred toward her son. She said: “Please, my lord! You should give her the living child! By no means put him to death!” But the other woman was saying: “He will be neither mine nor yours! Let them cut him in two!”
At that the king answered: “Give the living child to the first woman! By no means put him to death, for she is his mother.”
So all Israel heard about the judgment that the king had handed down, and they were in awe of the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was with him to execute justice.
As soon as Solʹo·mon had finished building the house of Jehovah, the house of the king, and everything Solʹo·mon desired to make,
Jehovah appeared to Solʹo·mon a second time, just as he had appeared to him in Gibʹe·on.
Jehovah said to him: “I have heard your prayer and your request for favor that you made before me. I have sanctified this house that you built by permanently putting my name there, and my eyes and my heart will always be there.
And you, if you walk before me as your father David walked, with integrity of heart and with uprightness, by doing everything I have commanded you, and you obey my regulations and my judgments,
then I will establish the throne of your kingdom over Israel forever, just as I promised your father David, saying, ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line sitting on the throne of Israel.’
But if you and your sons turn away from following me and do not keep my commandments and my statutes that I have put before you, and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them,
I will cut Israel off from the surface of the land that I have given to them, and the house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and Israel will become an object of scorn and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples.
And this house will become heaps of ruins. Everyone passing by it will stare in amazement and will whistle and say, ‘Why did Jehovah do that to this land and this house?’
Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned Jehovah their God, who had brought their forefathers out of the land of Egypt, and they embraced other gods and bowed down to them and served them. That is why Jehovah brought all this calamity on them.’”
At the end of 20 years, during which Solʹo·mon built the two houses, the house of Jehovah and the house of the king,
Hiʹram the king of Tyre had supplied Solʹo·mon with cedar and juniper timbers and with as much gold as he desired, and King Solʹo·mon gave to Hiʹram 20 cities in the land of Galilee.
So Hiʹram went out from Tyre to see the cities that Solʹo·mon had given him, but he was not satisfied with them.
He said: “What sort of cities are these that you have given me, my brother?” So they came to be called the Land of Caʹbul down to this day.
In the meantime, Hiʹram sent to the king 120 talents of gold.
This is the account of those whom King Solʹo·mon conscripted for forced labor to build the house of Jehovah, his own house, the Mound, the wall of Jerusalem, Haʹzor, Me·gidʹdo, and Geʹzer.
(Pharʹaoh king of Egypt had come up and captured Geʹzer and had burned it with fire, and he had also killed the Caʹnaan·ites dwelling in the city. So he gave it as a parting gift to his daughter, the wife of Solʹo·mon.)
Solʹo·mon built up Geʹzer, Lower Beth-hoʹron,
Baʹal·ath, and Taʹmar in the wilderness, within the land,
as well as all of Solʹo·mon’s storage cities, the chariot cities, the cities for the horsemen, and whatever Solʹo·mon desired to build in Jerusalem, in Lebʹa·non, and in all the land of his dominion.
As for all the people who were left from the Amʹor·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, who were not part of the people of Israel,
their descendants who were left in the land—those whom the Israelites had been unable to devote to destruction—were conscripted by Solʹo·mon for forced labor as slaves until this day.
But Solʹo·mon did not make any of the Israelites slaves, for they were his warriors, servants, princes, adjutants, and the chiefs of his charioteers and horsemen.
There were 550 chiefs of the deputies who were over the work of Solʹo·mon, the foremen over the people who were doing the work.
But Pharʹaoh’s daughter came up from the City of David to her own house that he had built for her; then he built the Mound.
Three times a year Solʹo·mon offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices on the altar that he had built for Jehovah, also making sacrificial smoke on the altar, which was before Jehovah, so he completed the house.
King Solʹo·mon also made a fleet of ships in Eʹzi·on-geʹber, which is by Eʹloth, on the shore of the Red Sea in the land of Eʹdom.
Hiʹram sent his own servants with the fleet of ships, experienced seamen, to serve along with the servants of Solʹo·mon.
They went to Oʹphir and took from there 420 talents of gold and brought it to King Solʹo·mon.
When the time of David’s death drew near, he gave his son Solʹo·mon these instructions:
“I am about to die. Therefore, be strong and prove yourself a man.
You must keep your obligation to Jehovah your God by walking in his ways and by observing his statutes, his commandments, his judgments, and his reminders as they are written in the Law of Moses; then you will succeed in everything you do and everywhere you turn.
And Jehovah will carry out his promise that he made concerning me: ‘If your sons pay attention to their way by walking faithfully before me with all their heart and soul, there will never fail to be a man of your line sitting on the throne of Israel.’
“You also well know what Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah did to me, what he did to two chiefs of the armies of Israel—Abʹner the son of Ner and A·maʹsa the son of Jeʹther. He killed them, shedding the blood of war in peacetime, and he put the blood of war on the belt around his waist and on the sandals on his feet.
You must act according to your wisdom and not let his gray hairs go down in peace to the Grave.
“But toward the sons of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite, you should show loyal love, and they should be among those eating at your table, for that was how they stood by me when I ran away from your brother Abʹsa·lom.
“There is also with you Shimʹe·i the son of Geʹra the Benʹja·min·ite from Ba·huʹrim. He was the one who cursed me with a vicious curse on the day that I was going to Ma·ha·naʹim; but when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by Jehovah: ‘I will not put you to death by the sword.’
Now do not leave him unpunished, for you are a wise man and you know what you should do to him; you must bring his gray hairs down to the Grave with blood.”
Then David was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David.
The length of David’s reign over Israel was 40 years. In Hebʹron he reigned for 7 years, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years.
Solʹo·mon then sat down on the throne of David his father, and gradually his kingship became firmly established.
In time Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith came to Bath-sheʹba, Solʹo·mon’s mother. She asked: “Is your coming peaceable?” He replied: “It is peaceable.”
He then said: “I have something to say to you.” So she said: “Speak.”
He continued: “You well know that the kingship was to become mine, and all Israel expected me to become king; but the kingship eluded me and became my brother’s, for it was from Jehovah that it became his.
But now there is just one request that I am making of you. Do not turn me away.” So she said to him: “Speak.”
He then said: “Please, ask Solʹo·mon the king—for he will not turn you away—to give me Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite as a wife.”
To this Bath-sheʹba said: “Very well! I will speak for you to the king.”
So Bath-sheʹba went in to King Solʹo·mon to speak to him for Ad·o·niʹjah. At once the king rose to meet her and bowed down to her. Then he sat down on his throne and had a throne set for the king’s mother, so that she could sit at his right.
She then said: “There is one small request that I am making of you. Do not turn me away.” So the king said to her: “Make it, my mother; for I will not turn you away.”
She said: “Let Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite be given as a wife to your brother Ad·o·niʹjah.”
At this King Solʹo·mon answered his mother: “Why are you requesting Abʹi·shag the Shuʹnam·mite for Ad·o·niʹjah? You may as well request the kingship for him, for he is my older brother, and supporting him are A·biʹa·thar the priest and Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah.”
With that King Solʹo·mon swore by Jehovah: “So may God do to me and add to it if it was not at the cost of his own life that Ad·o·niʹjah made this request.
And now, as surely as Jehovah is living, who has firmly established me and seated me on the throne of David my father and who made a house for me, just as he promised, Ad·o·niʹjah will be put to death today.”
King Solʹo·mon immediately sent Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, who went out and struck Ad·o·niʹjah down, and he died.
To A·biʹa·thar the priest, the king said: “Go to your fields in Anʹa·thoth! You deserve to die, but on this day I will not put you to death because you carried the Ark of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah before David my father and because you shared in all the hardships that my father suffered.”
So Solʹo·mon drove A·biʹa·thar out from serving as a priest of Jehovah, to fulfill Jehovah’s word against the house of Eʹli in Shiʹloh.
When the news reached Joʹab—for Joʹab had supported Ad·o·niʹjah but he had not supported Abʹsa·lom—Joʹab fled to the tent of Jehovah and grabbed hold of the horns of the altar.
Then King Solʹo·mon was told: “Joʹab has fled to the tent of Jehovah, and he is there beside the altar.” So Solʹo·mon sent Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, saying: “Go, strike him down!”
So Be·naiʹah went to the tent of Jehovah and said to him: “This is what the king says, ‘Come out!’” But he said: “No! I will die here.” Be·naiʹah brought word back to the king: “This is what Joʹab said, and this is what he answered me.”
Then the king said to him: “Do just as he said; strike him down and bury him and remove from me and from the house of my father the blood that Joʹab spilled without just cause.
Jehovah will bring his blood back on his own head, for without my father David’s knowledge, he struck down and killed with the sword two men more righteous and better than he was: Abʹner the son of Ner, the chief of the army of Israel, and A·maʹsa the son of Jeʹther, the chief of the army of Judah.
Their blood will come back on the head of Joʹab and on the head of his offspring forever; but for David, his offspring, his house, and his throne, may there be peace from Jehovah forever.”
Then Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da went up and struck Joʹab down and put him to death, and he was buried at his own house in the wilderness.
Then the king appointed Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da over the army in his place, and the king appointed Zaʹdok the priest in place of A·biʹa·thar.
Then the king summoned Shimʹe·i and said to him: “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem, and live there; do not go out from there to any other place.
On the day you go out and cross the Kidʹron Valley, you can be sure that you will die. Your blood will be on your own head.”
Shimʹe·i replied to the king: “What you have said is fair. Your servant will do just as my lord the king has said.” So Shimʹe·i stayed in Jerusalem for many days.
But at the end of three years, two of Shimʹe·i’s slaves ran away to Aʹchish the son of Maʹa·cah the king of Gath. When Shimʹe·i was told: “Look! Your slaves are in Gath,”
Shimʹe·i immediately saddled his donkey and went to see Aʹchish in Gath to find his slaves. When Shimʹe·i returned from Gath with his slaves,
Solʹo·mon was told: “Shimʹe·i has gone out of Jerusalem to Gath and has returned.”
At that the king summoned Shimʹe·i and said to him: “Did I not put you under oath by Jehovah and warn you: ‘On the day you go out from here to any other place, you can be sure that you will die’? And did you not say to me, ‘What you are saying is fair; I will obey’?
Why, then, did you not keep the oath of Jehovah and the commandment that I imposed on you?”
The king then said to Shimʹe·i: “You know in your heart all the injury that you did to David my father, and Jehovah will bring back that injury on your own head.
But King Solʹo·mon will be blessed, and the throne of David will be firmly established before Jehovah forever.”
With that the king commanded Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da, who went out and struck him down, and he died. Thus the kingdom was firmly established in the hand of Solʹo·mon.
Now the queen of Sheʹba heard the report about Solʹo·mon in connection with the name of Jehovah, so she came to test him with perplexing questions.
She arrived in Jerusalem with a very impressive entourage, with camels carrying balsam oil and great quantities of gold and precious stones. She went in to Solʹo·mon and spoke to him about everything that was close to her heart.
Solʹo·mon then answered all her questions. There was nothing too difficult for the king to explain to her.
When the queen of Sheʹba had seen all the wisdom of Solʹo·mon, the house that he built,
the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the table service of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers, and his burnt sacrifices that he regularly offered up at the house of Jehovah, she was left completely breathless.
So she said to the king: “The report that I heard in my own land about your achievements and about your wisdom was true.
But I did not put faith in the reports until I had come and had seen it with my own eyes. And look! I had not been told the half. You have far surpassed in wisdom and prosperity the report that I heard.
Happy are your men, and happy are your servants who stand before you constantly, listening to your wisdom!
May Jehovah your God be praised, who has taken pleasure in you by putting you on the throne of Israel. Because of Jehovah’s everlasting love for Israel, he appointed you as king to administer justice and righteousness.”
Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold and a great amount of balsam oil and precious stones. Never again was such a quantity of balsam oil brought in as what the queen of Sheʹba gave to King Solʹo·mon.
Hiʹram’s fleet of ships that carried gold from Oʹphir also brought from Oʹphir algum timbers in very great quantity, and precious stones.
The king made from the algum timbers supports for the house of Jehovah and for the king’s house, as well as harps and stringed instruments for the singers. Such algum timbers have never again been brought in or seen down to this day.
King Solʹo·mon also gave the queen of Sheʹba whatever she desired and asked for, in addition to what he gave her out of his own generosity. After that she left and returned to her own land, together with her servants.
And the weight of the gold that came to Solʹo·mon in one year amounted to 666 talents of gold,
besides that from the merchants and the profit from the traders and from all the kings of the Arabs and the governors of the land.
King Solʹo·mon made 200 large shields of alloyed gold (600 shekels of gold went on each shield)
and 300 bucklers of alloyed gold (three miʹnas of gold went on each buckler). Then the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non.
The king also made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with refined gold.
There were six steps to the throne, and the throne had a round canopy behind it, and there were armrests on both sides of the seat, and two lions were standing beside the armrests.
And there were 12 lions standing on the six steps, one at each end of the six steps. No other kingdom had made anything like it.
All the drinking vessels of King Solʹo·mon were of gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non were of pure gold. There was nothing made of silver, for silver was considered as nothing in the days of Solʹo·mon.
For the king had a fleet of ships of Tarʹshish on the sea along with Hiʹram’s fleet. Once every three years, the fleet of ships of Tarʹshish would come loaded with gold and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
So King Solʹo·mon was greater than all the other kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
And people of all the earth sought an audience with Solʹo·mon to hear his wisdom that God had put in his heart.
They would each bring a gift—articles of silver, articles of gold, garments, armor, balsam oil, horses, and mules—and this continued year after year.
And Solʹo·mon kept accumulating chariots and horses; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem.
The king made the silver in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah.
The horses of Solʹo·mon had been imported from Egypt, and the company of the king’s merchants would obtain the horses in droves for one price.
Each chariot imported from Egypt cost 600 silver pieces, and a horse cost 150; in turn, they would export them to all the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Syria.
The word of Jehovah against Baʹa·sha then came to Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, saying:
“I raised you up out of the dust and made you leader over my people Israel, but you kept walking in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and caused my people Israel to sin so that they offended me with their sins.
So I am making a clean sweep of Baʹa·sha and his house, and I will make his house like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.
Anyone belonging to Baʹa·sha who dies in the city the dogs will eat; and anyone belonging to him who dies in the field the birds of the heavens will eat.”
As for the rest of the history of Baʹa·sha, what he did and his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Baʹa·sha was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Tirʹzah; and Eʹlah his son became king in his place.
Also through the prophet Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, Jehovah’s word came against Baʹa·sha and his house, both because of all the badness that he committed in the eyes of Jehovah by offending him with the work of his hands, becoming like the house of Jer·o·boʹam, and also because of his striking him down.
In the 26th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Eʹlah the son of Baʹa·sha became king over Israel in Tirʹzah, and he reigned for two years.
His servant Zimʹri, the chief of half of his chariot forces, conspired against him while he was in Tirʹzah drinking himself drunk at the house of Arʹza, who was over the household in Tirʹzah.
Zimʹri came in and struck him down and put him to death in the 27th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and he became king in his place.
When he became king, as soon as he sat down on his throne, he struck down all the house of Baʹa·sha. He did not spare a single male, whether of his relatives or of his friends.
Thus Zimʹri annihilated the whole house of Baʹa·sha, according to the word that Jehovah had spoken against Baʹa·sha through Jeʹhu the prophet.
This was for all the sins that Baʹa·sha and his son Eʹlah had committed and the sins they had caused Israel to commit by offending Jehovah the God of Israel with their worthless idols.
As for the rest of the history of Eʹlah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
In the 27th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Zimʹri became king for seven days in Tirʹzah while the troops were camped against Gibʹbe·thon, which belonged to the Phi·lisʹtines.
In time the troops who were encamped heard it being said: “Zimʹri has conspired and has also struck down the king.” So all Israel made Omʹri, the chief of the army, king over Israel on that day in the camp.
Omʹri and all Israel with him went up from Gibʹbe·thon and laid siege to Tirʹzah.
When Zimʹri saw that the city had been captured, he went into the fortified tower of the king’s house and burned the house down over himself, and he died.
This was for his own sins that he had committed by doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah by walking in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and for the sin he had caused Israel to commit.
As for the rest of the history of Zimʹri and his conspiracy, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
It was then that the people of Israel were divided into two factions. One part of the people became followers of Tibʹni the son of Giʹnath, wanting to make him king, and the other part followed Omʹri.
But the people who were following Omʹri prevailed over the people following Tibʹni the son of Giʹnath. So Tibʹni died, and Omʹri became king.
In the 31st year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Omʹri became king over Israel, and he reigned for 12 years. In Tirʹzah he reigned for six years.
He bought the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a from Sheʹmer for two talents of silver, and he built a city on the mountain. He named the city that he built Sa·marʹi·a, after Sheʹmer the owner of the mountain.
Omʹri kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he was worse than all who were prior to him.
He walked in all the ways of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and in the sin he had caused Israel to commit by offending Jehovah the God of Israel with their worthless idols.
As for the rest of the history of Omʹri, what he did and his mighty exploits, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Omʹri was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Aʹhab became king in his place.
Aʹhab the son of Omʹri became king over Israel in the 38th year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and Aʹhab the son of Omʹri reigned over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a for 22 years.
Aʹhab the son of Omʹri was worse in the eyes of Jehovah than all those who were prior to him.
As if it were a trivial thing for him to walk in the sins of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, he also took as wife Jezʹe·bel the daughter of Eth·baʹal, the king of the Si·doʹni·ans, and began to serve Baʹal and to bow down to him.
Further, he set up an altar to Baʹal at the house of Baʹal that he built in Sa·marʹi·a.
Aʹhab also made the sacred pole. Aʹhab did more to offend Jehovah the God of Israel than all the kings of Israel prior to him.
In his days, Hiʹel the Bethʹel·ite rebuilt Jerʹi·cho. At the cost of A·biʹram his firstborn he laid its foundation, and at the cost of Seʹgub his youngest he put up its doors, according to the word of Jehovah spoken through Joshua the son of Nun.
When Hiʹram the king of Tyre heard that Solʹo·mon had been anointed as king in place of his father, he sent his servants to Solʹo·mon, for Hiʹram had always been a friend of David’s.
In turn Solʹo·mon sent word to Hiʹram:
“You well know that David my father was not able to build a house for the name of Jehovah his God because of the wars waged against him from every side until Jehovah put his enemies under the soles of his feet.
But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on all sides. There is no one opposing me and nothing bad happening.
So I intend to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, just as Jehovah promised to David my father, saying: ‘Your son whom I will put on your throne in your place, he is the one who will build the house for my name.’
Now command your people to cut cedars of Lebʹa·non for me. My servants will work with your servants, and I will pay the wages of your servants according to the rate you set, for you are aware that not one of us knows how to cut trees like the Si·doʹni·ans.”
When Hiʹram heard Solʹo·mon’s words, he rejoiced greatly and said: “May Jehovah be praised today, for he has given David a wise son over this great people!”
So Hiʹram sent word to Solʹo·mon: “I have heard the message you sent to me. I will do all you desire in providing the cedar and juniper timbers.
My servants will bring them down from Lebʹa·non to the sea, and I will make them into log rafts to go by sea to the place that you designate to me. I will have them broken up there, and you can carry them away. In exchange, you will provide the food that I request for my household.”
So Hiʹram supplied all the timbers of cedar and juniper that Solʹo·mon desired.
And Solʹo·mon gave Hiʹram 20,000 cor measures of wheat as food supplies for his household and 20 cor measures of very fine olive oil. That was what Solʹo·mon gave Hiʹram year after year.
And Jehovah gave Solʹo·mon wisdom, just as He had promised him. And there was peace between Hiʹram and Solʹo·mon, and the two of them made a treaty.
King Solʹo·mon conscripted men for forced labor out of all Israel; 30,000 men were conscripted.
He would send them to Lebʹa·non in shifts of 10,000 each month. They would spend a month in Lebʹa·non and two months at their homes; and Ad·o·niʹram was over those conscripted for forced labor.
Solʹo·mon had 70,000 common laborers and 80,000 stonecutters in the mountains,
as well as Solʹo·mon’s 3,300 princely deputies who served as foremen to supervise the workmen.
At the king’s order, they quarried large stones, expensive stones, to lay the foundation of the house with hewn stones.
So Solʹo·mon’s builders and Hiʹram’s builders and the Geʹbal·ites did the cutting, and they prepared the timbers and the stones to build the house.
At that time A·biʹjah the son of Jer·o·boʹam fell sick.
So Jer·o·boʹam said to his wife: “Rise up, please, and disguise yourself so that they will not know that you are Jer·o·boʹam’s wife, and go to Shiʹloh. Look! A·hiʹjah the prophet is there. He is the one who spoke of me becoming king over this people.
Take with you ten loaves of bread, sprinkled cakes, and a flask of honey, and go to him. He will then tell you what is going to happen to the boy.”
Jer·o·boʹam’s wife did what he said. She rose up and went to Shiʹloh and came to the house of A·hiʹjah. A·hiʹjah’s eyes stared straight ahead, and he could not see because of his age.
But Jehovah had told A·hiʹjah: “Here is the wife of Jer·o·boʹam coming to inquire of you regarding her son, for he is sick. I will tell you what to say to her. When she arrives, she will conceal her identity.”
As soon as A·hiʹjah heard the sound of her footsteps as she was coming into the entrance, he said: “Come in, wife of Jer·o·boʹam. Why are you concealing your identity? I have been assigned to give you a harsh message.
Go, tell Jer·o·boʹam, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “I raised you up from among your people to make you a leader over my people Israel.
Then I ripped the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you. But you have not become like my servant David, who kept my commandments and who walked after me with all his heart, doing only what was right in my eyes.
But you have done worse than all those who were prior to you, and you made for yourself another god and metal images to offend me, and it is I whom you have turned your back on.
For that reason I am bringing calamity on the house of Jer·o·boʹam, and I will annihilate from Jer·o·boʹam every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel, and I will make a clean sweep of the house of Jer·o·boʹam, just as one clears away the dung until it is all gone!
Anyone belonging to Jer·o·boʹam who dies in the city, the dogs will eat; and anyone who dies in the field, the birds of the heavens will eat, for Jehovah has spoken it.”’
“Now rise up; go to your house. When you set foot in the city, the child will die.
All Israel will mourn him and bury him, for he alone of Jer·o·boʹam’s family will be laid in a grave, because he is the only one of the house of Jer·o·boʹam in whom Jehovah the God of Israel has found something good.
Jehovah will raise up for himself a king over Israel who will do away with the house of Jer·o·boʹam from that day forward, yes, even now.
Jehovah will strike Israel down like a reed that sways in the water, and he will uproot Israel off this good land that he gave to their forefathers, and he will scatter them beyond the River, because they made their sacred poles, offending Jehovah.
And he will abandon Israel because of the sins that Jer·o·boʹam has committed and has caused Israel to commit.”
At that Jer·o·boʹam’s wife rose up and went on her way and came to Tirʹzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the boy died.
So they buried him, and all Israel mourned him, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servant A·hiʹjah the prophet.
And the rest of the history of Jer·o·boʹam, how he waged war and how he reigned, is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.
And the length of Jer·o·boʹam’s reign was 22 years, after which he was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Naʹdab became king in his place.
Meanwhile, Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon had become king in Judah. Re·ho·boʹam was 41 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 17 years in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel as the place to put his name. The name of Re·ho·boʹam’s mother was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess.
And Judah was doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and by the sins they committed they provoked him more than their forefathers had done.
They too kept building for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and sacred poles on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree.
There were also male temple prostitutes in the land. They acted according to all the detestable things of the nations that Jehovah had driven out before the Israelites.
In the fifth year of King Re·ho·boʹam, King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem.
He took the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything, including all the gold shields that Solʹo·mon had made.
So King Re·ho·boʹam made copper shields to replace them, and he entrusted them to the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the entrance of the king’s house.
Whenever the king came to the house of Jehovah, the guards would carry them, and then they would return them to the guard chamber.
And the rest of the history of Re·ho·boʹam, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
There was constant warfare between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam.
Then Re·ho·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David. His mother’s name was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess. And his son A·biʹjam became king in his place.
For three years there was no war between Syria and Israel.
In the third year King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah went down to the king of Israel.
Then the king of Israel said to his servants: “Do you know that Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad belongs to us? And yet we are hesitating to take it back from the king of Syria.”
He then said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Will you go with me to fight at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?” Je·hoshʹa·phat replied to the king of Israel: “I am the same as you. My people are the same as your people. My horses are the same as your horses.”
But Je·hoshʹa·phat said to the king of Israel: “First inquire, please, for the word of Jehovah.”
So the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about 400 men, and said to them: “Should I go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” They said: “Go up, and Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”
Je·hoshʹa·phat then said: “Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah? Let us also inquire through him.”
At that the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “There is still one more man through whom we can inquire of Jehovah; but I hate him, for he never prophesies good things concerning me, only bad. He is Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah.” However, Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The king should not say such a thing.”
So the king of Israel called a court official and said: “Bring Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah quickly.”
Now the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah were each sitting on his throne, dressed in royal attire, at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, and all the prophets were prophesying before them.
Then Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah made for himself iron horns and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘With these you will gore the Syrians until you exterminate them.’”
All the other prophets were prophesying the same way, saying: “Go up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”
So the messenger who went to call Mi·caiʹah said to him: “Look! The words of the prophets are unanimously favorable to the king. Let your word, please, become like their words, and speak favorably.”
But Mi·caiʹah said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, whatever Jehovah says to me is what I will speak.”
Then he came in to the king, and the king asked him: “Mi·caiʹah, should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should we refrain?” At once he replied: “Go up and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”
At that the king said to him: “How many times must I put you under oath not to speak to me anything but the truth in the name of Jehovah?”
So he said: “I see all the Israelites scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. Jehovah said: ‘These have no master. Let each one go back to his house in peace.’”
Then the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Did I not tell you, ‘He will not prophesy good things concerning me, only bad’?”
Mi·caiʹah then said: “Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne and all the army of the heavens standing by him, to his right and to his left.
Jehovah then said, ‘Who will fool Aʹhab, so that he will go up and fall at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?’ And one was saying one thing while another said something else.
Then a spirit came forward and stood before Jehovah and said, ‘I will fool him.’ Jehovah asked him, ‘How will you do it?’
He replied, ‘I will go out and become a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ So he said, ‘You will fool him, and what is more, you will be successful. Go out and do that.’
And now Jehovah has put a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all these prophets of yours, but Jehovah has declared calamity for you.”
Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah now approached and struck Mi·caiʹah on the cheek and said: “Which way did the spirit of Jehovah pass from me to speak with you?”
Mi·caiʹah replied: “Look! You will see which way on the day when you will enter the innermost room to hide.”
Then the king of Israel said: “Take Mi·caiʹah and turn him over to Aʹmon the chief of the city and to Joʹash the king’s son.
Tell them, ‘This is what the king says: “Put this fellow in the prison and feed him with a reduced allowance of bread and water until I return in peace.”’”
But Mi·caiʹah said: “If you do return in peace, Jehovah has not spoken with me.” Then he added: “Take note, all you peoples.”
So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah went up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
The king of Israel now said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “I will disguise myself and will go into the battle, but you should put on your royal attire.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and entered the battle.
Now the king of Syria had ordered his 32 chariot commanders: “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.”
And as soon as the chariot commanders saw Je·hoshʹa·phat, they said to themselves: “Surely it is the king of Israel.” So they turned to fight against him; and Je·hoshʹa·phat began to cry for help.
When the chariot commanders saw that it was not the king of Israel, they immediately turned back from following him.
But one man shot his bow at random, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his coat of mail. So the king said to his charioteer: “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I have been badly wounded.”
The fighting raged throughout that day, and the king had to be propped up in the chariot, facing the Syrians. The blood of the wound poured out into the interior of the war chariot, and he died in the evening.
Around sunset a cry passed through the camp, saying: “Everyone to his city! Everyone to his land!”
Thus the king died, and he was brought to Sa·marʹi·a; they buried the king in Sa·marʹi·a.
When they washed off the war chariot by the pool of Sa·marʹi·a, the dogs licked up his blood and the prostitutes bathed there, according to the word that Jehovah had spoken.
As for the rest of the history of Aʹhab, all that he did and the house of ivory that he built and all the cities that he built, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Aʹhab was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son A·ha·ziʹah became king in his place.
Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Aʹsa had become king over Judah in the fourth year of King Aʹhab of Israel.
Je·hoshʹa·phat was 35 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 25 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·zuʹbah the daughter of Shilʹhi.
He kept walking in all the way of Aʹsa his father. He did not deviate from it, and he did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes. However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.
Je·hoshʹa·phat kept peaceful relations with the king of Israel.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoshʹa·phat, his mighty exploits and how he waged war, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
He also cleared out of the land the rest of the male temple prostitutes who had been left over in the days of Aʹsa his father.
Then there was no king in Eʹdom; a deputy was acting as king.
Je·hoshʹa·phat also made Tarʹshish ships to go to Oʹphir for gold, but they did not go because the ships were wrecked at Eʹzi·on-geʹber.
It was then that A·ha·ziʹah the son of Aʹhab said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Let my servants go with your servants in the ships,” but Je·hoshʹa·phat did not consent.
Then Je·hoshʹa·phat was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David his forefather; and his son Je·hoʹram became king in his place.
A·ha·ziʹah the son of Aʹhab became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a in the 17th year of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years.
And he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes and walking in the way of his father and his mother and in the way of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, who had caused Israel to sin.
He continued serving Baʹal and bowing down to him and kept offending Jehovah the God of Israel, just as his father had done.
In the 18th year of King Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, A·biʹjam became king over Judah.
He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of A·bishʹa·lom.
He went on walking in all the sins that his father committed prior to him, and his heart was not complete with Jehovah his God like the heart of David his forefather.
However, on account of David, Jehovah his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem by raising up his son after him and keeping Jerusalem in existence.
For David did what was right in the eyes of Jehovah, and he did not turn aside from anything that He had commanded him all the days of his life, except in the matter of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite.
And there was warfare between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam all the days of his life.
As for the rest of the history of A·biʹjam, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? There was also war between A·biʹjam and Jer·o·boʹam.
Then A·biʹjam was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David; and his son Aʹsa became king in his place.
In the 20th year of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel, Aʹsa began to reign over Judah.
He reigned in Jerusalem for 41 years. His grandmother’s name was Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of A·bishʹa·lom.
Aʹsa did what was right in the eyes of Jehovah, like David his forefather.
He expelled the male temple prostitutes from the land and removed all the disgusting idols that his forefathers had made.
He even removed Maʹa·cah his grandmother from her position as queen mother, because she had made an obscene idol for the worship of the sacred pole. Aʹsa cut down her obscene idol and burned it in the Kidʹron Valley.
But the high places were not removed. Nevertheless, Aʹsa’s heart was complete with Jehovah all his life.
And he brought the things that he and his father had made holy into the house of Jehovah—silver, gold, and various utensils.
There was constant warfare between Aʹsa and Baʹa·sha the king of Israel.
So King Baʹa·sha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Raʹmah to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Aʹsa of Judah.
At that Aʹsa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah and the treasuries of the house of the king and handed them over to his servants. King Aʹsa then sent them to Ben-haʹdad the son of Tab·rimʹmon the son of Heʹzi·on, the king of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus, saying:
“There is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father. I am sending you a gift of silver and gold. Come, break your treaty with King Baʹa·sha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”
Ben-haʹdad listened to King Aʹsa and sent the chiefs of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they struck down Iʹjon, Dan, Aʹbel-beth-maʹa·cah, all Chinʹne·reth, and all the land of Naphʹta·li.
When Baʹa·sha heard of it, he immediately quit building Raʹmah and continued dwelling in Tirʹzah.
King Aʹsa then summoned all Judah—no one was exempt—and they carried off the stones and timbers of Raʹmah that Baʹa·sha had been building with, and with them King Aʹsa built up Geʹba in Benjamin, and Mizʹpah.
As for all the rest of the history of Aʹsa, all his mightiness and all that he did and the cities that he built, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah? But in his old age he suffered from a disease in his feet.
Then Aʹsa was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with them in the City of David his forefather; and his son Je·hoshʹa·phat became king in his place.
Naʹdab the son of Jer·o·boʹam became king over Israel in the second year of King Aʹsa of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years.
He kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and walked in the way of his father and in his sin that he caused Israel to commit.
Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah of the house of Isʹsa·char conspired against him, and Baʹa·sha struck him down at Gibʹbe·thon, which belonged to the Phi·lisʹtines, while Naʹdab and all Israel were besieging Gibʹbe·thon.
So Baʹa·sha put him to death in the third year of King Aʹsa of Judah and became king in his place.
And as soon as he became king, he struck down all the house of Jer·o·boʹam. He did not let remain anyone breathing who belonged to Jer·o·boʹam; he had them annihilated according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servant A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite.
This was because of the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had committed and had caused Israel to commit and because he had greatly offended Jehovah the God of Israel.
As for the rest of the history of Naʹdab, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
And there was constant warfare between Aʹsa and King Baʹa·sha of Israel.
In the third year of King Aʹsa of Judah, Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah became king in Tirʹzah over all Israel and reigned for 24 years.
But he kept doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, and he walked in the way of Jer·o·boʹam and in his sin that he caused Israel to commit.
King Solʹo·mon ruled over all Israel.
These were his high officials: Az·a·riʹah the son of Zaʹdok was the priest;
El·i·horʹeph and A·hiʹjah the sons of Shiʹsha were secretaries; Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was the recorder;
Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was in charge of the army; Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar were priests;
Az·a·riʹah the son of Nathan was over the deputies; Zaʹbud the son of Nathan was a priest and the king’s friend;
A·hiʹshar was over the household; and Ad·o·niʹram the son of Abʹda was over those conscripted for forced labor.
Solʹo·mon had 12 deputies in charge of all Israel who provided the king and his household with food. Each one was responsible for providing the food for one month of the year.
These were their names: The son of Hur, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im;
the son of Deʹker, in Maʹkaz, Sha·alʹbim, Beth-sheʹmesh, and Eʹlon-beth-haʹnan;
the son of Heʹsed, in A·rubʹboth (he had Soʹcoh and all the land of Heʹpher);
the son of A·binʹa·dab, in all the slopes of Dor (Solʹo·mon’s daughter Taʹphath became his wife);
Baʹa·na the son of A·hiʹlud, in Taʹa·nach, Me·gidʹdo, and all Beth-sheʹan, which is beside Zarʹe·than below Jezʹre·el, from Beth-sheʹan to Aʹbel-me·hoʹlah to the region of Jokʹme·am;
the son of Geʹber, in Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad (he had the tent villages of Jaʹir the son of Ma·nasʹseh, which are in Gilʹe·ad; he also had the region of Arʹgob, which is in Baʹshan: 60 large cities with walls and copper bars);
A·hinʹa·dab the son of Idʹdo, in Ma·ha·naʹim;
A·himʹa·az, in Naphʹta·li (he took Basʹe·math, another of Solʹo·mon’s daughters, as his wife);
Baʹa·na the son of Huʹshai, in Ashʹer and Be·aʹloth;
Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Pa·ruʹah, in Isʹsa·char;
Shimʹe·i the son of Eʹla, in Benjamin;
Geʹber the son of Uʹri, in the land of Gilʹe·ad, the land of Siʹhon king of the Amʹor·ites and of Og king of Baʹshan. There was also one deputy in charge of all these other deputies in the land.
Judah and Israel were as numerous as the grains of sand by the sea; they were eating and drinking and rejoicing.
Solʹo·mon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and to the boundary of Egypt. They brought tribute and served Solʹo·mon all the days of his life.
Solʹo·mon’s food for each day was 30 cor measures of fine flour and 60 cor measures of flour,
10 fattened cattle, 20 pastured cattle, and 100 sheep, besides some stags, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened cuckoos.
For he controlled everything this side of the River, from Tiphʹsah to Gazʹa, including all the kings on this side of the River; and he enjoyed peace in every region, all around him.
Judah and Israel lived in security, everyone under his own vine and under his own fig tree, from Dan to Beʹer-sheʹba, all the days of Solʹo·mon.
And Solʹo·mon had 4,000 stalls of horses for his chariots and 12,000 horses.
These deputies supplied food to King Solʹo·mon and to everyone who ate at the table of King Solʹo·mon. Each was responsible for his month and saw to it that nothing was lacking.
They also brought barley and straw wherever it was needed for the horses and for the teams of horses, each according to his quota.
And God gave Solʹo·mon wisdom and discernment in very great measure and a broadness of heart like the sand on the seashore.
Solʹo·mon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the people of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt.
He was wiser than any other man, wiser than Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite and Heʹman, Calʹcol, and Darʹda, the sons of Maʹhol; his fame spread among all the surrounding nations.
He composed 3,000 proverbs and his songs numbered 1,005.
He would speak about the trees, from the cedar in Lebʹa·non to the hyssop that grows on the wall; he would speak about the animals, the birds, the creeping things, and the fish.
People from all the nations came to hear Solʹo·mon’s wisdom, including kings from all over the earth who had heard about his wisdom.
Now King Ben-haʹdad of Syria gathered his whole army together along with 32 other kings and their horses and chariots; he went up and laid siege to Sa·marʹi·a and fought against it.
Then he sent messengers to King Aʹhab of Israel at the city and said to him: “This is what Ben-haʹdad says,
‘Your silver and your gold are mine, as well as the best of your wives and your sons.’”
To this the king of Israel answered: “According to your word, my lord the king, I am yours along with all that belongs to me.”
The messengers later came back and said: “This is what Ben-haʹdad says, ‘I sent this message to you: “Your silver, your gold, your wives, and your sons you will give me.”
But about this time tomorrow I will send my servants to you, and they will carefully search your house and the houses of your servants, and all your desirable things they will seize and take away.’”
At that the king of Israel called all the elders of the land and said: “Take note, please, and see that this man is bent on bringing calamity, for he demanded my wives, my sons, my silver, and my gold, and I did not refuse him.”
Then all the elders and all the people said to him: “Do not obey, and do not consent.”
So he said to the messengers of Ben-haʹdad: “Say to my lord the king, ‘All that you first demanded of your servant I will do, but this I cannot do.’” With that the messengers went off and brought word back to him.
Ben-haʹdad now sent him this message: “So may the gods do to me and add to it if there is enough dust in Sa·marʹi·a to give each of the people following me a handful!”
The king of Israel answered: “Tell him, ‘The one who puts on his armor should not boast about himself like one who takes it off.’”
As soon as he heard this reply, while he and the kings were drinking in their tents, he said to his servants: “Get ready to attack!” So they got ready to attack the city.
But a prophet approached King Aʹhab of Israel and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Have you seen all this large crowd? Here I am giving it into your hand today, and then you will know that I am Jehovah.’”
Aʹhab asked: “By whom?” to which he said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘By the attendants of the princes of the provinces.’” So he asked: “Who will start the battle?” to which he said: “You!”
Aʹhab then counted the attendants of the princes of the provinces, and they were 232; after that, he counted all the Israelite men, 7,000.
They went out at noon while Ben-haʹdad was drinking himself drunk in the tents along with the 32 kings who were helping him.
When the attendants of the princes of the provinces came out first, Ben-haʹdad at once sent messengers. They reported to him: “Men have come out from Sa·marʹi·a.”
At that he said: “If they have come out for peace, take them alive; or if they have come out for battle, you should still take them alive.”
But when these came out of the city—the attendants of the princes of the provinces and the armies that were following them—
each one struck down his opponent. Then the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them, but King Ben-haʹdad of Syria escaped on a horse with some of the horsemen.
But the king of Israel went out and kept striking down the horses and the chariots, and he inflicted a great defeat on the Syrians.
Later the prophet approached the king of Israel and said to him: “Go, strengthen yourself and consider what you are going to do, for at the start of the next year the king of Syria will come up against you.”
Now the servants of the king of Syria said to him: “Their God is a God of mountains. That is why they overpowered us. But if we fight against them on level land, we will overpower them.
Also do this: Remove all the kings from their places, and replace them with governors.
Then gather an army equal to the army you lost, horse for horse and chariot for chariot. Let us fight against them on level land, and we will surely overpower them.” So he listened to their advice and did just that.
At the start of the year, Ben-haʹdad mustered the Syrians and went up to Aʹphek for battle against Israel.
The people of Israel were also mustered and supplied, and they went out to meet them. When the people of Israel camped in front of them, they were like two tiny flocks of goats, while the Syrians filled the whole land.
Then the man of the true God approached the king of Israel and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Because the Syrians have said: “Jehovah is a God of mountains, and he is not a God of plains,” I will give all this large crowd into your hand, and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah.’”
They remained encamped opposite each other for seven days, and on the seventh day the battle began. The people of Israel struck down 100,000 Syrian foot soldiers in one day.
And the rest fled to Aʹphek, into the city. But the wall fell down on 27,000 of the men who were left. Ben-haʹdad also fled and came into the city, and he hid in an inner room.
So his servants said to him: “Look, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings. Please, let us wear sackcloth on our hips and put ropes on our heads and go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will spare your life.”
So they wore sackcloth around their hips and ropes on their heads and came in to the king of Israel and said: “Your servant Ben-haʹdad says, ‘Please, let me live.’” He replied: “Is he still alive? He is my brother.”
The men took it as an omen and quickly took him at his word, so they said: “Ben-haʹdad is your brother.” At that he said: “Go and get him.” Then Ben-haʹdad went out to him, and he had him get up into the chariot.
Ben-haʹdad now said to him: “The cities that my father took from your father I will return, and you may establish markets for yourself in Damascus, just as my father did in Sa·marʹi·a.” Aʹhab replied: “On the basis of this agreement, I will let you go.” With that he made an agreement with him and let him go.
By the word of Jehovah, one of the sons of the prophets said to his companion: “Strike me, please.” But the man refused to strike him.
So he said to him: “Because you did not listen to the voice of Jehovah, as soon as you leave me, a lion will kill you.” After he left him, a lion came upon him and killed him.
He found another man and said: “Strike me, please.” So the man struck him and wounded him.
Then the prophet went and waited for the king by the road, disguising himself with a bandage over his eyes.
As the king was passing by, he cried out to the king: “Your servant went into the thick of the battle, and there was a man coming out who brought a man to me and said, ‘Guard this man. If he is found missing, your life will have to take the place of his life, or else you will pay a talent of silver.’
And while your servant was busy here and there, suddenly the man was gone.” The king of Israel said to him: “So your own judgment will be; you have decided it yourself.”
Then he quickly removed the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel recognized that he was one of the prophets.
He said to him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Because you have let the man whom I said should be destroyed escape from your hand, your life must take the place of his life, and your people the place of his people.’”
At that the king of Israel went home to Sa·marʹi·a, sullen and dejected.
Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king.
As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had run off on account of King Solʹo·mon and was living in Egypt),
they sent for him. After that Jer·o·boʹam and all the congregation of Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said:
“Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”
At this he said to them: “Go away for three days; then return to me.” So the people went away.
King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?”
They answered him: “If today you would become a servant to this people and submit to their request and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”
However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants.
He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?”
The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to this people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips.
My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.’”
Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.”
But the king answered the people harshly, rejecting the advice that the older men had given him.
He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will punish you with scourges.”
So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by Jehovah, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.
When all Israel saw that the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. To your gods, O Israel. Now look after your own house, O David!” With that Israel returned to their homes.
But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent A·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but all Israel stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem.
And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.
As soon as all Israel heard that Jer·o·boʹam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. None of the people followed the house of David except the tribe of Judah.
When Re·ho·boʹam arrived in Jerusalem, he immediately congregated all the house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, 180,000 trained warriors, to fight against the house of Israel in order to restore the kingship to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon.
Then the word of the true God came to She·maiʹah the man of the true God, saying:
“Say to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon the king of Judah and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people,
‘This is what Jehovah says: “You must not go up and fight against your Israelite brothers. Each one of you must return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”’” So they obeyed the word of Jehovah and went back home, as Jehovah had told them.
Jer·o·boʹam then built up Sheʹchem in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im and lived there. From there he went out and built up Pe·nuʹel.
Jer·o·boʹam said in his heart: “Now the kingdom will return to the house of David.
If this people continues to go up to offer sacrifices at the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, the heart of this people will also return to their lord, King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah. Yes, they will kill me and return to King Re·ho·boʹam of Judah.”
After consultation, the king made two golden calves and said to the people: “It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Here is your God, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.”
Then he placed one in Bethʹel, and the other he put in Dan.
And this caused them to sin, and the people went as far as Dan to worship the one there.
And he made houses of worship on the high places and appointed priests from the people in general, those who were not Levites.
Jer·o·boʹam also established a festival in the eighth month, on the 15th day of the month, like the festival in Judah. On the altar that he made at Bethʹel, he sacrificed to the calves he had made, and at Bethʹel he assigned priests for the high places that he had made.
And he began to make offerings on the altar that he had made at Bethʹel on the 15th day in the eighth month, in the month that he had devised on his own; and he established a festival for the people of Israel, and he ascended the altar to make offerings and sacrificial smoke.
After some time, in the third year, Jehovah’s word came to E·liʹjah, saying: “Go, present yourself to Aʹhab, and I will send rain on the surface of the ground.”
So E·liʹjah went to present himself to Aʹhab, while the famine was severe in Sa·marʹi·a.
Meanwhile, Aʹhab called O·ba·diʹah, who was over the household. (Now O·ba·diʹah greatly feared Jehovah,
and when Jezʹe·bel was doing away with Jehovah’s prophets, O·ba·diʹah took 100 prophets and hid them 50 to a cave, and he supplied them with bread and water.)
Aʹhab then said to O·ba·diʹah: “Go through the land to all the springs of water and to all the valleys. Perhaps we can find enough grass to keep the horses and mules alive and not have all our animals die.”
So they divided between themselves the land they were going to pass through. Aʹhab went alone by one way, and O·ba·diʹah went alone by another way.
As O·ba·diʹah was on his way, E·liʹjah was there to meet him. At once he recognized him and fell facedown and said: “Is this you, my lord E·liʹjah?”
He replied to him: “It is I. Go and tell your lord: ‘E·liʹjah is here.’”
But he said: “What sin have I committed that you should hand your servant over to Aʹhab to put me to death?
As surely as Jehovah your God is living, there is not a nation or a kingdom where my lord has not sent to look for you. After they said, ‘He is not here,’ he made the kingdom and the nation swear that they could not find you.
Now you are saying, ‘Go and tell your lord: “E·liʹjah is here.”’
When I depart from you, the spirit of Jehovah will carry you away to a place I will not know, and when I tell Aʹhab and he does not find you, he will surely kill me. Yet, your servant has feared Jehovah from his youth.
Has my lord not been told what I did when Jezʹe·bel was killing the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid 100 of the prophets of Jehovah by groups of 50 in a cave and kept supplying them bread and water?
But now you are saying, ‘Go and tell your lord: “E·liʹjah is here.”’ He will certainly kill me.”
However, E·liʹjah said: “As surely as Jehovah of armies whom I serve is living, today I will present myself to him.”
So O·ba·diʹah went off to meet Aʹhab and told him, and Aʹhab went to meet E·liʹjah.
As soon as Aʹhab saw E·liʹjah, he said to him: “Is this you, the one bringing great trouble on Israel?”
To this he said: “I have not brought trouble on Israel, but you and the house of your father have, by abandoning the commandments of Jehovah and by following the Baʹals.
And now summon all Israel to me at Mount Carʹmel, as well as the 450 prophets of Baʹal and the 400 prophets of the sacred pole, who are eating at the table of Jezʹe·bel.”
So Aʹhab sent word among all the people of Israel and collected the prophets together at Mount Carʹmel.
Then E·liʹjah approached all the people and said: “How long will you be limping between two different opinions? If Jehovah is the true God, follow him; but if Baʹal is, follow him!” But the people did not say a word in answer to him.
E·liʹjah then said to the people: “I am the only prophet of Jehovah left, while the prophets of Baʹal are 450 men.
Let them give us two young bulls, and let them choose one young bull and cut it into pieces and put it on the wood, but they should not put fire to it. I will prepare the other young bull, and I will place it on the wood, but I will not put fire to it.
Then you must call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of Jehovah. The God who answers by fire will show that he is the true God.” To this all the people answered: “What you say is good.”
E·liʹjah now said to the prophets of Baʹal: “Choose one young bull and prepare it first, because you are the majority. Then call on the name of your god, but you must not put fire to it.”
So they took the young bull that was given to them, prepared it, and kept calling on the name of Baʹal from morning until noon, saying: “O Baʹal, answer us!” But there was no voice and no one answering. They kept limping around the altar that they had made.
About noon E·liʹjah began to mock them and say: “Call out at the top of your voice! After all, he is a god! Perhaps he is deep in thought or he has gone to relieve himself. Or maybe he is asleep and someone needs to wake him up!”
They were calling out at the top of their voice and cutting themselves with daggers and lances, according to their custom, until their blood gushed out all over them.
Noon was past and they continued in a frenzy until the time the evening grain offering is presented, but there was no voice and no one answering; no one was paying attention.
At length E·liʹjah said to all the people: “Approach me.” So all the people approached him. Then he repaired the altar of Jehovah that had been torn down.
E·liʹjah then took 12 stones, corresponding to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom Jehovah’s word had come, saying: “Israel will be your name.”
With the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah. Then he made a trench all around the altar, an area large enough to sow with two seah measures of seed.
After that he put the pieces of wood in order, cut the young bull into pieces, and placed it on the wood. He now said: “Fill four large jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and on the pieces of wood.”
Then he said: “Do it again.” So they did it again. Once more he said: “Do it a third time.” So they did it a third time.
And the water ran all around the altar, and he also filled the trench with water.
About the time when the evening grain offering is presented, E·liʹjah the prophet stepped forward and said: “O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, today let it be known that you are God in Israel and that I am your servant and that it is by your word that I have done all these things.
Answer me, O Jehovah! Answer me so that this people may know that you, Jehovah, are the true God and that you are turning their hearts back to you.”
At that the fire of Jehovah fell from above and consumed the burnt offering, the pieces of wood, the stones, and the dust, and it licked up the water from the trench.
When all the people saw it, they immediately fell facedown and said: “Jehovah is the true God! Jehovah is the true God!”
Then E·liʹjah said to them: “Seize the prophets of Baʹal! Do not let a single one of them escape!” At once they seized them, and E·liʹjah brought them down to the stream of Kiʹshon and slaughtered them there.
E·liʹjah now said to Aʹhab: “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of a heavy downpour.”
So Aʹhab went up to eat and drink, while E·liʹjah went up to the top of Carʹmel and crouched on the ground, keeping his face between his knees.
Then he said to his attendant: “Go up, please, and look toward the sea.” So he went up and looked and said: “There is nothing at all.” Seven times E·liʹjah said, “Go back.”
The seventh time his attendant said: “Look! There is a small cloud like a man’s hand ascending out of the sea.” He now said: “Go, say to Aʹhab, ‘Hitch up the chariot! Go down so that the downpour may not detain you!’”
Meanwhile, the sky grew dark with clouds, the wind blew, and a heavy downpour fell; and Aʹhab kept riding and made his way to Jezʹre·el.
But the hand of Jehovah came on E·liʹjah, and he wrapped his garment around his hips and ran ahead of Aʹhab all the way to Jezʹre·el.
In the 480th year after the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year after Solʹo·mon became king over Israel, in the month of Ziv (that is, the second month), he began to build the house of Jehovah.
The house that King Solʹo·mon built for Jehovah was 60 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high.
The porch in front of the temple was 20 cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house. Its depth was ten cubits from the front of the house.
He made windows of narrowing frames for the house.
Further, he built a side structure against the wall of the house; it went around the walls of the house, those of the temple and the innermost room, and he made side chambers all around.
The lowest level of the side chambers was five cubits wide, the middle level was six cubits wide, and the third level was seven cubits wide, for he made offsets all around the house, so that nothing was attached to the walls of the house.
The house was built with quarry stone that had already been prepared, so that no hammers or axes or any iron tools were heard in the house while it was being built.
The entrance of the lowest side chamber was on the south side of the house, and a winding staircase led up to the middle floor, and from the middle floor up to the third floor.
He continued building the house and finished it and covered the house with cedar beams and rows of cedar planks.
He built the side chambers all around the house, each five cubits high, and they were joined to the house by cedar timbers.
Meanwhile, the word of Jehovah came to Solʹo·mon, saying:
“As for this house that you are building, if you walk in my statutes and carry out my judgments and observe all my commandments by walking in them, I will also carry out with you my promise that I made to David your father,
and I will reside in the midst of the Israelites, and I will not forsake my people Israel.”
Solʹo·mon continued building the house to finish it.
He built the inside walls of the house with cedar boards. He paneled the inside walls with timber, from the floor of the house up to the rafters of the ceiling, and he overlaid the floor of the house with juniper boards.
And he built a section of 20 cubits at the rear of the house with cedar boards, from the floor up to the rafters, and he built inside of it the innermost room, the Most Holy.
And the temple—the part of the house in front of it—was 40 cubits.
The cedar inside the house was carved with gourds and flowers in bloom. All of it was cedar; no stone was seen.
And he prepared the innermost room inside the house to put there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
The innermost room was 20 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 20 cubits high; and he overlaid it with pure gold; he overlaid the altar with cedar.
Solʹo·mon overlaid the interior of the house with pure gold, and he stretched gold chains in front of the innermost room, which was overlaid with gold.
He overlaid the whole house with gold until all the house was completed; he also overlaid with gold the entire altar near the innermost room.
In the innermost room he made two cherubs of pinewood, each ten cubits high.
One wing of the cherub measured five cubits, and the other wing was five cubits. From the tip of one wing to the tip of the other wing was ten cubits.
The second cherub was also ten cubits. The two cherubs had the same size and shape.
The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, as was that of the other cherub.
Then he put the cherubs inside the inner house. The wings of the cherubs were extended so that the wing of the one cherub reached to one wall and the wing of the other cherub reached to the other wall, and their wings extended toward the middle of the house, so that the wings touched.
And he overlaid the cherubs with gold.
And on all the walls of the house all around both the inner and outer rooms, he carved figures of cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom.
He overlaid the floor of the house with gold in the inner and outer rooms.
And for the entrance of the innermost room he made doors of pinewood, side pillars, and doorposts, as a fifth part.
The two doors were of pinewood, and he carved on them cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom, and he overlaid them with gold; and he hammered the gold down over the cherubs and the palm trees.
For the entrance of the temple, that was how he made the doorposts of pinewood, belonging to a fourth part.
And he made two doors of juniper wood. The one door had two leaves that turned on pivots, and the other door had two leaves that turned on pivots.
He carved cherubs, palm trees, and flowers in bloom, and overlaid gold foil on the carvings.
He built the inner courtyard with three rows of hewn stone and a row of cedar beams.
In the 4th year, in the month of Ziv, the house of Jehovah had its foundation laid;
and in the 11th year, in the month of Bul (that is, the eighth month), the house was finished in all its details and according to its plan. So he spent seven years building it.
At that time Solʹo·mon congregated the elders of Israel, all the heads of the tribes, the chieftains of the paternal houses of Israel. They came to King Solʹo·mon at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the City of David, that is, Zion.
All the men of Israel assembled before King Solʹo·mon at the festival in the month of Ethʹa·nim, that is, the seventh month.
So all the elders of Israel came, and the priests lifted up the Ark.
They brought up the Ark of Jehovah, the tent of meeting, and all the holy utensils that were in the tent. The priests and the Levites brought them up.
King Solʹo·mon and the entire assembly of Israel, who had been summoned to meet with him, were before the Ark. So many sheep and cattle were being sacrificed that they could not be counted or numbered.
Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the innermost room of the house, the Most Holy, underneath the wings of the cherubs.
Thus the wings of the cherubs were spread out over the place of the Ark, so that the cherubs overshadowed the Ark and its poles.
The poles were so long that the tips of the poles were visible from the Holy in front of the innermost room, but they were not visible from outside. And they are there to this day.
There was nothing in the Ark but the two stone tablets that Moses placed there at Hoʹreb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the people of Israel while they were coming out of the land of Egypt.
When the priests came out from the holy place, the cloud filled the house of Jehovah.
The priests were not able to stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah.
At that time Solʹo·mon said: “Jehovah said he would reside in the thick gloom.
I have successfully built a lofty house for you, an established place for you to dwell in forever.”
Then the king turned around and began to bless all the congregation of Israel while all the congregation of Israel stood.
He said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, the one who by his own mouth promised my father David, and by his own hand has given fulfillment, saying,
‘From the day I brought my people Israel out of Egypt, I have not chosen a city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name to remain there, but I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’
And it was the heart’s desire of my father David to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.
But Jehovah said to my father David, ‘It was your heart’s desire to build a house for my name, and you did well to desire this in your heart.
However, you will not build the house, but your own son who is to be born to you is the one who will build the house for my name.’
Jehovah has carried out the promise that he made, for I have succeeded my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as Jehovah promised. I have also built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel
and have set up a place there for the Ark containing the covenant that Jehovah made with our forefathers when he was bringing them out of the land of Egypt.”
Then Solʹo·mon stood before the altar of Jehovah in front of all the congregation of Israel, and he spread his hands out to the heavens,
and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens above or on the earth beneath, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart.
You have kept the promise that you made to your servant David my father. You made the promise with your own mouth, and this day you have fulfilled it with your own hand.
And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant David my father when you said: ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons will pay attention to their way by walking before me, just as you have walked before me.’
And now, O God of Israel, let the promise that you made to your servant David my father prove trustworthy, please.
“But will God really dwell on the earth? Look! The heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, cannot contain you; how much less, then, this house that I have built!
Now pay attention to the prayer of your servant and to his request for favor, O Jehovah my God, and listen to the cry for help and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you today.
May your eyes be open toward this house night and day, toward the place of which you said, ‘My name will be there,’ to listen to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place.
And listen to your servant’s request for favor and to the request by your people Israel that they pray toward this place, and may you hear from your dwelling place in the heavens; yes, may you hear and forgive.
“When a man sins against his fellow man and is made to take an oath and is brought under liability to the oath, and while under the oath he comes before your altar in this house,
may you then hear from the heavens and act and judge your servants by pronouncing the wicked one guilty and bringing what he did on his own head, and by pronouncing the righteous one innocent and rewarding him according to his own righteousness.
“When your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they kept sinning against you, and they return to you and glorify your name and pray and beg you for favor in this house,
may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to their forefathers.
“When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they kept sinning against you, and they pray toward this place and glorify your name and turn back from their sin because you humbled them,
may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your servants, of your people Israel, for you will instruct them about the good way in which they should walk; and bring rain on your land that you gave to your people as an inheritance.
“If a famine occurs in the land, or a pestilence, a scorching blight, mildew, swarming locusts, or voracious locusts; or if their enemy besieges them in any of the cities of the land or if any other sort of plague or disease occurs,
whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel (for each one knows the plague of his own heart) when they spread out their hands toward this house,
then may you hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, and may you forgive and take action; and reward each one according to all his ways, for you know his heart (you alone truly know every human heart),
so that they may fear you all the days they live on the land that you gave to our forefathers.
“Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your name
(for they will hear about your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm), and he comes and prays toward this house,
may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.
“If your people go to war against their enemy in the way that you send them, and they pray to Jehovah in the direction of the city that you have chosen and toward the house that I have built for your name,
then hear from the heavens their prayer and their request for favor and execute judgment for them.
“If they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin), and you are furious with them and you abandon them to an enemy, and their captors carry them off captive to the land of the enemy, far or near;
and they come to their senses in the land where they were carried off captive, and they return to you and beg you for favor in the land of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’
and they return to you with all their heart and all their soul in the land of their enemies who carried them off captive, and they pray to you in the direction of their land that you gave to their forefathers and of the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name,
then hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, their prayer and their request for favor, and execute judgment for them
and forgive your people who have sinned against you, forgiving all their transgressions they committed against you. You will make them objects of pity before their captors, and they will pity them
(for they are your people and your inheritance, whom you brought out of Egypt, from inside the iron-smelting furnace).
May your eyes be opened to your servant’s request for favor and to the request for favor by your people Israel by listening whenever they call to you.
For you set them apart as your inheritance out of all the peoples of the earth, just as you declared through Moses your servant when you were bringing our forefathers out of Egypt, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And as soon as Solʹo·mon finished offering to Jehovah this entire prayer and request for favor, he rose up from before the altar of Jehovah, where he had been kneeling with his hands spread out to the heavens.
He then stood and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying:
“Praised be Jehovah, who has given a resting-place to his people Israel, just as he promised. Not one word of all his good promise that he made through Moses his servant has failed.
May Jehovah our God be with us just as he was with our forefathers. May he not abandon us nor forsake us.
May he draw our heart toward himself, to walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments, his regulations, and his judgments, which he commanded our forefathers to observe.
And may these words of mine with which I have begged Jehovah for favor be near to Jehovah our God by day and night, that he may execute judgment for his servant and for his people Israel as each day requires,
so that all the peoples of the earth may know that Jehovah is the true God. There is no other!
So let your heart be complete with Jehovah our God by walking in his regulations and by keeping his commandments as on this day.”
Now the king and all Israel with him offered a grand sacrifice before Jehovah.
Solʹo·mon offered the communion sacrifices to Jehovah: He offered 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Thus the king and all the Israelites inaugurated the house of Jehovah.
On that day the king had to sanctify the middle of the courtyard that is before the house of Jehovah, for there he had to offer up the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices, because the copper altar that is before Jehovah was too small to contain the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices.
At that time Solʹo·mon held the festival together with all Israel, a great congregation from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of Egypt, before Jehovah our God for 7 days and then another 7 days, 14 days in all.
On the following day, he sent the people away, and they blessed the king and went to their homes rejoicing and feeling glad of heart over all the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David his servant and Israel his people.
In the 12th year of King Aʹhaz of Judah, Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a; he ruled for nine years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, only not to the extent of the kings of Israel prior to him.
King Shal·man·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a came up against him, and Ho·sheʹa became his servant and began to pay tribute to him.
However, the king of As·syrʹi·a learned that Ho·sheʹa was involved in a conspiracy, for he had sent messengers to King So of Egypt and did not bring the tribute up to the king of As·syrʹi·a as in former years. Therefore, the king of As·syrʹi·a kept him confined and bound in prison.
The king of As·syrʹi·a invaded the entire land, and he came to Sa·marʹi·a and laid siege to it for three years.
In the ninth year of Ho·sheʹa, the king of As·syrʹi·a captured Sa·marʹi·a. He then led the people of Israel into exile in As·syrʹi·a and made them dwell in Haʹlah and in Haʹbor at the river Goʹzan and in the cities of the Medes.
This happened because the people of Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God, who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the control of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. They worshipped other gods,
they followed the customs of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites, and they followed the customs that the kings of Israel had established.
The Israelites were pursuing the things that were not right according to Jehovah their God. They kept building high places in all their cities, from watchtower to fortified city.
They kept setting up for themselves sacred pillars and sacred poles on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree;
and on all the high places they would make sacrificial smoke just as the nations did that Jehovah had driven into exile from before them. They kept doing wicked things to offend Jehovah.
They continued to serve disgusting idols, about which Jehovah had told them: “You must not do this!”
Jehovah kept warning Israel and Judah through all his prophets and every visionary, saying: “Turn back from your wicked ways! Keep my commandments and my statutes according to all the law that I commanded your forefathers and that I sent to you through my servants the prophets.”
But they did not listen, and they remained just as stubborn as their forefathers who had not shown faith in Jehovah their God.
They continued rejecting his regulations and his covenant that he had made with their forefathers and his reminders that he had given to warn them, and they kept following worthless idols and became worthless themselves, imitating the nations all around them that Jehovah had commanded them not to imitate.
They kept leaving all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and they made metal statues of two calves and a sacred pole, and they bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served Baʹal.
They also made their sons and their daughters pass through the fire, they practiced divination and looked for omens, and they kept devoting themselves to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah, to offend him.
So Jehovah was very angry with Israel, so that he removed them from his sight. He did not let any remain but the tribe of Judah alone.
Even Judah did not keep the commandments of Jehovah their God; they also walked in the customs that Israel followed.
Jehovah rejected all the descendants of Israel and humiliated them and gave them into the hand of plunderers, until he had cast them away from before him.
He ripped Israel away from the house of David, and they made Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat king. But Jer·o·boʹam caused Israel to stray from following Jehovah, and he caused them to commit a great sin.
And the people of Israel kept walking in all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had committed. They did not depart from them
until Jehovah removed Israel from his sight, just as he had declared through all his servants the prophets. So Israel was taken into exile from its land to As·syrʹi·a, where they remain to this day.
The king of As·syrʹi·a then brought people from Babylon, Cuʹthah, Avʹva, Haʹmath, and Seph·ar·vaʹim and settled them in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a in place of the Israelites; they took possession of Sa·marʹi·a and lived in its cities.
When they first began dwelling there, they did not fear Jehovah. So Jehovah sent lions among them, and they killed some of the people.
It was reported to the king of As·syrʹi·a: “The nations that you have taken into exile and resettled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a do not know the religion of the God of the land. So he keeps sending lions among them, which are putting them to death, because none of them know the religion of the God of the land.”
At that the king of As·syrʹi·a commanded: “Have one of the priests whom you took into exile from there return to live there and to teach them the religion of the God of the land.”
So one of the priests whom they had taken into exile from Sa·marʹi·a came back to live in Bethʹel, and he began to teach them how they should fear Jehovah.
However, each different nation made their own god, which they placed in the houses of worship on the high places that the Sa·marʹi·tans had made; each different nation did so in their cities where they were living.
So the men of Babylon made Sucʹcoth-beʹnoth, the men of Cuth made Nerʹgal, the men of Haʹmath made A·shiʹma,
and the Avʹvites made Nibʹhaz and Tarʹtak. The Seʹphar·vites would burn their sons in the fire to A·dramʹme·lech and A·namʹme·lech, the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim.
Although they feared Jehovah, they appointed priests for the high places from the people in general, and these officiated for them at the houses of worship on the high places.
Thus, they feared Jehovah, but they worshipped their own gods according to the religion of the nations from which they had been deported.
To this day they follow their former religions. None of them worship Jehovah, and none follow his statutes, his judgments, the Law, and the commandment that Jehovah gave the sons of Jacob, whose name he changed to Israel.
When Jehovah made a covenant with them, he commanded them: “You must not fear other gods, and you must not bow down to them or serve them or sacrifice to them.
But Jehovah, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm, is the One you should fear, and to him you should bow down, and to him you should sacrifice.
And the regulations, the judgments, the Law, and the commandment that he wrote for you, you should always follow carefully, and you must not fear other gods.
And you must not forget the covenant that I made with you, and you must not fear other gods.
But it is Jehovah your God whom you should fear, as he is the one who will rescue you out of the hand of all your enemies.”
But they did not obey, and they followed their former religion.
So these nations came to fear Jehovah, but they were also serving their own graven images. Both their sons and their grandsons have done just as their forefathers did, down to this day.
As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah.
Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz.
They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth.
Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear all the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”
So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah,
and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me.
Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah.
Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “Here he has come out to fight against you.” So he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying:
“This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued?
Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar?
Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”
Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah.
And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray before Jehovah and say: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God.
It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated the nations and their lands.
And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them.
But now, O Jehovah our God, please save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”
Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I have heard your prayer to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a.
This is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him: “The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you. The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.
Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voiceAnd lifted your arrogant eyes? It is against the Holy One of Israel!
Through your messengers you have taunted Jehovah and said,‘With the multitude of my war chariotsI will ascend the heights of mountains,The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non. I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees. I will enter its farthest retreats, its densest forests.
I will dig wells and drink foreign waters;I will dry up all the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’
Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined. From days gone by I have prepared it. Now I will bring it about. You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.
Their inhabitants will be helpless;They will be terrified and put to shame. They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass,As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.
But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in,And when you are enraged against me,
Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears. So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips,And I will lead you back the way you came.”
“‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward.
For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
“‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a: “He will not come into this cityOr shoot an arrow thereOr confront it with a shieldOr cast up a siege rampart against it.
By the way he came he will return;He will not come into this city,” declares Jehovah.
“I will defend this city and save it for my own sakeAnd for the sake of my servant David.”’”
On that very night the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there.
And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
Now when Ath·a·liʹah, A·ha·ziʹah’s mother, saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed the entire royal line.
However, Je·hoshʹe·ba the daughter of King Je·hoʹram, A·ha·ziʹah’s sister, took Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were to be put to death, keeping him and his nurse in an inner bedroom. They managed to keep him concealed from Ath·a·liʹah, so he was not put to death.
He remained with her for six years, hidden at the house of Jehovah, while Ath·a·liʹah was ruling over the land.
In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da sent for the chiefs of hundreds of the Caʹri·an bodyguard and of the palace guards and had them come to him at the house of Jehovah. He made a pact with them and had them swear to it at the house of Jehovah, and then he showed them the son of the king.
He ordered them: “This is what you are to do: One third of you will be on duty on the Sabbath and will keep strict watch over the king’s house,
another third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and another third will be at the gate behind the palace guards. You will take turns watching over the house.
Your two divisions that are supposed to be off duty on the Sabbath must keep strict watch over the house of Jehovah to protect the king.
You must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering within the ranks will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”
The chiefs of hundreds did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, and they came in to Je·hoiʹa·da the priest.
The priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of Jehovah.
And the palace guards took their positions, each with his weapons in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king.
Then Je·hoiʹa·da brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony, and they made him king and anointed him. They began to clap their hands and say: “Long live the king!”
When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah.
Then she saw the king standing there by the pillar according to the custom. The chiefs and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!”
But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest commanded the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.”
So they seized her, and when she reached the place where the horses enter the king’s house, she was put to death there.
Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah, and he also made a covenant between the king and the people.
After that all the people of the land came to the house of Baʹal and tore down his altars, completely smashed his images, and killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars. Then the priest appointed overseers over the house of Jehovah.
Further, he took the chiefs of hundreds, the Caʹri·an bodyguard, the palace guards, and all the people of the land to escort the king down from the house of Jehovah, and they came to the king’s house by the way of the gate of the palace guard. He then sat on the throne of the kings.
So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword at the king’s house.
Je·hoʹash was seven years old when he became king.
After the death of Aʹhab, Moʹab revolted against Israel.
It was then that A·ha·ziʹah fell down through the grating in his roof chamber in Sa·marʹi·a and was injured. So he sent messengers and said to them: “Go, inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron to find out whether I will recover from this injury.”
But the angel of Jehovah said to E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite: “Rise up, go to meet the messengers of the king of Sa·marʹi·a and say to them, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron?
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “You will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.”’” With that E·liʹjah went off.
When the messengers returned to him, he immediately said to them: “Why have you come back?”
They replied to him: “There was a man who came up to meet us, and he said to us, ‘Go, return to the king who sent you and tell him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron? Therefore, you will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.’”’”
At this he asked them: “What did the man look like who came up to meet you and spoke these words to you?”
So they said to him: “He was a man with a garment of hair and a leather belt around his waist.” Immediately he said: “It was E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite.”
The king then sent to him a chief of 50 with his 50 men. When he went up to him, he was sitting on the top of the mountain. He said to him: “Man of the true God, the king says, ‘Come down.’”
But E·liʹjah answered the chief of the 50: “Well, if I am a man of God, let fire come down from the heavens and consume you and your 50 men.” And fire came down from the heavens and consumed him and his 50 men.
So the king sent again to him another chief of 50 with his 50 men. He went and said to him: “Man of the true God, this is what the king says, ‘Come down quickly.’”
But E·liʹjah answered them: “If I am a man of the true God, let fire come down from the heavens and consume you and your 50 men.” And fire of God came down from the heavens and consumed him and his 50 men.
Then the king sent again a third chief of 50 and his 50 men. But the third chief of 50 went up and bowed down on his knees in front of E·liʹjah and began to beg for favor and say to him: “Man of the true God, please, let my life and the lives of these 50 servants of yours be precious in your eyes.
Fire has already come down from the heavens and consumed the two former chiefs of 50 and their groups of 50, but now let my life be precious in your eyes.”
At that the angel of Jehovah told E·liʹjah: “Go down with him. Do not be afraid of him.” So he rose and went down with him to the king.
E·liʹjah then said to the king, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘You sent messengers to inquire of Baʹal-zeʹbub the god of Ekʹron. Is it because there is no God in Israel? Why did you not inquire of his word? Therefore, you will not leave the bed on which you are lying, for you will certainly die.’”
So he died, according to the word of Jehovah that E·liʹjah had spoken; and because he did not have a son, Je·hoʹram became king in his place, in the second year of Je·hoʹram the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah.
As for the rest of the history of A·ha·ziʹah, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
E·liʹsha now said, “Listen to the word of Jehovah. This is what Jehovah says: ‘Tomorrow about this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel.’”
At that the adjutant whom the king relied on said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could this possibly take place?” To that he said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.”
There were four lepers at the entrance of the city gate, and they said to one another: “Why are we sitting here until we die?
If we say, ‘Let us go into the city,’ while the famine is in the city, we would die there. And if we sit here, we will die anyway. So now let us go over to the camp of the Syrians. If they spare our lives, we will live, but if they put us to death, then we will die.”
They then got up in the evening darkness and entered the camp of the Syrians. When they reached the outskirts of the Syrian camp, there was nobody there.
For Jehovah had caused the Syrian camp to hear the sound of war chariots and horses, the sound of a huge army. So they said to one another: “Look! The king of Israel has hired the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Egypt to come against us!”
They immediately got up and fled in the evening darkness, leaving their tents, horses, donkeys, and the whole camp just as it was, and they fled for their lives.
When these lepers reached the outskirts of the camp, they entered into one of the tents and began to eat and drink. They carried away from there silver, gold, and garments and went and hid them. Then they returned and entered another tent and carried things away from there and went and hid them.
Finally they said to one another: “What we are doing is not right. This day is a day of good news! If we hesitate and wait until dawn, we will deserve to be punished. Let us now go and report this at the king’s house.”
So they went and called out to the gatekeepers of the city and reported to them: “We went into the camp of the Syrians, but nobody was there—we did not hear anyone at all. There were only the horses and donkeys tied and the tents left just as they were.”
At once the gatekeepers called out, and it was reported inside the king’s house.
Immediately the king got up by night and said to his servants: “Please let me tell you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry, so they left the camp to hide in the field, saying, ‘They will come out of the city, and we will catch them alive and enter into the city.’”
Then one of his servants said: “Please, let some men take five of the remaining horses that are in the city. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that remain here. Look! They will end up the same as all the crowd of Israel that perished. Let us then send them out and see.”
So they took two chariots with horses, and the king sent them out to the camp of the Syrians, saying: “Go and see.”
They followed them as far as the Jordan, and the entire way was covered with garments and utensils that the Syrians had thrown away as they fled in panic. The messengers returned and reported it to the king.
The people then went out and plundered the camp of the Syrians, so that a seah measure of fine flour came to be worth a shekel, and two seah measures of barley came to be worth a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.
The king had appointed the adjutant whom he relied on to be in charge of the gate, but the people trampled him to death at the gate, just as the man of the true God had told the king when he came down to him.
It happened just as the man of the true God had said to the king: “Two seah measures of barley will be worth a shekel, and a seah measure of fine flour will be worth a shekel tomorrow at this time at the gate of Sa·marʹi·a.”
But the adjutant had said to the man of the true God: “Even if Jehovah should open floodgates in the heavens, could such a thing take place?” To this E·liʹsha had said: “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat from it.”
That is exactly what happened to him, because the people trampled him to death at the gate.
In the ninth year of Zed·e·kiʹah’s reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem. He camped against it and built a siege wall all around it,
and the city was under siege until the 11th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah.
On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine was severe in the city, and there was no food for the people of the land.
The city wall was broken through, and all the soldiers fled by night through the gate between the double wall near the king’s garden, while the Chal·deʹans were surrounding the city; and the king went by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
But the Chal·deʹan army pursued the king, and they overtook him in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho, and all his troops were scattered from his side.
Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah, and they passed sentence on him.
They slaughtered Zed·e·kiʹah’s sons before his eyes; then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar blinded Zed·e·kiʹah’s eyes, bound him with copper fetters, and brought him to Babylon.
In the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, that is, in the 19th year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, the servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem.
He burned down the house of Jehovah, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; he also burned down the house of every prominent man.
And the walls surrounding Jerusalem were pulled down by the entire Chal·deʹan army that was with the chief of the guard.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had gone over to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the population.
But the chief of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to serve as vinedressers and as compulsory laborers.
And the Chal·deʹans broke into pieces the copper pillars of the house of Jehovah and the carriages and the copper Sea that were in the house of Jehovah, and they carried the copper away to Babylon.
They also took the cans, the shovels, the extinguishers, the cups, and all the copper utensils used in the temple service.
The chief of the guard took the fire holders and the bowls that were of genuine gold and silver.
As for the two pillars, the Sea, and the carriages that Solʹo·mon had made for the house of Jehovah, the copper of all these articles was beyond weighing.
Each pillar was 18 cubits high, and the capital on it was of copper; and the height of the capital was three cubits, and the network and pomegranates all around on the capital were all made of copper. The second pillar with its network was like it.
The chief of the guard also took Se·raiʹah the chief priest, Zeph·a·niʹah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers.
And he took from the city one court official who was the commissioner over the soldiers, five close associates of the king who were found in the city, as well as the secretary of the chief of the army, the one mustering the people of the land, and 60 men of the common people of the land who were yet found in the city.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah.
The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath. Thus Judah went into exile from its land.
King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan over the people whom he had left behind in the land of Judah.
When all the army chiefs and their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah, they immediately came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men.
Ged·a·liʹah swore an oath to them and their men and said to them: “Do not be afraid of being servants to the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.”
And in the seventh month, Ishʹma·el son of Neth·a·niʹah son of E·lishʹa·ma, who was of the royal line, came with ten other men, and they struck down Ged·a·liʹah and he died, along with the Jews and the Chal·deʹans who were with him in Mizʹpah.
After that all the people, from small to great, including the army chiefs, rose up and went to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chal·deʹans.
And in the 37th year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah, in the 12th month, on the 27th day of the month, King Eʹvil-merʹo·dach of Babylon, in the year he became king, released King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah from prison.
He spoke kindly with him and put his throne higher than the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
So Je·hoiʹa·chin took off his prison garments, and he regularly ate before him all the days of his life.
A regular allowance of food was given him from the king, day after day, all the days of his life.
In the 23rd year of Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah the king of Judah, Je·hoʹa·haz the son of Jeʹhu became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 17 years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and he persisted in the sin that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. He did not turn away from it.
So Jehovah’s anger grew hot against Israel, and he gave them into the hand of King Hazʹa·el of Syria and into the hand of Ben-haʹdad the son of Hazʹa·el all their days.
In time Je·hoʹa·haz begged for the favor of Jehovah, and Jehovah listened to him, for he had seen the oppression the king of Syria had inflicted on Israel.
So Jehovah provided Israel with a savior to free them from Syria’s grip, and the Israelites were able to dwell in their homes as before.
(However, they did not depart from the sin of the house of Jer·o·boʹam that he had caused Israel to commit. They continued in this sin, and the sacred pole continued to stand in Sa·marʹi·a.)
Je·hoʹa·haz was left with an army of only 50 horsemen, 10 chariots, and 10,000 foot soldiers, because the king of Syria had destroyed them, trampling them like the dust at threshing time.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹa·haz, all that he did and his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Je·hoʹa·haz was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Je·hoʹash became king in his place.
In the 37th year of King Je·hoʹash of Judah, Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 16 years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, not departing from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had made Israel commit. He continued in these sins.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, all that he did and his mightiness and how he fought against King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Je·hoʹash was laid to rest with his forefathers, and Jer·o·boʹam sat on his throne. And Je·hoʹash was buried in Sa·marʹi·a with the kings of Israel.
Now when E·liʹsha became ill with the sickness from which he eventually died, Je·hoʹash the king of Israel came down to him and wept over him, saying: “My father, my father! The chariot of Israel and his horsemen!”
E·liʹsha then said to him: “Take a bow and arrows.” So he took a bow and arrows.
Then he said to the king of Israel: “Put your hand to the bow.” So he put his hand to it, after which E·liʹsha laid his hands on the king’s hands.
Then he said: “Open the window toward the east.” So he opened it. E·liʹsha said: “Shoot!” So he shot. He now said: “Jehovah’s arrow of victory, the arrow of victory over Syria! You will strike down Syria at Aʹphek until you finish it off.”
He continued: “Take the arrows,” and he took them. Then he said to the king of Israel: “Strike the ground.” So he struck the ground three times and stopped.
At that the man of the true God grew indignant at him and said: “You should have struck the ground five or six times! Then you would have struck down Syria until you finished it off, but now you will strike down Syria only three times.”
After that E·liʹsha died and was buried. There were Moʹab·ite marauder bands that would come into the land at the beginning of the year.
As some men were burying a man, they saw the marauder band, so they quickly threw the man into E·liʹsha’s burial place and ran off. When the man touched the bones of E·liʹsha, he came to life and stood on his feet.
Now King Hazʹa·el of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Je·hoʹa·haz.
However, Jehovah extended favor and mercy to them and showed his concern for them for the sake of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He did not want to bring them to ruin, and he has not cast them away from his presence to this day.
When King Hazʹa·el of Syria died, his son Ben-haʹdad became king in his place.
Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz then took back from Ben-haʹdad the son of Hazʹa·el the cities that he had taken in war from Je·hoʹa·haz his father. Three times Je·hoʹash struck him down, and he recovered the cities of Israel.
Ma·nasʹseh was 12 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 55 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hephʹzi·bah.
He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the people of Israel.
He rebuilt the high places that his father Hez·e·kiʹah had destroyed, and he set up altars to Baʹal and made a sacred pole, just as Aʹhab the king of Israel had done. And he bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served them.
He also built altars in the house of Jehovah, about which Jehovah had said: “In Jerusalem, I will put my name.”
And he built altars to all the army of the heavens in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah.
And he made his own son pass through the fire; he practiced magic, looked for omens, and appointed spirit mediums and fortune-tellers. He did on a grand scale what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, to offend him.
He put the carved image of the sacred pole that he made into the house about which Jehovah had said to David and to his son Solʹo·mon: “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will permanently put my name.
And I will never again make the feet of Israel wander from the land that I gave to their forefathers, provided they carefully observe all that I have commanded them, the entire Law that my servant Moses ordered them to follow.”
But they did not obey, and Ma·nasʹseh kept leading them astray, causing them to do greater evil than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated from before the Israelites.
Jehovah kept speaking through his servants the prophets, saying:
“Ma·nasʹseh the king of Judah has done all these detestable things; he has acted more wickedly than all the Amʹor·ites before him, and he has made Judah sin with his disgusting idols.
Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Here I am bringing such a disaster on Jerusalem and Judah that it will make both ears of anyone who hears about it tingle.
And I will stretch out on Jerusalem the measuring line applied to Sa·marʹi·a and use the leveling tool applied to the house of Aʹhab, and I will wipe Jerusalem clean, just as one wipes a bowl clean, wiping it and turning it upside down.
I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance and give them into the hand of their enemies, and they will become plunder and spoil to all their enemies,
because they did what was bad in my eyes and were continually offending me from the day that their forefathers came out of Egypt to this day.’”
Ma·nasʹseh also shed innocent blood in very great quantity until he had filled Jerusalem from one end to the other, besides his sin of causing Judah to sin by doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah.
As for the rest of the history of Ma·nasʹseh and all that he did and the sins that he committed, are they not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Ma·nasʹseh was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzʹza; and his son Aʹmon became king in his place.
Aʹmon was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Me·shulʹle·meth the daughter of Haʹruz from Jotʹbah.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Ma·nasʹseh had done.
He kept walking in all the ways that his father walked, and he continued serving and bowing down to the disgusting idols that his father had served.
So he abandoned Jehovah the God of his forefathers, and he did not walk in the way of Jehovah.
Eventually Aʹmon’s servants conspired against him and put the king to death in his own house.
But the people of the land struck down all those who conspired against King Aʹmon, and they made his son Jo·siʹah king in his place.
As for the rest of the history of Aʹmon, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
So they buried him in his grave in the garden of Uzʹza, and his son Jo·siʹah became king in his place.
Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a in the 18th year of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, and he reigned for 12 years.
He kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, but not to the extent of his father or his mother, for he removed the sacred pillar of Baʹal that his father had made.
However, he clung to the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit. He did not depart from them.
Now Meʹsha the king of Moʹab was a sheep raiser, and he used to pay 100,000 lambs and 100,000 unshorn rams as tribute to the king of Israel.
As soon as Aʹhab died, the king of Moʹab revolted against the king of Israel.
So King Je·hoʹram went out on that day from Sa·marʹi·a and mustered all Israel.
He also sent a message to King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, saying: “The king of Moʹab has revolted against me. Will you go with me to war against Moʹab?” To this he said: “I will go. I am the same as you. My people are the same as your people. My horses are the same as your horses.”
Then he asked: “By which way should we go up?” He replied: “By the way of the wilderness of Eʹdom.”
The king of Israel then set out with the king of Judah and the king of Eʹdom. After they journeyed roundabout for seven days, there was no water for the camp and for the domestic animals that were following behind them.
The king of Israel said: “How terrible! Jehovah has called these three kings, only to give them into the hand of Moʹab!”
At that Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “Is there no prophet of Jehovah here through whom we may inquire of Jehovah?” So one of the servants of the king of Israel answered: “There is E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat, who used to pour out water on the hands of E·liʹjah.”
Then Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The word of Jehovah is with him.” So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat and the king of Eʹdom went down to him.
E·liʹsha said to the king of Israel: “What do I have to do with you? Go to the prophets of your father and to the prophets of your mother.” But the king of Israel said to him: “No, for it is Jehovah who has called these three kings to give them into the hand of Moʹab.”
To this E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah of armies whom I serve is living, if I did not have regard for King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah, I would not look at you or take notice of you.
Now bring me a harpist.” As soon as the harpist started playing, the hand of Jehovah came on him.
He said, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Dig trench after trench in this valley,
for this is what Jehovah says: “You will not see wind, and you will not see rain; yet this valley will be filled with water, and you will drink from it, you, your livestock, and your other animals.”’
But this is a trivial thing in the eyes of Jehovah, for he will also give Moʹab into your hand.
You must strike down every fortified city and every choice city, you should cut down every good tree, you should stop up all the springs of water, and you should ruin every good plot of land with stones.”
And in the morning, at the time of the morning grain offering, water was suddenly coming from the direction of Eʹdom, and the land became filled with the water.
All the Moʹab·ites heard that the kings had come up to fight against them, so they called together all the men who could bear arms, and they stationed themselves at the border.
When they got up early in the morning, the sun was shining on the water, and to the Moʹab·ites on the opposite side, the water looked red like blood.
They said: “This is blood! The kings have surely slaughtered one another with the sword. So, then, to the spoil, O Moʹab!”
When they came into the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and began striking down the Moʹab·ites, who fled from them. They advanced into Moʹab, striking the Moʹab·ites down as they went.
They tore down the cities, and each man threw a stone into every good plot of land, filling it with stones; they stopped up every spring of water, and they cut down every good tree. Finally only the stone walls of Kir-harʹe·seth remained standing, and the slingers surrounded it and struck it down.
When the king of Moʹab saw that the battle was lost, he took with him 700 men armed with swords to break through to the king of Eʹdom; but they were not able to.
So he took his firstborn son who was going to reign in his place and offered him up as a burnt sacrifice on the wall. And there came to be great indignation against Israel, so they withdrew from against him and returned to their land.
E·liʹsha the prophet then called one of the sons of the prophets and said to him: “Wrap your garments around your waist, and quickly take this flask of oil with you and go to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
When you arrive there, look for Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi; go in and have him get up from among his brothers and take him into the innermost room.
Then take the flask of oil and pour it out on his head and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’ Then open the door and flee without delay.”
So the prophet’s attendant got on his way to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
When he arrived, the army chiefs were seated there. He said: “I have a message for you, O chief.” Jeʹhu asked: “For which one of us?” He said: “For you, O chief.”
So Jeʹhu got up and went into the house; the attendant poured the oil out on his head and said to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I anoint you as king over Jehovah’s people, over Israel.
You must strike down the house of Aʹhab your lord, and I will avenge the blood of my servants the prophets and of all the servants of Jehovah who died at the hands of Jezʹe·bel.
And the whole house of Aʹhab will perish; and I will annihilate from Aʹhab every male, including the helpless and weak in Israel.
And I will make the house of Aʹhab like the house of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat and like the house of Baʹa·sha the son of A·hiʹjah.
As for Jezʹe·bel, the dogs will eat her up in the plot of land at Jezʹre·el, and no one will bury her.’” With that he opened the door and fled.
When Jeʹhu went back to the servants of his lord, they asked him: “Is everything all right? Why did this crazy man come to you?” He answered them: “You know that sort of man and his sort of talk.”
But they said: “That is not true! Tell us, please.” Then he said: “This is what he said to me, and then he added, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I anoint you as king over Israel.”’”
At this each of them quickly took his garment and put it under him on the bare steps, and they blew the horn and said: “Jeʹhu has become king!”
Then Jeʹhu the son of Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of Nimʹshi conspired against Je·hoʹram. Je·hoʹram had been on guard at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, he with all Israel, because of King Hazʹa·el of Syria.
King Je·hoʹram later returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that the Syrians inflicted on him when he fought King Hazʹa·el of Syria. Jeʹhu now said: “If you agree, do not let anyone escape from the city to go and report this in Jezʹre·el.”
Then Jeʹhu mounted his chariot and went to Jezʹre·el, for Je·hoʹram was lying there wounded, and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah had gone down to see Je·hoʹram.
As the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezʹre·el, he saw the throng of Jeʹhu’s men approaching. At once he said: “I see a throng of men.” Je·hoʹram said: “Take a cavalryman and send him to meet them, and let him say, ‘Are you coming in peace?’”
So a horseman went to meet him and said: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!” The watchman then reported: “The messenger reached them, but he has not returned.”
So he sent out a second horseman, who said when he came to them: “This is what the king says, ‘Are you coming in peace?’” But Jeʹhu said: “What do you have to do with ‘peace’? Fall in behind me!”
The watchman then reported: “He reached them, but he has not returned, and the driving is like the driving of Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi, for he drives like a madman.”
Je·hoʹram said: “Hitch up!” So his war chariot was hitched up and King Je·hoʹram of Israel and King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah each went out in his own war chariot to meet Jeʹhu. They encountered him in the plot of land of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite.
As soon as Je·hoʹram saw Jeʹhu, he said: “Are you coming in peace, Jeʹhu?” But he said: “What peace could there be as long as there is the prostitution of Jezʹe·bel your mother and her many sorceries?”
At once Je·hoʹram turned his chariot to flee, and he said to A·ha·ziʹah: “We have been tricked, A·ha·ziʹah!”
Jeʹhu took his bow in hand and shot Je·hoʹram between the shoulders, and the arrow came out at his heart, and he collapsed in his war chariot.
He then said to Bidʹkar his adjutant: “Pick him up and throw him into the field of Naʹboth the Jezʹre·el·ite. Remember, you and I were riding together behind Aʹhab his father when Jehovah himself made this pronouncement against him:
‘“As surely as I saw the blood of Naʹboth and the blood of his sons yesterday,” declares Jehovah, “I will repay you in this very plot of land,” declares Jehovah.’ So now pick him up and throw him into the plot of land, according to the word of Jehovah.”
When King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah saw what was happening, he fled by way of the garden house. (Later Jeʹhu pursued him and said: “Strike him down also!” So they struck him down in the chariot on his way up to Gur, which is by Ibʹle·am. But he continued his flight to Me·gidʹdo and died there.
Then his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and they buried him in his grave with his forefathers in the City of David.
It was in the 11th year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab that A·ha·ziʹah had become king over Judah.)
When Jeʹhu came to Jezʹre·el, Jezʹe·bel heard of it. So she painted her eyes with black paint and adorned her head and looked down through the window.
As Jeʹhu came in through the gate, she said: “Did it go well with Zimʹri, the killer of his lord?”
Looking up to the window, he said: “Who is on my side? Who?” Immediately two or three court officials looked down at him.
He said: “Throw her down!” So they threw her down, and some of her blood splattered on the wall and on the horses, and he trampled her.
After that he went in and ate and drank. He then said: “Please, take care of this accursed woman and bury her. After all, she is the daughter of a king.”
But when they went to bury her, they did not find anything but her skull and her feet and the palms of her hands.
When they returned and told him, he said: “This fulfills the word of Jehovah that he spoke through his servant E·liʹjah the Tishʹbite, saying, ‘In the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, the dogs will eat the flesh of Jezʹe·bel.
And the dead body of Jezʹe·bel will become as manure on the surface of the field in the plot of land of Jezʹre·el, so that they may not say: “This is Jezʹe·bel.”’”
In Je·hoiʹa·kim’s days King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came against him, and Je·hoiʹa·kim became his servant for three years. However, he turned against him and rebelled.
Then Jehovah began to send against him marauder bands of Chal·deʹans, Syrians, Moʹab·ites, and Amʹmon·ites. He kept sending them against Judah to destroy it, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken through his servants the prophets.
Surely it was by the order of Jehovah that this happened to Judah, to remove them from his sight because of all the sins that Ma·nasʹseh had committed,
and also the innocent blood that he had shed, for he had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood and Jehovah was not willing to forgive.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoiʹa·kim, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Je·hoiʹa·kim was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Je·hoiʹa·chin became king in his place.
Never again did the king of Egypt venture out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken all that belonged to the king of Egypt, from the Wadi of Egypt up to the Eu·phraʹtes River.
Je·hoiʹa·chin was 18 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ne·hushʹta the daughter of El·naʹthan of Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his father had done.
During that time the servants of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the city came under siege.
King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to the city while his servants were laying siege to it.
King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, along with his mother, his servants, his princes, and his court officials; and the king of Babylon took him captive in the eighth year of his reign.
Then he took out from there all the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He cut into pieces all the gold utensils that Solʹo·mon the king of Israel had made in the temple of Jehovah, just as Jehovah had foretold.
He took into exile all Jerusalem, all the princes, all the mighty warriors, and every craftsman and metalworker—he took 10,000 into exile. No one was left behind except the poorest people of the land.
Thus he took Je·hoiʹa·chin into exile to Babylon; he also led away the king’s mother, the king’s wives, his court officials, and the foremost men of the land, taking them into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon.
The king of Babylon also took into exile to Babylon all the warriors, 7,000, as well as 1,000 craftsmen and metalworkers, all of them mighty men and trained for war.
The king of Babylon made Mat·ta·niʹah, Je·hoiʹa·chin’s uncle, king in his place and changed his name to Zed·e·kiʹah.
Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah from Libʹnah.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that Je·hoiʹa·kim had done.
It was because of Jehovah’s anger that these things took place in Jerusalem and in Judah, until he cast them out of his sight. And Zed·e·kiʹah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
When Jehovah was about to take E·liʹjah up to the heavens in a windstorm, E·liʹjah and E·liʹsha went out from Gilʹgal.
E·liʹjah said to E·liʹsha: “Stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to Bethʹel.” But E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethʹel.
Then the sons of the prophets in Bethʹel came out to E·liʹsha and said to him: “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking your master away from headship over you?” At this he said: “I already know it. Be silent.”
E·liʹjah now said to him: “E·liʹsha, stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to Jerʹi·cho.” But he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So they came to Jerʹi·cho.
Then the sons of the prophets who were in Jerʹi·cho approached E·liʹsha and said to him: “Do you know that today Jehovah is taking your master away from headship over you?” At this he said: “I already know it. Be silent.”
E·liʹjah now said to him: “Stay here, please, because Jehovah has sent me on to the Jordan.” But he said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you are living, I will not leave you.” So both of them went on.
And 50 of the sons of the prophets also went and stood watching from a distance while the two of them stood by the Jordan.
Then E·liʹjah took his official garment and rolled it up and struck the waters, and they were divided to the left and to the right, so that both of them went across on the dry ground.
As soon as they had gone across, E·liʹjah said to E·liʹsha: “Ask what you want me to do for you before I am taken from you.” So E·liʹsha said: “Please, may I receive a double portion of your spirit?”
He replied: “You have asked a difficult thing. If you see me when I am taken from you, it will happen for you that way; but if you do not, it will not happen.”
As they were walking along, speaking as they walked, suddenly a fiery chariot and fiery horses made a separation between the two of them, and E·liʹjah ascended to the heavens in the windstorm.
While E·liʹsha was watching, he was crying out: “My father, my father! The chariot of Israel and his horsemen!” When he could no longer see him, he took hold of his own garments and ripped them into two pieces.
After that he picked up the official garment of E·liʹjah that had fallen off him and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan.
Then he took the official garment of E·liʹjah that had fallen off him and struck the waters and said: “Where is Jehovah, the God of E·liʹjah?” When he struck the waters, they were divided to the left and to the right, so that E·liʹsha went across.
When the sons of the prophets at Jerʹi·cho saw him from a distance, they said: “The spirit of E·liʹjah has settled down on E·liʹsha.” So they went to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him.
They said to him: “Here are 50 capable men with your servants. Let them go, please, to look for your master. Perhaps the spirit of Jehovah has lifted him up and then thrown him on one of the mountains or in one of the valleys.” But he said: “Do not send them.”
However, they kept urging him until he was embarrassed, so he said: “Send them.” They sent the 50 men, who kept looking for three days but did not find him.
When they returned to him, he was staying in Jerʹi·cho. Then he said to them: “Did I not tell you not to go?”
In time the men of the city said to E·liʹsha: “My master can see that the city is well-situated; but the water is bad, and the land is barren.”
At that he said: “Bring me a small new bowl and put salt in it.” So they brought it to him.
Then he went out to the source of the water and threw salt into it and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘I have healed this water. No more will it cause death or barrenness.’”
And the water has been healed down to this day, according to the word spoken by E·liʹsha.
He went up from there to Bethʹel. As he was going along the way, some young boys came out from the city and began to jeer at him, and they kept saying to him: “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!”
Finally he turned around and looked at them and cursed them in the name of Jehovah. Then two she-bears came out of the forest and tore 42 of the children to pieces.
He kept going from there to Mount Carʹmel, and from there he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.
Now Aʹhab had 70 sons in Sa·marʹi·a. So Jeʹhu wrote letters and sent them to Sa·marʹi·a, to the princes of Jezʹre·el, the elders, and the guardians of Aʹhab’s children, saying:
“Now when this letter comes to you, the sons of your lord will be with you, as well as the war chariots, the horses, a fortified city, and weapons.
Select the best and most suitable of the sons of your lord and put him on the throne of his father. Then fight for the house of your lord.”
But they were overcome with fear and said: “Look! If two kings could not stand before him, how can we stand?”
So the overseer of the palace, the governor of the city, the elders, and the guardians sent this message to Jeʹhu: “We are your servants, and we will do everything that you tell us. We will not make anyone king. Do whatever seems good in your eyes.”
Then he wrote them a second letter, saying: “If you belong to me and are willing to obey me, bring the heads of the sons of your lord and come to me tomorrow at this time at Jezʹre·el.” Now the 70 sons of the king were with the distinguished men of the city who were raising them.
As soon as the letter came to them, they took the sons of the king and slaughtered them, 70 men, and they put their heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezʹre·el.
The messenger came in and told him: “They have brought the heads of the sons of the king.” So he said: “Put them in two heaps at the entrance of the city gate until morning.”
When he went out in the morning, he stood before all the people and said: “You are innocent. Yes, I conspired against my lord, and I killed him, but who struck down all of these?
Know, then, that not a single word of Jehovah’s that Jehovah has spoken against the house of Aʹhab will go unfulfilled, and Jehovah has done what he spoke through his servant E·liʹjah.”
Moreover, Jeʹhu struck down all who were left of the house of Aʹhab in Jezʹre·el, as well as all his distinguished men, his acquaintances, and his priests, until he had left him no survivor.
Then he got up and went on his way to Sa·marʹi·a. The binding house of the shepherds was on the way.
There Jeʹhu encountered the brothers of King A·ha·ziʹah of Judah, and he said to them, “Who are you?” They said: “We are the brothers of A·ha·ziʹah, and we are on our way down to ask if all is well with the sons of the king and the sons of the queen mother.”
Immediately he said: “Capture them alive!” So they captured them alive and slaughtered them at the cistern of the binding house, 42 men. He did not let a single one of them survive.
As he went from there, he encountered Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, who was coming to meet him. When he greeted him, he said to him: “Is your heart fully with me, just as my heart is with your heart?” Je·honʹa·dab replied: “It is.” “If so, give me your hand.” So he gave him his hand, and Jeʹhu pulled him up into the chariot with him.
Then he said: “Come along with me, and see my toleration of no rivalry toward Jehovah.” So they had him ride with him in his war chariot.
Then he came to Sa·marʹi·a, and he struck down all who were left over of Aʹhab’s house in Sa·marʹi·a until he had annihilated them, according to Jehovah’s word that he had spoken to E·liʹjah.
Further, Jeʹhu collected all the people together and said to them: “Aʹhab worshipped Baʹal a little, but Jeʹhu will worship him much more.
So summon all the prophets of Baʹal, all his worshippers, and all his priests to me. Do not let a single one be absent, because I have a great sacrifice for Baʹal. Anyone who is absent will not live.” But Jeʹhu was acting with cunning to destroy the worshippers of Baʹal.
Jeʹhu continued: “Declare a solemn assembly for Baʹal.” So they proclaimed it.
After that Jeʹhu sent word throughout Israel, and all the worshippers of Baʹal came. Not a single one was left out who did not come. They entered the house of Baʹal, and the house of Baʹal was filled from end to end.
He said to the one who was in charge of the wardrobe: “Bring out garments for all the worshippers of Baʹal.” So he brought out the clothing for them.
Then Jeʹhu and Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab went into the house of Baʹal. He now said to the worshippers of Baʹal: “Search carefully and see that there are no worshippers of Jehovah here, only worshippers of Baʹal.”
Finally they came in to offer up sacrifices and burnt offerings. Jeʹhu had stationed 80 of his men outside and said: “If any one of the men I am putting into your hands escapes, it will be your life for his.”
As soon as he finished offering up the burnt offering, Jeʹhu said to the guards and the adjutants: “Come in and strike them down! Do not let a single one escape!” So the guards and the adjutants struck them down with the sword and threw them out, and they kept going as far as the inner sanctuary of the house of Baʹal.
Then they brought out the sacred pillars of the house of Baʹal and burned each one.
They tore down the sacred pillar of Baʹal, and they tore down the house of Baʹal and turned it into latrines, as it remains to this day.
Thus Jeʹhu annihilated Baʹal out of Israel.
However, Jeʹhu did not turn away from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit as regards the golden calves that were in Bethʹel and in Dan.
So Jehovah said to Jeʹhu: “Because you have acted well and have done what is right in my eyes by carrying out all that was in my heart to do to the house of Aʹhab, four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.”
But Jeʹhu did not take care to walk in the Law of Jehovah the God of Israel with all his heart. He did not turn away from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam had caused Israel to commit.
In those days Jehovah started to cut off Israel piece by piece. Hazʹa·el kept attacking them throughout the territory of Israel,
from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilʹe·ad—of the Gadʹites, the Reuʹben·ites, and the Ma·nasʹsites—from A·roʹer, which is by the Arʹnon Valley, to Gilʹe·ad and Baʹshan.
And the rest of the history of Jeʹhu, all that he did and all his mightiness, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Jeʹhu was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in Sa·marʹi·a; and his son Je·hoʹa·haz became king in his place.
The length of Jeʹhu’s reign over Israel was 28 years in Sa·marʹi·a.
In the 17th year of Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah, Aʹhaz the son of King Joʹtham of Judah became king.
Aʹhaz was 20 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the eyes of Jehovah his God as David his forefather had done.
Instead, he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and he even made his own son pass through the fire, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites.
He also kept sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places, on the hills, and under every luxuriant tree.
It was then that King Reʹzin of Syria and Peʹkah son of Rem·a·liʹah the king of Israel came up to wage war against Jerusalem. They laid siege against Aʹhaz but were not able to capture the city.
At that time King Reʹzin of Syria restored Eʹlath to Eʹdom, after which he drove the Jews out of Eʹlath. And the Eʹdom·ites entered Eʹlath, and they have occupied it down to this day.
So Aʹhaz sent messengers to King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a, saying: “I am your servant and your son. Come up and save me from the hand of the king of Syria and the hand of the king of Israel, who are attacking me.”
Aʹhaz then took the silver and the gold that was to be found at the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the king’s house and sent the king of As·syrʹi·a a bribe.
The king of As·syrʹi·a responded to his request, and he went up to Damascus and captured it and led its people into exile to Kir, and he put Reʹzin to death.
Then King Aʹhaz went to meet King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a at Damascus. When he saw the altar that was in Damascus, King Aʹhaz sent U·riʹjah the priest a plan of the altar, showing its pattern and how it was made.
U·riʹjah the priest built an altar according to all the directions that King Aʹhaz had sent from Damascus. U·riʹjah the priest finished building it before King Aʹhaz returned from Damascus.
When the king returned from Damascus and saw the altar, he approached the altar and made offerings on it.
And on that altar he continued to make his burnt offerings and his grain offerings smoke; he also poured out his drink offerings and sprinkled the blood of his communion sacrifices on it.
Then he moved the copper altar that was before Jehovah from its place in front of the house, from between his own altar and the house of Jehovah, and he put it at the north side of his own altar.
King Aʹhaz commanded U·riʹjah the priest: “Make the morning burnt offering smoke on the great altar, also the evening grain offering, the king’s burnt offering, and his grain offering, as well as the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the drink offerings of all the people. You should also sprinkle on it all the blood of the burnt offerings and all the blood of the other sacrifices. As for the copper altar, let me decide what to do with it.”
And U·riʹjah the priest did everything that King Aʹhaz had commanded.
Furthermore, King Aʹhaz cut the side panels of the carriages into pieces and removed the basins from them, and he took the Sea down off the copper bulls that supported it and put it on a stone pavement.
And the covered structure for the Sabbath that had been built in the house and the king’s outer entryway he shifted away from the house of Jehovah; he did so because of the king of As·syrʹi·a.
As for the rest of the history of Aʹhaz, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Aʹhaz was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Hez·e·kiʹah became king in his place.
Now Naʹa·man the army chief of the king of Syria was a prominent man who was held in esteem by his lord, because through him Jehovah had given victory to Syria. He was a mighty warrior, although he was a leper.
On one of their raids, the Syrians had taken captive from the land of Israel a little girl who became a servant to Naʹa·man’s wife.
She said to her mistress: “If only my lord would visit the prophet in Sa·marʹi·a! Then he would cure him of his leprosy.”
So he went and reported to his lord, telling him what the girl from Israel had said.
Then the king of Syria said: “Go now! And I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” So he went, taking with him ten talents of silver, 6,000 pieces of gold, and ten changes of garments.
He brought to the king of Israel the letter, which read: “Along with this letter that has come to you, I send my servant Naʹa·man so that you may cure him of his leprosy.”
As soon as the king of Israel read the letter, he ripped his garments apart and said: “Am I God, to put to death and to keep alive? For he is sending this man to me, telling me to cure him of his leprosy! You can see for yourselves that he is seeking a quarrel with me.”
But when E·liʹsha the man of the true God heard that the king of Israel had ripped his garments apart, he at once sent word to the king: “Why did you rip your garments apart? Please let him come to me so that he may know that there is a prophet in Israel.”
So Naʹa·man came with his horses and his war chariots and stood at the entrance of the house of E·liʹsha.
However, E·liʹsha sent a messenger to tell him: “Go, wash seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will be restored, and you will be clean.”
At this Naʹa·man became indignant and started to leave, saying: “Here I said to myself, ‘He will come out to me and stand here and call on the name of Jehovah his God, moving his hand back and forth over the leprosy to cure it.’
Are not the A·baʹnah and the Pharʹpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Can I not wash in them and become clean?” With that he turned and went away in a rage.
His servants now approached him and said: “My father, if the prophet had told you to do something extraordinary, would you not do it? How much more, then, since he only said to you, ‘Wash and be clean’?”
At that he went down and plunged into the Jordan seven times, according to the word of the man of the true God. Then his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little boy, and he became clean.
After that he went back to the man of the true God, he and all his entourage, and he stood before him and said: “Now I know that there is no God anywhere in all the earth but in Israel. Now accept, please, a gift from your servant.”
However, E·liʹsha said: “As surely as Jehovah whom I serve is living, I will not accept it.” He urged him to accept it, but he kept refusing.
Finally Naʹa·man said: “If not, please, let your servant be given two mule-loads of soil from this land, for your servant will no longer offer a burnt offering or a sacrifice to any gods other than Jehovah.
But may Jehovah forgive your servant for this one thing: When my lord goes into the house of Rimʹmon to bow down there, he supports himself on my arm, so I have to bow down at the house of Rimʹmon. When I bow down at the house of Rimʹmon, may Jehovah, please, forgive your servant for this.”
At this he said to him: “Go in peace.” After he departed from him and had traveled for some distance,
Ge·haʹzi the attendant of E·liʹsha the man of the true God said to himself: ‘Here my master has spared this Syrian Naʹa·man by not accepting from him what he brought. As surely as Jehovah is living, I will run after him and take something from him.’
So Ge·haʹzi chased after Naʹa·man. When Naʹa·man saw someone running after him, he got down from his chariot to meet him and said: “Is everything all right?”
To this he said: “All is well. My master has sent me, saying, ‘Look! Just now two young men from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im from the sons of the prophets came to me. Give them, please, a talent of silver and two changes of garments.’”
Naʹa·man said: “Go on, take two talents.” He kept urging him, and he wrapped up two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments, and gave them to two of his attendants, who carried them before him.
When he reached Oʹphel, he took them from their hand and put them in the house and sent the men away. After they left,
he went in and stood by his master. E·liʹsha now said to him: “Where did you come from, Ge·haʹzi?” But he said: “Your servant did not go anywhere.”
E·liʹsha said to him: “Was my heart not there with you when the man got down from his chariot to meet you? Is it a time to accept silver or to accept garments or olive groves or vineyards or sheep or cattle or male or female servants?
Now Naʹa·man’s leprosy will stick to you and your descendants forever.” Immediately he went out from before him a leper, white as snow.
In the second year of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel, Am·a·ziʹah the son of King Je·hoʹash of Judah became king.
He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ho·adʹdin of Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, but not like David his forefather. He did everything as Je·hoʹash his father had done.
However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.
As soon as he had the kingdom firmly in his control, he struck down his servants who had struck down his father the king.
But he did not put the sons of the murderers to death, in harmony with Jehovah’s commandment written in the book of Moses’ Law: “Fathers should not be put to death for their sons, and sons should not be put to death for their fathers; but each one should be put to death for his own sin.”
He struck down the Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt, 10,000 men, and captured Seʹla in the war, and its name became Jokʹthe·el to this day.
Then Am·a·ziʹah sent messengers to Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz son of Jeʹhu the king of Israel, saying: “Come, let us confront each other in battle.”
King Je·hoʹash of Israel sent this message to King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah: “The thorny weed in Lebʹa·non sent a message to the cedar in Lebʹa·non, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ However, a wild beast of Lebʹa·non passed by and trampled down the thorny weed.
True, you have struck down Eʹdom, so your heart has become arrogant. Enjoy your glory, but stay in your own house. Why should you provoke disaster and fall, bringing Judah down with you?”
But Am·a·ziʹah did not listen. So King Je·hoʹash of Israel went up, and he and King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah confronted each other in battle at Beth-sheʹmesh, which belongs to Judah.
Judah was defeated by Israel, so each one fled to his home.
King Je·hoʹash of Israel captured King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, son of Je·hoʹash son of A·ha·ziʹah, at Beth-sheʹmesh. Then they came to Jerusalem, and he made a breach in the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Eʹphra·im to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits.
He took all the gold and the silver and all the articles that were found in the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the house of the king, as well as hostages. Then he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, what he did and his mightiness and how he fought against King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Je·hoʹash was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in Sa·marʹi·a with the kings of Israel; and his son Jer·o·boʹam became king in his place.
Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah lived for 15 years after the death of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel.
As for the rest of the history of Am·a·ziʹah, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Later a conspiracy was formed against him at Jerusalem, and he fled to Laʹchish, but they sent men after him to Laʹchish and put him to death there.
So they carried him back on horses, and he was buried in Jerusalem with his forefathers in the City of David.
Then all the people of Judah took Az·a·riʹah, who was 16 years old, and made him king in place of his father Am·a·ziʹah.
He rebuilt Eʹlath and restored it to Judah after the king was laid to rest with his forefathers.
In the 15th year of Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah, Jer·o·boʹam the son of King Je·hoʹash of Israel became king in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 41 years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit.
He restored the boundary of Israel from Leʹbo-haʹmath clear to the Sea of the Arʹa·bah, according to the word that Jehovah the God of Israel spoke through his servant Joʹnah the son of A·mitʹtai, the prophet from Gath-heʹpher.
For Jehovah had seen the very bitter affliction of Israel. There was no one left to help Israel, not even the helpless or the weak.
But Jehovah had promised not to wipe out the name of Israel from under the heavens. So he saved them by the hand of Jer·o·boʹam the son of Je·hoʹash.
As for the rest of the history of Jer·o·boʹam, all that he did and his mightiness, how he fought and how he restored Damascus and Haʹmath to Judah in Israel, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Jer·o·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers, with the kings of Israel; and his son Zekariah became king in his place.
Jo·siʹah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for 31 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·diʹdah the daughter of A·daiʹah from Bozʹkath.
He did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes and walked in all the ways of David his forefather, and he did not deviate to the right or to the left.
In the 18th year of King Jo·siʹah, the king sent Shaʹphan the secretary, the son of Az·a·liʹah the son of Me·shulʹlam, to the house of Jehovah, saying:
“Go up to Hil·kiʹah the high priest, and let him collect all the money that is being brought into the house of Jehovah, which the doorkeepers have collected from the people.
Have them give it to those appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah who, in turn, will give it to the workers in the house of Jehovah who are to repair the damage to the house,
that is, to the craftsmen, the builders, and the masons; and they are to use it to buy timbers and hewn stones to repair the house.
But no accounting should be required of them for the money that they are given, because they are trustworthy.”
Later Hil·kiʹah the high priest said to Shaʹphan the secretary: “I have found the book of the Law in the house of Jehovah.” So Hil·kiʹah gave the book to Shaʹphan, who began to read it.
Then Shaʹphan the secretary went to the king and told him: “Your servants have poured out the money that was found in the house, and they have handed it over to those appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah.”
Shaʹphan the secretary also told the king: “There is a book that Hil·kiʹah the priest has given me.” Then Shaʹphan began to read it before the king.
As soon as the king heard the words of the book of the Law, he ripped his garments apart.
Then the king gave this order to Hil·kiʹah the priest, A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, Achʹbor the son of Mi·caiʹah, Shaʹphan the secretary, and A·saiʹah the king’s servant:
“Go, inquire of Jehovah in my behalf, in behalf of the people, and in behalf of all Judah concerning the words of this book that has been found; for Jehovah’s rage that has been set ablaze against us is great, because our forefathers did not obey the words of this book by observing all that is written concerning us.”
So Hil·kiʹah the priest, A·hiʹkam, Achʹbor, Shaʹphan, and A·saiʹah went to Hulʹdah the prophetess. She was the wife of Shalʹlum son of Tikʹvah son of Harʹhas, the caretaker of the wardrobe, and she was dwelling in the Second Quarter of Jerusalem; and they spoke to her there.
She said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Tell the man who sent you to me:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will bring calamity on this place and its inhabitants, all the words of the book that the king of Judah has read.
Because they have abandoned me and are making sacrifices smoke to other gods in order to offend me with all the work of their hands, my rage will be set ablaze against this place and it will not be extinguished.’”
But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, this is what you should say to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Regarding the words that you have heard,
because your heart was responsive and you humbled yourself before Jehovah on hearing what I have spoken against this place and its inhabitants—that they would become an object of horror and a curse—and you ripped your garments apart and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares Jehovah.
That is why I will gather you to your ancestors, and you will be laid in your grave in peace, and your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place.’”’” Then they brought the reply to the king.
In the 27th year of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel, Az·a·riʹah the son of King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah became king.
He was 16 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 52 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·co·liʹah of Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Am·a·ziʹah had done.
However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.
Jehovah afflicted the king, and he remained a leper until the day of his death; and he stayed in a separate house, while the king’s son Joʹtham was in charge of the house, judging the people of the land.
As for the rest of the history of Az·a·riʹah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Az·a·riʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Joʹtham became king in his place.
In the 38th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Zekariah the son of Jer·o·boʹam became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for six months.
He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his forefathers had done. He did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit.
Then Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh conspired against him and struck him down at Ibʹle·am. After putting him to death, he became king in his place.
As for the rest of the history of Zekariah, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.
That fulfilled Jehovah’s word spoken to Jeʹhu: “Four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.” And that is how it happened.
Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh became king in the 39th year of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah, and he reigned for a full month in Sa·marʹi·a.
Then Menʹa·hem the son of Gaʹdi came up from Tirʹzah to Sa·marʹi·a and struck down Shalʹlum the son of Jaʹbesh in Sa·marʹi·a. After putting him to death, he became king in his place.
As for the rest of the history of Shalʹlum and the conspiracy that he formed, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.
It was then that Menʹa·hem came from Tirʹzah and struck down Tiphʹsah and all who were in it and its territory, because it did not open its gates to him. He struck it down and ripped open its pregnant women.
In the 39th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Menʹa·hem the son of Gaʹdi became king over Israel, and he reigned for ten years in Sa·marʹi·a.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from all the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit, all his days.
King Pul of As·syrʹi·a came into the land, and Menʹa·hem gave Pul 1,000 talents of silver in return for his support in strengthening his hold on the kingdom.
So Menʹa·hem raised the silver from Israel by exacting it from the prominent, wealthy men. He gave the king of As·syrʹi·a 50 silver shekels for each man. Then the king of As·syrʹi·a turned back and did not stay in the land.
As for the rest of the history of Menʹa·hem, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel?
Then Menʹa·hem was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Pek·a·hiʹah became king in his place.
In the 50th year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Pek·a·hiʹah the son of Menʹa·hem became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for two years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes. He did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit.
Then his adjutant Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah conspired against him and struck him down in Sa·marʹi·a in the fortified tower of the king’s house with Arʹgob and A·riʹeh. He had 50 men of Gilʹe·ad with him; and after he put him to death, he became king in his place.
As for the rest of the history of Pek·a·hiʹah, all that he did, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.
In the 52nd year of King Az·a·riʹah of Judah, Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah became king over Israel in Sa·marʹi·a, and he reigned for 20 years.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, and he did not depart from the sins that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had caused Israel to commit.
In the days of King Peʹkah of Israel, King Tigʹlath-pil·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a invaded and captured Iʹjon, Aʹbel-beth-maʹa·cah, Ja·noʹah, Keʹdesh, Haʹzor, Gilʹe·ad, and Galilee, all the land of Naphʹta·li, and he took the inhabitants into exile in As·syrʹi·a.
Then Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah formed a conspiracy against Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah, and he struck him and put him to death; and he became king in his place in the 20th year of Joʹtham the son of Uz·ziʹah.
As for the rest of the history of Peʹkah, all that he did, it is written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Israel.
In the second year of Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah the king of Israel, Joʹtham the son of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah became king.
He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ruʹsha the daughter of Zaʹdok.
He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Uz·ziʹah had done.
However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places. He was the one who built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah.
As for the rest of the history of Joʹtham, what he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
In those days Jehovah began sending Reʹzin the king of Syria and Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah against Judah.
Then Joʹtham was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David his forefather. And his son Aʹhaz became king in his place.
Now one of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to E·liʹsha, saying: “Your servant my husband is dead, and you well know that your servant had always feared Jehovah. Now a creditor has come to take both of my children as his slaves.”
At this E·liʹsha said to her: “What can I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” She replied: “Your servant has nothing at all in the house but a jar of oil.”
Then he said: “Go outside, ask for containers from all your neighbors, empty containers. Do not limit yourself to a few.
Then go in and close the door behind you and your sons. Fill all these containers, and set the full ones aside.”
So she left him. When she closed the door behind her and her sons, they passed the containers to her, and she kept pouring.
When the containers were full, she said to one of her sons: “Bring another container to me.” But he said to her: “There are no more containers.” At that the oil stopped.
So she came in and told the man of the true God, and he said: “Go, sell the oil and pay off your debts, and you and your sons can live from what is left.”
One day E·liʹsha went to Shuʹnem, where there was a prominent woman, and she urged him to eat a meal there. As often as he would pass by, he would stop there to eat.
So she said to her husband: “I know that it is a holy man of God who comes this way regularly.
Please, let us make a small room on the roof and put there for him a bed, a table, a chair, and a lampstand. Then, whenever he comes to us, he can stay there.”
One day he came there, and he went to the room on the roof to lie down.
He then said to Ge·haʹzi his attendant: “Call this Shuʹnam·mite woman.” So he called her, and she stood before him.
Then he said to Ge·haʹzi: “Please tell her, ‘Here you have gone to all this trouble for us. What can be done for you? Should I speak in your behalf to the king or to the chief of the army?’” But her reply was: “I am living among my own people.”
So he said: “Then what can be done for her?” Ge·haʹzi now said: “Well, she does not have a son, and her husband is old.”
Immediately he said: “Call her.” So he called her, and she stood at the doorway.
Then he said: “At this time next year, you will be embracing a son.” But she said: “No, my master, man of the true God! Do not tell lies to your servant.”
However, the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son at the same time the next year, just as E·liʹsha had told her.
The child grew up, and one day he went out to his father, who was with the reapers.
He kept saying to his father: “My head, O my head!” Then his father said to the attendant: “Carry him to his mother.”
So he carried him back to his mother, and he sat on her lap until noon, and then he died.
Then she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of the true God, and she shut the door behind her and left.
She now called her husband and said: “Send me, please, one of the attendants and one of the donkeys, and let me go quickly to the man of the true God and return.”
But he said: “Why are you going to see him today? It is not a new moon or a sabbath.” However, she said: “Everything is all right.”
So she saddled the donkey and said to her attendant: “Go quickly. Do not slow down for me unless I tell you to.”
So she went to the man of the true God at Mount Carʹmel. As soon as the man of the true God saw her from afar, he said to Ge·haʹzi his attendant: “Look! The Shuʹnam·mite woman is over there.
Please run to meet her and ask her, ‘Are you well? Is your husband well? Is your child well?’” To this she said: “All is well.”
When she came to the man of the true God at the mountain, she at once grabbed hold of his feet. At this Ge·haʹzi came near to push her away, but the man of the true God said: “Let her alone, for she is in bitter distress, and Jehovah has hidden it from me and has not told me.”
She then said: “Did I ask my lord for a son? Did I not say, ‘You must not give me a false hope’?”
He immediately said to Ge·haʹzi: “Wrap your garments around your waist and take my staff in your hand and go. If you encounter anyone, do not greet him; and if anyone should greet you, do not answer him. Go and place my staff on the boy’s face.”
At this the boy’s mother said: “As surely as Jehovah is living and as you yourself are living, I will not leave you.” So he got up and went with her.
Ge·haʹzi went before them and put the staff on the boy’s face, but there was no sound or response. He went back to meet E·liʹsha and told him: “The boy did not wake up.”
When E·liʹsha came into the house, the boy was lying dead on his bed.
He went in and closed the door behind them both and began to pray to Jehovah.
Then he got up on the bed and lay down on the child and put his own mouth on the boy’s mouth, his own eyes on his eyes, and his own palms on his palms and kept bent over him, and the child’s body started to grow warm.
He walked back and forth in the house, and he got up on the bed and bent over him again. The boy sneezed seven times, after which he opened his eyes.
E·liʹsha now called Ge·haʹzi and said: “Call the Shuʹnam·mite woman.” So he called her and she came in to him. Then he said: “Pick up your son.”
And she came in and fell at his feet and bowed down to the ground before him, after which she picked up her son and went out.
When E·liʹsha returned to Gilʹgal, there was famine in the land. The sons of the prophets were sitting before him, and he said to his attendant: “Put the large pot on and boil stew for the sons of the prophets.”
So one of them went out to the field to pick mallows, and he found a wild vine and picked wild gourds from it, filling his garment. He then returned and sliced them into the stewpot, not knowing what they were.
They later served it to the men to eat, but as soon as they ate from the stew, they cried out: “There is death in the pot, O man of the true God.” And they could not eat it.
So he said: “Bring some flour.” After he threw it into the pot, he said: “Serve it to the people.” And nothing harmful was in the pot.
A man came from Baʹal-shalʹi·shah, and he brought the man of the true God 20 loaves of barley bread made from the first ripe fruits, as well as a bag of new grain. Then E·liʹsha said: “Give it to the people so that they may eat.”
However, his attendant said: “How can I set this before 100 men?” To this he said: “Give it to the people so that they may eat, for this is what Jehovah says, ‘They will eat and have some left over.’”
At that he put it before them, and they ate and they had some left over, according to the word of Jehovah.
In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz came and said to him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Give instructions to your household, for you will die; you will not recover.’”
At that he turned his face to the wall and began to pray to Jehovah:
“I beg you, O Jehovah, remember, please, how I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart, and I have done what was good in your eyes.” And Hez·e·kiʹah began to weep profusely.
Isaiah had not yet gone out to the middle courtyard when Jehovah’s word came to him, saying:
“Go back and say to Hez·e·kiʹah, the leader of my people, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says: “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Here I am healing you. On the third day you will go up to the house of Jehovah.
I will add 15 years to your life, and I will rescue you and this city out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and I will defend this city for my own sake and for the sake of David my servant.”’”
Isaiah then said: “Bring a cake of pressed dried figs.” So they brought it and applied it to the boil, after which he gradually recovered.
Hez·e·kiʹah had asked Isaiah: “What is the sign to show that Jehovah will heal me and that I will go up on the third day to the house of Jehovah?”
Isaiah replied: “This is the sign from Jehovah to show you that Jehovah will carry out the word that he has spoken: Do you want the shadow on the stairway to move forward ten steps or back ten steps?”
Hez·e·kiʹah said: “It is an easy thing for the shadow to extend itself ten steps but not to go back ten steps.”
So Isaiah the prophet called out to Jehovah, and He made the shadow on the stairway of Aʹhaz go back ten steps after it had already descended the steps.
At that time the king of Babylon, Be·roʹdach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that Hez·e·kiʹah had been sick.
Hez·e·kiʹah welcomed them and showed them his entire treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.
After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.”
Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”
Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah,
‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah.
‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “It is good if there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
As for the rest of the history of Hez·e·kiʹah, all his mightiness and how he made the pool and the conduit and brought the water into the city, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Hez·e·kiʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers; and his son Ma·nasʹseh became king in his place.
In the seventh year of Jeʹhu, Je·hoʹash became king, and he reigned for 40 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibʹi·ah from Beʹer-sheʹba.
Je·hoʹash continued doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes all the days that Je·hoiʹa·da the priest instructed him.
However, the high places were not removed, and the people were still sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places.
Je·hoʹash said to the priests: “Take all the money that is brought to the house of Jehovah for the holy offerings, the money for which each one is assessed, the money given as an estimated value for a person, and all the money that each person’s heart is moved to bring to the house of Jehovah.
The priests will personally take it from their donors and use it to repair the house, wherever any damage is found.”
By the 23rd year of King Je·hoʹash, the priests had not yet repaired the damage to the house.
So King Je·hoʹash called Je·hoiʹa·da the priest and the other priests and said to them: “Why are you not repairing the damage to the house? Therefore, do not take any more money from your donors unless it is used to repair the house.”
At that the priests agreed not to take any more money from the people and not to be responsible for repairing the house.
Je·hoiʹa·da the priest then took a chest and bored a hole in its lid and put it next to the altar on the right as one enters the house of Jehovah. That is where the priests who served as doorkeepers would put all the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah.
Whenever they saw that there was a great deal of money in the chest, the secretary of the king and the high priest would come up and collect and count the money that had been brought to the house of Jehovah.
They would give the money that had been counted to those appointed over the work being done in the house of Jehovah. They, in turn, paid it to the woodworkers and to the builders who were working at the house of Jehovah,
as well as to the masons and the stonecutters. They also bought timbers and hewn stones for repairing the damage to the house of Jehovah and used the money for all the other expenses incurred in repairing the house.
However, none of the money brought to the house of Jehovah was used to make basins of silver, extinguishers, bowls, trumpets, or any sort of gold or silver article for the house of Jehovah.
They would give it only to those who did the work, and with it they repaired the house of Jehovah.
They would not call for an accounting from the men to whom they gave the money to give to the workers, for they were trustworthy.
However, the money for guilt offerings and the money for sin offerings was not brought to the house of Jehovah; it belonged to the priests.
It was then that Hazʹa·el the king of Syria went up to fight against Gath, and he captured it, after which he decided to attack Jerusalem.
At that King Je·hoʹash of Judah took all the holy offerings that his forefathers Je·hoshʹa·phat, Je·hoʹram, and A·ha·ziʹah, the kings of Judah, had sanctified, as well as his own holy offerings and all the gold to be found in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah and the king’s house, and sent them to Hazʹa·el the king of Syria. So he withdrew from Jerusalem.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoʹash, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
However, his servants joined in a conspiracy against him and struck Je·hoʹash down at the house of the Mound, on the way that goes down to Silʹla.
His servants Joʹza·car the son of Shimʹe·ath and Je·hozʹa·bad the son of Shoʹmer were the ones who struck him and put him to death. They buried him with his forefathers in the City of David, and his son Am·a·ziʹah became king in his place.
In the third year of Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah the king of Israel, Hez·e·kiʹah the son of King Aʹhaz of Judah became king.
He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Aʹbi the daughter of Zekariah.
He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as David his forefather had done.
He was the one who removed the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the sacred pole. He also crushed the copper serpent that Moses had made; for down to that time the people of Israel had been making sacrificial smoke to it and it used to be called the copper serpent-idol.
He trusted in Jehovah the God of Israel; there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah after him nor among those prior to him.
He held fast to Jehovah. He did not turn away from following him; he continued to keep the commandments that Jehovah had given to Moses.
And Jehovah was with him. Wherever he went, he acted wisely. He rebelled against the king of As·syrʹi·a and refused to serve him.
He also defeated the Phi·lisʹtines clear to Gazʹa and its territories, from watchtower to fortified city.
In the fourth year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, that is, the seventh year of Ho·sheʹa the son of Eʹlah the king of Israel, King Shal·man·eʹser of As·syrʹi·a came up against Sa·marʹi·a and began to lay siege to it.
They captured it at the end of three years; in the sixth year of Hez·e·kiʹah, which was the ninth year of King Ho·sheʹa of Israel, Sa·marʹi·a was captured.
Then the king of As·syrʹi·a took Israel into exile in As·syrʹi·a and settled them in Haʹlah and in Haʹbor at the river Goʹzan and in the cities of the Medes.
This was because they had not listened to the voice of Jehovah their God but kept violating his covenant, all that Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded. They neither listened nor obeyed.
In the 14th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
So King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah sent word to the king of As·syrʹi·a at Laʹchish: “I am at fault. Withdraw from against me, and I will give whatever you may impose on me.” The king of As·syrʹi·a imposed on King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah a fine of 300 silver talents and 30 gold talents.
So Hez·e·kiʹah gave all the silver that could be found at the house of Jehovah and in the treasuries of the king’s house.
At that time Hez·e·kiʹah removed the doors of the temple of Jehovah and the doorposts that King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah himself had overlaid, and he gave them to the king of As·syrʹi·a.
The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Tarʹtan, the Rabʹsa·ris, and the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They went up to Jerusalem and took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field.
When they called for the king to come out, E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to them.
So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence?
You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put your trust, so that you dare to rebel against me?
Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him.
And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar in Jerusalem’?”’
So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you 2,000 horses if you are able to find enough riders for them.
How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this place to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
At this E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, and Shebʹnah and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
But the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”
Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a.
This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you out of my hand.
And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern,
until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and honey. Then you will live and not die. Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he misleads you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’
Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a?
Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim, Heʹna, and Ivʹvah? Have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand?
Who among all the gods of the lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”
But the people kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.”
But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹnah the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
So the king sent word, and they summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
After that the king went up to the house of Jehovah with all the men of Judah, all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, and the prophets—all the people, from small to great. He read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in the house of Jehovah.
The king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before Jehovah, that he would follow Jehovah and keep his commandments, his reminders, and his statutes with all his heart and with all his soul by carrying out the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people agreed to the covenant.
The king then ordered Hil·kiʹah the high priest, the priests of the second rank, and the doorkeepers to bring out from the temple of Jehovah all the utensils made for Baʹal, for the sacred pole, and for all the army of the heavens. Then he burned them outside Jerusalem on the terraces of Kidʹron, and he took their ashes to Bethʹel.
So he put out of business the foreign-god priests, whom the kings of Judah had appointed to make sacrificial smoke on the high places in the cities of Judah and the surroundings of Jerusalem, as well as those making sacrificial smoke to Baʹal, to the sun, to the moon, to the constellations of the zodiac, and to all the army of the heavens.
He brought the sacred pole out from the house of Jehovah to the outskirts of Jerusalem, to the Kidʹron Valley, and he burned it in the Kidʹron Valley and ground it to dust and scattered its dust on the graves of the common people.
He also tore down the houses of the male temple prostitutes, which were in the house of Jehovah and where the women were weaving tent shrines for the sacred pole.
Then he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and he made unfit for worship the high places where the priests had been making sacrificial smoke, from Geʹba to Beʹer-sheʹba. He also tore down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the chief of the city, which were on the left as one entered the city gate.
The priests of the high places did not serve at the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they did eat unleavened bread along with their brothers.
He also made unfit for worship Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Sons of Hinʹnom, so that no one could make his son or his daughter pass through the fire to Moʹlech.
And he prohibited the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun from entering the house of Jehovah by the chamber of Naʹthan-melʹech the court official, which was in the porticoes; and he burned the chariots of the sun in the fire.
The king also tore down the altars that the kings of Judah had set up on the roof of Aʹhaz’s upper chamber, as well as the altars that Ma·nasʹseh had set up in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah. He crushed them and scattered their dust in the Kidʹron Valley.
And the king made unfit for worship the high places in front of Jerusalem that were to the south of the Mount of Ruination, which Solʹo·mon the king of Israel had built to Ashʹto·reth the disgusting goddess of the Si·doʹni·ans; and to Cheʹmosh the disgusting god of Moʹab; and to Milʹcom the detestable god of the Amʹmon·ites.
He broke the sacred pillars to pieces and cut down the sacred poles and filled their places with human bones.
He also tore down the altar in Bethʹel, the high place that Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat had made that caused Israel to sin. After tearing down that altar and the high place, he burned the high place, ground it to dust, and burned the sacred pole.
When Jo·siʹah turned and saw the graves on the mountain, he had the bones taken from the graves and burned them on the altar, making it unfit for worship, according to Jehovah’s word that had been proclaimed by the man of the true God who foretold that these things would happen.
Then he said: “What is the gravestone over there that I am looking at?” At this the men of the city said to him: “It is the grave of the man of the true God from Judah who foretold these things that you have done against the altar of Bethʹel.”
So he said: “Let him rest. Do not let anyone disturb his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, as well as the bones of the prophet who had come from Sa·marʹi·a.
Jo·siʹah also removed all the houses of worship on the high places that were in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a, which the kings of Israel had built to offend God, and he did the same thing to them that he had done at Bethʹel.
So he sacrificed on the altars all the priests of the high places who were there, and he burned human bones on them. After that he returned to Jerusalem.
The king now commanded all the people: “Hold a Passover to Jehovah your God as is written in this book of the covenant.”
No Passover like this had been held since the days when the judges had judged Israel or in all the days of the kings of Israel and the kings of Judah.
But in the 18th year of King Jo·siʹah, this Passover to Jehovah was held in Jerusalem.
Jo·siʹah also cleared out the spirit mediums, the fortune-tellers, the teraphim statues, the disgusting idols, and all the disgusting things that had appeared in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, in order to carry out the words of the Law that were written in the book that Hil·kiʹah the priest had found in the house of Jehovah.
There was no king like him prior to him, who returned to Jehovah with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his strength, according to all the Law of Moses; nor did anyone like him rise up after him.
Nevertheless, Jehovah did not turn away from his burning anger that blazed against Judah because of all the offensive things that Ma·nasʹseh had done to offend Him.
Jehovah said: “I will also remove Judah from my sight, just as I removed Israel; and I will reject this city that I chose, Jerusalem, and the house about which I said, ‘My name will continue there.’”
As for the rest of the history of Jo·siʹah, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
In his days Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh the king of Egypt came to meet the king of As·syrʹi·a by the Eu·phraʹtes River, and King Jo·siʹah went out to confront him; but when Neʹchoh saw him, he put him to death at Me·gidʹdo.
So his servants transported his dead body in a chariot from Me·gidʹdo and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in his grave. Then the people of the land took Jo·siʹah’s son Je·hoʹa·haz and anointed him and made him king in place of his father.
Je·hoʹa·haz was 23 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah from Libʹnah.
He began to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his forefathers had done.
Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh imprisoned him at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, to keep him from reigning in Jerusalem, and then imposed on the land a fine of 100 silver talents and a gold talent.
Furthermore, Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh made Jo·siʹah’s son E·liʹa·kim king in place of his father Jo·siʹah and changed his name to Je·hoiʹa·kim; but he took Je·hoʹa·haz and brought him to Egypt, where he eventually died.
Je·hoiʹa·kim gave the silver and the gold to Pharʹaoh, but he had to tax the land to give the silver that Pharʹaoh demanded. He exacted an assessed amount of silver and gold from each of the people of the land to give to Pharʹaoh Neʹchoh.
Je·hoiʹa·kim was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ze·biʹdah the daughter of Pe·daiʹah from Ruʹmah.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that his forefathers had done.
The sons of the prophets said to E·liʹsha: “Look! The place where we are staying with you is too cramped for us.
Please let us go to the Jordan. Let each of us take a log from there and make a place there where we can dwell.” He said: “Go.”
One of them said: “Will you please come along with your servants?” At that he said: “I will come.”
So he went with them, and they came to the Jordan and began to cut down the trees.
As one of them was cutting down a tree, the axhead fell into the water, and he cried out: “Alas, my master, it was borrowed!”
The man of the true God said: “Where did it fall?” So he showed him the place. He then cut off a piece of wood and threw it there and made the axhead float.
He said: “Lift it out.” So he reached out his hand and took it.
Now the king of Syria went to war against Israel. He consulted with his servants and said: “I will encamp at such and such a place with you.”
Then the man of the true God sent word to the king of Israel, saying: “Beware of passing by this place, because that is where the Syrians are coming down.”
So the king of Israel sent word to the place that the man of the true God had warned him about. He kept warning him, and he stayed away from there on several occasions.
This enraged the king of Syria, so he summoned his servants and said to them: “Tell me! Who among us is on the side of the king of Israel?”
Then one of his servants said: “None of us, my lord the king! It is E·liʹsha the prophet in Israel who tells the king of Israel the things that you say in your own bedroom.”
He said: “Go and find out where he is, so that I may send men to capture him.” Later the report was made to him: “He is in Doʹthan.”
He immediately sent horses and war chariots there, as well as a large army; they came by night and surrounded the city.
When the attendant of the man of the true God rose early and went outside, he saw that an army with horses and war chariots was surrounding the city. At once the attendant said to him: “Alas, my master! What are we to do?”
But he said: “Do not be afraid! For there are more who are with us than those who are with them.”
Then E·liʹsha began to pray and say: “O Jehovah, open his eyes, please, that he may see.” Immediately Jehovah opened the attendant’s eyes and he saw, and look! the mountainous region was full of horses and war chariots of fire all around E·liʹsha.
When the Syrians came down to him, E·liʹsha prayed to Jehovah and said: “Please, strike this nation with blindness.” So he struck them with blindness, just as E·liʹsha had requested.
E·liʹsha now said to them: “This is not the way, and this is not the city. Follow me, and let me lead you to the man you are looking for.” However, he led them to Sa·marʹi·a.
When they arrived in Sa·marʹi·a, E·liʹsha said: “O Jehovah, open their eyes so that they may see.” So Jehovah opened their eyes, and they saw that they were in the middle of Sa·marʹi·a.
When the king of Israel saw them, he said to E·liʹsha: “Should I strike them down, should I strike them down, my father?”
But he said: “You must not strike them down. Do you strike down those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow? Give them bread and water so they may eat and drink and return to their lord.”
So he spread a great feast for them, and they ate and drank, after which he sent them away to return to their lord. And not once did the marauder bands of the Syrians come again into the land of Israel.
Afterward Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria gathered all his army together and went up and besieged Sa·marʹi·a.
So there was a great famine in Sa·marʹi·a, and they besieged it until a donkey’s head was worth 80 silver pieces, and a fourth of a cab measure of dove’s droppings was worth 5 silver pieces.
As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him: “Help us, O my lord the king!”
To this he said: “If Jehovah does not help you, where can I get help for you? From the threshing floor? Or from the wine or oil press?”
The king asked her: “What is the matter with you?” She replied: “This woman said to me, ‘Hand over your son, and we will eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.’
So we boiled my son and ate him. The next day I said to her, ‘Hand over your son so that we may eat him.’ But she hid her son.”
As soon as the king heard the woman’s words, he ripped his garments apart. When he passed by on the wall, the people saw that he was wearing sackcloth under his clothes.
Then he said: “So may God do to me and add to it if the head of E·liʹsha the son of Shaʹphat remains on him today!”
E·liʹsha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. The king sent a man ahead of him, but before the messenger arrived, E·liʹsha said to the elders: “Have you seen how this son of a murderer has sent to take off my head? Watch when the messenger comes, close the door, and hold the door shut against him. Is not the sound of his lord’s footsteps behind him?”
While he was still speaking with them, the messenger came to him, and the king said: “This calamity is from Jehovah. Why should I wait any longer for Jehovah?”
E·liʹsha said to the woman whose son he had restored to life: “Rise up and go, you with your household, and live as a foreigner wherever you can, for Jehovah has declared a famine, and it will come on the land for seven years.”
So the woman got up and did what the man of the true God said. She went with her household and settled in the land of the Phi·lisʹtines for seven years.
At the end of seven years, the woman returned from the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and went to appeal to the king for her house and her field.
Now the king was speaking to Ge·haʹzi the attendant of the man of the true God, saying: “Relate to me, please, all the great things that E·liʹsha has done.”
Just as he was relating to the king how he had restored the dead one to life, the woman whose son he had restored to life came to the king, appealing for her house and her field. At once Ge·haʹzi said: “My lord the king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom E·liʹsha restored to life.”
At that the king asked the woman, and she related the story to him. Then the king assigned her a court official, telling him: “Return all that belongs to her and all the products of the field from the day she left the land until now.”
E·liʹsha came to Damascus when Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria was sick. So the report was made to him: “The man of the true God has come here.”
At that the king said to Hazʹa·el: “Take a gift with you and go and meet the man of the true God. Inquire of Jehovah through him, asking, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
Hazʹa·el went to meet him and took a gift with him, every sort of good thing of Damascus, the load of 40 camels. He came and stood before him and said: “Your son, Ben-haʹdad the king of Syria, has sent me to you, asking, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’”
E·liʹsha replied to him: “Go and tell him, ‘You will certainly recover,’ but Jehovah has shown me that he will certainly die.”
And he kept staring at him to the point of embarrassment. Then the man of the true God gave way to weeping.
Hazʹa·el asked: “Why is my lord weeping?” He replied: “Because I know what harm you will do to the people of Israel. Their fortified places you will set on fire, their choice men you will kill with the sword, their children you will dash to pieces, and their pregnant women you will rip open.”
Hazʹa·el said: “How could your servant, who is a mere dog, do such a deed?” But E·liʹsha said: “Jehovah has shown me that you will be king over Syria.”
Then he left E·liʹsha and returned to his own lord, who said to him: “What did E·liʹsha say to you?” He replied: “He told me that you will certainly recover.”
But the next day, Hazʹa·el took a coverlet, dipped it in water, and held it over his face until he died. And Hazʹa·el became king in his place.
In the fifth year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab the king of Israel, while Je·hoshʹa·phat was king of Judah, Je·hoʹram the son of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah became king.
He was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem.
He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as those of the house of Aʹhab had done, for Aʹhab’s daughter had become his wife; and he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.
But Jehovah did not want to bring Judah to ruin for the sake of David his servant, since he had promised him to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.
In his days Eʹdom revolted against Judah and then set up its own king.
So Je·hoʹram crossed over to Zaʹir with all his chariots, and he rose up by night and defeated the Eʹdom·ites who were surrounding him and the chariot commanders; and the troops fled to their tents.
But Eʹdom has kept up its revolt against Judah to this day. Libʹnah also revolted at that time.
And the rest of the history of Je·hoʹram, all that he did, is it not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Judah?
Then Je·hoʹram was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David. And his son A·ha·ziʹah became king in his place.
In the 12th year of Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab the king of Israel, A·ha·ziʹah the son of King Je·hoʹram of Judah became king.
A·ha·ziʹah was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ath·a·liʹah the granddaughter of King Omʹri of Israel.
He walked in the way of the house of Aʹhab and kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, like the house of Aʹhab, for he was related to the house of Aʹhab by marriage.
So he went with Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab to wage war against King Hazʹa·el of Syria at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, but the Syrians wounded Je·hoʹram.
So King Je·hoʹram returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that the Syrians had inflicted on him at Raʹmah when he fought against King Hazʹa·el of Syria. A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram the king of Judah went down to Jezʹre·el to see Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab, because he had been wounded.
As soon as David was settled in his own house, he said to Nathan the prophet: “Here I am living in a house of cedars while the ark of the covenant of Jehovah is under tent cloths.”
Nathan replied to David: “Do whatever is in your heart, for the true God is with you.”
On that very night, the word of God came to Nathan, saying:
“Go and say to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You are not the one who will build the house for me to dwell in.
For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought Israel out to this day, but I continued going from tent to tent and from one tabernacle to another.
During all the time that I went with all Israel, did I ever say one word to any of the judges of Israel whom I appointed to shepherd my people, saying, ‘Why did you not build a house of cedars for me?’”’
“Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel.
And I will be with you wherever you go, and I will do away with all your enemies from before you; and I will make a name for you like the name of the great men of the earth.
I will appoint a place for my people Israel and settle them, and they will live there and not be disturbed anymore; and wicked men will not oppress them again as they did in the past,
from the day that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I tell you, ‘Jehovah will build a house for you.’
“‘“When your days come to an end and you go to be with your forefathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, one of your sons, and I will firmly establish his kingship.
He is the one who will build a house for me, and I will firmly establish his throne forever.
I will become his father, and he will become my son. I will not remove my loyal love from him the way I removed it from the one who was prior to you.
I will cause him to stand in my house and in my kingship forever, and his throne will last forever.”’”
Nathan told David all these words and this entire vision.
At that King David came in and sat down before Jehovah and said: “Who am I, O Jehovah God? And what is my house that you have brought me this far?
As if this were not enough, O God, you also speak about the house of your servant down to a distant future time, and you have looked on me as if I were a man who should be further exalted, O Jehovah God.
What more can your servant David say to you about the honor given me when you know your servant so well?
O Jehovah, for the sake of your servant and in agreement with your heart you have done all these great things by revealing your greatness.
O Jehovah, there is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this.
And what other nation on earth is like your people Israel? The true God went and redeemed them as his people. You made a name for yourself by your great and awe-inspiring deeds, driving out nations from before your people, whom you redeemed from Egypt.
You made your people Israel your own people for all time; and you, O Jehovah, became their God.
Now, O Jehovah, may the promise you have made concerning your servant and his house prove faithful for all time, and may you do just as you have promised.
May your name endure and be exalted forever, so that people may say, ‘Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, is God to Israel,’ and may the house of your servant David be firmly established before you.
For you, my God, have revealed to your servant your purpose to build him a house. That is why your servant has the confidence to offer this prayer to you.
And now, O Jehovah, you are the true God, and you have promised these good things concerning your servant.
So may it please you to bless the house of your servant, and may it continue forever before you, for you, O Jehovah, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.”
Later Naʹhash the king of the Amʹmon·ites died, and his son became king in his place.
At that David said: “I will show loyal love toward Haʹnun the son of Naʹhash, because his father showed loyal love toward me.” So David sent messengers to offer him comfort over the loss of his father. But when David’s servants came into the land of the Amʹmon·ites to comfort Haʹnun,
the princes of the Amʹmon·ites said to Haʹnun: “Do you think that David is honoring your father by sending comforters to you? Is it not to make a thorough search and to overthrow you and to spy out the land that his servants have come to you?”
So Haʹnun took the servants of David and shaved them and cut their garments in half at their buttocks and sent them away.
When David was told about the men, he at once sent others to meet them, because the men had been deeply humiliated; and the king told them: “Stay in Jerʹi·cho until your beards grow back, and then return.”
In time the Amʹmon·ites saw that they had become a stench to David, so Haʹnun and the Amʹmon·ites sent 1,000 silver talents to hire chariots and horsemen from Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Aʹram-maʹa·cah, and Zoʹbah.
Thus they hired 32,000 chariots, along with the king of Maʹa·cah and his people. Then they came and camped before Medʹe·ba. The Amʹmon·ites gathered together from their cities and came out for the battle.
When David heard about it, he sent Joʹab and the entire army, including his mightiest warriors.
And the Amʹmon·ites went out and drew up in battle formation at the entrance of the city while the kings who had come were by themselves in the open field.
When Joʹab saw that the battle charges were coming against him from the front and the rear, he chose some of the best troops in Israel and drew them up in battle formation to meet the Syrians.
He put the rest of the men under the command of his brother A·bishʹai, in order to draw them up in battle formation to meet the Amʹmon·ites.
Then he said: “If the Syrians become too strong for me, then you must come to my rescue; but if the Amʹmon·ites become too strong for you, I will rescue you.
We must be strong and courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and Jehovah will do what is good in his eyes.”
Then Joʹab and his men advanced to meet the Syrians in battle, and they fled from before him.
When the Amʹmon·ites saw that the Syrians had fled, they also fled from his brother A·bishʹai and went into the city. After that Joʹab came to Jerusalem.
When the Syrians saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers to summon the Syrians in the region of the River, with Shoʹphach the chief of the army of Had·ad·eʹzer leading them.
When the report was made to David, he immediately gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to them and drew up in battle formation against them. David drew up in battle formation to meet the Syrians, and they fought against him.
But the Syrians fled from Israel; and David killed 7,000 charioteers and 40,000 foot soldiers of the Syrians, and he put Shoʹphach the chief of the army to death.
When the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they promptly made peace with David and became his subjects; and Syria did not want to help the Amʹmon·ites anymore.
In time all the Israelites gathered to David at Hebʹron and said: “Look! We are your own bone and flesh.
In times past while Saul was king, you were the one who was leading Israel on its campaigns. And Jehovah your God said to you: ‘You will shepherd my people Israel, and you will become leader over my people Israel.’”
So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebʹron, and David made a covenant with them in Hebʹron before Jehovah. Then they anointed David as king over Israel, according to Jehovah’s word through Samuel.
Later David and all Israel set out for Jerusalem, that is, Jeʹbus, where the Jebʹu·sites were inhabiting the land.
The inhabitants of Jeʹbus taunted David: “You will never come in here!” However, David captured the stronghold of Zion, which is now the City of David.
So David said: “Whoever is the first to strike the Jebʹu·sites will become chief and prince.” And Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah went up first, and he became the chief.
Then David took up residence in the stronghold. That is why they called it the City of David.
He began to build up the city all around, from the Mound to the areas around it, and Joʹab restored the rest of the city.
Thus David became greater and greater, and Jehovah of armies was with him.
Now these are the heads of David’s mighty warriors, who gave him strong support in his kingship, together with all Israel, to make him king according to Jehovah’s word concerning Israel.
This is the list of David’s mighty warriors: Ja·shoʹbe·am the son of a Hachʹmon·ite, the head of the three. He brandished his spear over 300 slain at one time.
Next to him was El·e·aʹzar the son of Doʹdo the A·hoʹhite. He was among the three mighty warriors.
He was with David at Pas-damʹmim, where the Phi·lisʹtines had gathered together for war. Now there was a plot of land full of barley, and the people had fled because of the Phi·lisʹtines.
But he took his stand in the middle of the field and defended it and kept striking down the Phi·lisʹtines, so that Jehovah brought about a great victory.
Three of the 30 headmen went down to the rock, to David at the cave of A·dulʹlam, while a Phi·lisʹtine army was camped in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
David was then in the stronghold, and a garrison of the Phi·lisʹtines was in Bethʹle·hem.
Then David expressed his longing: “If only I could have a drink of the water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem!”
At that the three forced their way into the camp of the Phi·lisʹtines and drew water from the cistern by the gate of Bethʹle·hem and brought it to David; but David refused to drink it and poured it out to Jehovah.
He said: “It is unthinkable on my part from the standpoint of my God to do this! Should I drink the blood of these men who risked their lives? For it was at the risk of their lives that they brought it.” So he refused to drink it. These are the things that his three mighty warriors did.
A·bishʹai the brother of Joʹab became head of another three; he brandished his spear over 300 slain, and he had a reputation like the three.
Of the other three, he was more distinguished than two of them, and he was their chief; yet he did not attain to the rank of the first three.
Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was a courageous man who performed many exploits in Kabʹze·el. He struck down the two sons of Arʹi·el of Moʹab, and he descended into a waterpit on a snowy day and killed a lion.
He also struck down an Egyptian man of extraordinary size—five cubits tall. Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand like the beam of loom workers, he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
These things Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da did, and he had a reputation like that of the three mighty warriors.
Although he was distinguished even more than the thirty, he did not attain to the rank of the three. However, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.
The mighty warriors of the military forces were Asʹa·hel the brother of Joʹab, El·haʹnan the son of Doʹdo of Bethʹle·hem,
Shamʹmoth the Haʹro·rite, Heʹlez the Pelʹo·nite,
Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite, Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite,
Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite, Iʹlai the A·hoʹhite,
Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, Heʹled the son of Baʹa·nah the Ne·tophʹa·thite,
Iʹthai the son of Riʹbai of Gibʹe·ah of the Benʹja·min·ites, Be·naiʹah the Pirʹa·thon·ite,
Huʹrai of the wadis of Gaʹash, A·biʹel the Arʹbath·ite,
Azʹma·veth the Ba·haʹrum·ite, E·liʹah·ba the Sha·alʹbo·nite,
the sons of Haʹshem the Giʹzo·nite, Jonʹa·than the son of Shaʹgee the Harʹa·rite,
A·hiʹam the son of Saʹcar the Harʹa·rite, E·liʹphal the son of Ur,
Heʹpher the Me·cheʹrath·ite, A·hiʹjah the Pelʹo·nite,
Hezʹro the Carʹmel·ite, Naʹa·rai the son of Ezʹbai,
Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibʹhar the son of Hagʹri,
Zeʹlek the Amʹmon·ite, Naʹha·rai the Be·rothʹite, the armor-bearer of Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah;
Iʹra the Ithʹrite, Gaʹreb the Ithʹrite,
U·riʹah the Hitʹtite, Zaʹbad the son of Ahʹlai,
Adʹi·na the son of Shiʹza the Reuʹben·ite, a head of the Reuʹben·ites, and 30 with him;
Haʹnan the son of Maʹa·cah, Joshʹa·phat the Mithʹnite,
Uz·ziʹa the Ashʹte·rath·ite, Shaʹma and Je·iʹel, the sons of Hoʹtham the A·roʹer·ite;
Je·diʹa·el the son of Shimʹri, and Joʹha his brother the Tiʹzite;
Eʹli·el the Maʹha·vite, Jerʹi·bai and Josh·a·viʹah the sons of Elʹna·am, and Ithʹmah the Moʹab·ite;
Eʹli·el, Oʹbed, and Ja·a·siʹel the Me·zoʹba·ite.
The divisions of gatekeepers were as follows: of the Korʹah·ites, Me·shel·e·miʹah the son of Koʹre of the sons of Aʹsaph.
And Me·shel·e·miʹah had sons: Zekariah the firstborn, Je·diʹa·el the second, Zeb·a·diʹah the third, Jathʹni·el the fourth,
Eʹlam the fifth, Je·ho·haʹnan the sixth, Elʹie·ho-eʹnai the seventh.
And Oʹbed-eʹdom had sons: She·maiʹah the firstborn, Je·hozʹa·bad the second, Joʹah the third, Saʹcar the fourth, Ne·thanʹel the fifth,
Amʹmi·el the sixth, Isʹsa·char the seventh, and Pe·ulʹle·thai the eighth; for God had blessed him.
And to his son She·maiʹah, there were sons born who were rulers of their paternal house, for they were mighty, capable men.
The sons of She·maiʹah: Othʹni, Rephʹa·el, Oʹbed, and El·zaʹbad; and his brothers E·liʹhu and Sem·a·chiʹah were also capable men.
All of these were of the sons of Oʹbed-eʹdom; they and their sons and their brothers were capable men and qualified for the service, 62 belonging to Oʹbed-eʹdom.
And Me·shel·e·miʹah had sons and brothers, 18 capable men.
And Hoʹsah of the sons of Me·rarʹi had sons. Shimʹri was the head, for although he was not the firstborn, his father appointed him as head,
Hil·kiʹah the second, Teb·a·liʹah the third, Zekariah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hoʹsah were 13.
Of these divisions of the gatekeepers, the headmen had duties just as their brothers did, to minister at the house of Jehovah.
So they cast lots, the small and the great alike by their paternal houses, for the different gates.
Then the lot to the east fell to Shel·e·miʹah. For Zekariah his son, a discreet adviser, they cast the lots, and his lot came out to the north.
Oʹbed-eʹdom had his to the south, and his sons were assigned the storehouses.
Shupʹpim and Hoʹsah had theirs to the west, near the Shalʹlech·eth Gate by the highway that goes up, guard group corresponding to guard group;
there were six Levites to the east; to the north, four each day and to the south, four each day; and for the storehouses, two by two;
for the portico to the west, there were four at the highway and two at the portico.
These were the divisions of the gatekeepers from the sons of the Korʹah·ites and of the Me·rarʹites.
As regards the Levites, A·hiʹjah was in charge of the treasuries of the house of the true God and the treasuries of the things made holy.
The sons of Laʹdan: the sons of the Gerʹshon·ite belonging to Laʹdan, the heads of the paternal houses belonging to Laʹdan the Gerʹshon·ite, Je·hiʹe·li
and the sons of Je·hiʹe·li, Zeʹtham and his brother Joel. They were in charge of the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.
From the Amʹram·ites, the Izʹhar·ites, the Hebʹron·ites, and the Uz·ziʹel·ites,
Shebʹu·el son of Gerʹshom son of Moses was a leader in charge of the storehouses.
As regards his brothers, of E·li·eʹzer, there was Re·ha·biʹah his son, Je·shaʹiah his son, Joʹram his son, Zichʹri his son, and She·loʹmoth his son.
This She·loʹmoth and his brothers were in charge of all the treasuries of the things made holy, which King David, the heads of the paternal houses, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, and the chiefs of the army had made holy.
From the wars and from the spoil, they had made things holy to maintain the house of Jehovah;
also, all that Samuel the seer, Saul the son of Kish, Abʹner the son of Ner, and Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah had made holy. Whatever anyone made holy was put in the care of She·loʹmith and his brothers.
Of the Izʹhar·ites, Chen·a·niʹah and his sons were assigned outside administrative duties as officers and as judges over Israel.
Of the Hebʹron·ites, Hash·a·biʹah and his brothers, 1,700 capable men, were over the administration of Israel in the region west of the Jordan for all the work of Jehovah and for the king’s service.
Of the Hebʹron·ites, Je·riʹjah was the head of the Hebʹron·ites by line of descent of their paternal house. In the 40th year of David’s kingship, they were sought out, and mighty, capable men were found among them in Jaʹzer in Gilʹe·ad.
And his brothers numbered 2,700 capable men, heads of the paternal houses. So King David assigned them over the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of the Ma·nasʹsites, for every matter of the true God and matter of the king.
Adam,Seth,Eʹnosh,
Keʹnan,Ma·halʹa·lel,Jaʹred,
Eʹnoch,Me·thuʹse·lah,Laʹmech,
Noah,Shem, Ham, and Jaʹpheth.
The sons of Jaʹpheth were Goʹmer, Maʹgog, Maʹda·i, Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, Meʹshech, and Tiʹras.
The sons of Goʹmer were Ashʹke·naz, Riʹphath, and To·garʹmah.
The sons of Jaʹvan were E·liʹshah, Tarʹshish, Kitʹtim, and Roʹda·nim.
The sons of Ham were Cush, Mizʹra·im, Put, and Caʹnaan.
The sons of Cush were Seʹba, Havʹi·lah, Sabʹtah, Raʹa·mah, and Sabʹte·ca. The sons of Raʹa·mah were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
Cush became father to Nimʹrod. He was the first to become a mighty one on the earth.
Mizʹra·im became father to Luʹdim, Anʹa·mim, Le·haʹbim, Naph·tuʹhim,
Path·ruʹsim, Cas·luʹhim (from whom the Phi·lisʹtines came), and Caphʹto·rim.
Caʹnaan became father to Siʹdon, his firstborn, and Heth,
as well as the Jebʹu·site, the Amʹor·ite, the Girʹga·shite,
the Hiʹvite, the Arkʹite, the Siʹnite,
the Arʹvad·ite, the Zemʹa·rite, and the Haʹmath·ite.
The sons of Shem were Eʹlam, Asʹshur, Ar·pachʹshad, Lud, and Aʹram,and Uz, Hul, Geʹther, and Mash.
Ar·pachʹshad became father to Sheʹlah, and Sheʹlah became father to Eʹber.
Two sons were born to Eʹber. The name of the one was Peʹleg, because in his lifetime the earth was divided. The name of his brother was Jokʹtan.
Jokʹtan became father to Al·moʹdad, Sheʹleph, Ha·zar·maʹveth, Jeʹrah,
Ha·doʹram, Uʹzal, Dikʹlah,
Oʹbal, A·bimʹa·el, Sheʹba,
Oʹphir, Havʹi·lah, and Joʹbab; all of these were the sons of Jokʹtan.
Shem,Ar·pachʹshad,Sheʹlah,
Eʹber,Peʹleg,Reʹu,
Seʹrug,Naʹhor,Teʹrah,
Aʹbram, that is, Abraham.
The sons of Abraham were Isaac and Ishʹma·el.
These are their family origins: Ishʹma·el’s firstborn Ne·baʹioth, then Keʹdar, Adʹbe·el, Mibʹsam,
Mishʹma, Duʹmah, Masʹsa, Haʹdad, Teʹma,
Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Kedʹe·mah. These were the sons of Ishʹma·el.
The sons that Ke·tuʹrah, Abraham’s concubine, gave birth to were Zimʹran, Jokʹshan, Meʹdan, Midʹi·an, Ishʹbak, and Shuʹah. The sons of Jokʹshan were Sheʹba and Deʹdan.
The sons of Midʹi·an were Eʹphah, Eʹpher, Haʹnoch, A·biʹda, and El·daʹah. All of these were the sons of Ke·tuʹrah.
Abraham became father to Isaac. The sons of Isaac were Eʹsau and Israel.
The sons of Eʹsau were Elʹi·phaz, Reuʹel, Jeʹush, Jaʹlam, and Korʹah.
The sons of Elʹi·phaz were Teʹman, Oʹmar, Zeʹpho, Gaʹtam, Keʹnaz, Timʹna, and Amʹa·lek.
The sons of Reuʹel were Naʹhath, Zeʹrah, Shamʹmah, and Mizʹzah.
The sons of Seʹir were Loʹtan, Shoʹbal, Zibʹe·on, Aʹnah, Diʹshon, Eʹzer, and Diʹshan.
The sons of Loʹtan were Hoʹri and Hoʹmam. Loʹtan’s sister was Timʹna.
The sons of Shoʹbal were Alʹvan, Manʹa·hath, Eʹbal, Sheʹpho, and Oʹnam. The sons of Zibʹe·on were Aʹiah and Aʹnah.
The son of Aʹnah was Diʹshon. The sons of Diʹshon were Hemʹdan, Eshʹban, Ithʹran, and Cheʹran.
The sons of Eʹzer were Bilʹhan, Zaʹa·van, and Aʹkan. The sons of Diʹshan were Uz and Aʹran.
These are the kings who reigned in the land of Eʹdom before any king reigned over the Israelites: Beʹla the son of Beʹor; the name of his city was Dinʹha·bah.
When Beʹla died, Joʹbab the son of Zeʹrah from Bozʹrah began to reign in his place.
When Joʹbab died, Huʹsham from the land of the Teʹman·ites began to reign in his place.
When Huʹsham died, Haʹdad the son of Beʹdad, who defeated Midʹi·an in the territory of Moʹab, began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Aʹvith.
When Haʹdad died, Samʹlah from Mas·reʹkah began to reign in his place.
When Samʹlah died, Shaʹul from Re·hoʹboth by the River began to reign in his place.
When Shaʹul died, Baʹal-haʹnan the son of Achʹbor began to reign in his place.
When Baʹal-haʹnan died, Haʹdad began to reign in his place. The name of his city was Paʹu, and the name of his wife was Me·hetʹa·bel the daughter of Maʹtred, the daughter of Meʹza·hab.
Then Haʹdad died. The sheikhs of Eʹdom were Sheikh Timʹna, Sheikh Alʹvah, Sheikh Jeʹtheth,
Sheikh O·hol·i·baʹmah, Sheikh Eʹlah, Sheikh Piʹnon,
Sheikh Keʹnaz, Sheikh Teʹman, Sheikh Mibʹzar,
Sheikh Magʹdi·el, Sheikh Iʹram. These were the sheikhs of Eʹdom.
Now the sons of Isʹsa·char were Toʹla, Puʹah, Jaʹshub, and Shimʹron—four.
And the sons of Toʹla were Uzʹzi, Re·phaʹiah, Jeʹri·el, Jahʹmai, Ibʹsam, and She·muʹel, the heads of their paternal houses. Descended from Toʹla were mighty warriors, whose number in the days of David was 22,600.
And the descendants of Uzʹzi were Iz·ra·hiʹah and the sons of Iz·ra·hiʹah: Miʹcha·el, O·ba·diʹah, Joel, and Is·shiʹah—all five of them were chiefs.
And with them by their descendants, according to their paternal houses, there were 36,000 soldiers in their army available for war, for they had many wives and sons.
And their brothers of all the families of Isʹsa·char were mighty warriors, 87,000 as listed in the genealogical enrollment.
The sons of Benjamin were Beʹla, Beʹcher, and Je·diʹa·el—three.
And the sons of Beʹla were Ezʹbon, Uzʹzi, Uzʹzi·el, Jerʹi·moth, and Iʹri—five—heads of their paternal houses, mighty warriors, and 22,034 were in their genealogical enrollment.
And the sons of Beʹcher were Ze·miʹrah, Joʹash, E·li·eʹzer, Eli·o·eʹnai, Omʹri, Jerʹe·moth, A·biʹjah, Anʹa·thoth, and Alʹe·meth—all of these were the sons of Beʹcher.
Their genealogical enrollment by their descendants as respects the heads of their paternal houses was 20,200 mighty warriors.
And the sons of Je·diʹa·el were Bilʹhan and the sons of Bilʹhan: Jeʹush, Benjamin, Eʹhud, Che·naʹa·nah, Zeʹthan, Tarʹshish, and A·hishʹa·har.
All of these were the sons of Je·diʹa·el, according to the heads of their forefathers, 17,200 mighty warriors ready to go out to the army for war.
The Shupʹpim and the Hupʹpim were the sons of Ir; the Huʹshim were the sons of Aʹher.
The sons of Naphʹta·li were Jahʹzi·el, Guʹni, Jeʹzer, and Shalʹlum—descendants of Bilʹhah.
The sons of Ma·nasʹseh: Asʹri·el, whom his Syrian concubine bore. (She bore Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad.
Maʹchir took a wife for Hupʹpim and for Shupʹpim, and the name of his sister was Maʹa·cah.) The name of the second was Ze·loʹphe·had, but Ze·loʹphe·had had daughters.
Maʹa·cah, Maʹchir’s wife, bore a son and named him Peʹresh; and the name of his brother was Sheʹresh; and his sons were Uʹlam and Reʹkem.
And the son of Uʹlam was Beʹdan. These were the sons of Gilʹe·ad son of Maʹchir son of Ma·nasʹseh.
And his sister was Ham·moʹle·cheth. She gave birth to Ishʹhod, Abi-eʹzer, and Mahʹlah.
And the sons of She·miʹda were A·hiʹan, Sheʹchem, Likʹhi, and A·niʹam.
The sons of Eʹphra·im were Shuʹthe·lah, Beʹred his son, Taʹhath his son, E·le·aʹdah his son, Taʹhath his son,
Zaʹbad his son, Shuʹthe·lah his son, Eʹzer, and Eʹle·ad. The men of Gath who were born in the land killed them because they went down to take their livestock.
Eʹphra·im their father carried on mourning for many days, and his brothers kept coming in to comfort him.
Afterward he had relations with his wife, and she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. But he named him Be·riʹah because it was with calamity that she was in his house.
And his daughter was Sheʹe·rah, who built Lower and Upper Beth-hoʹron and Uzʹzen-sheʹe·rah.
And there was Reʹphah his son, Reʹsheph, Teʹlah his son, Taʹhan his son,
Laʹdan his son, Am·miʹhud his son, E·lishʹa·ma his son,
Nun his son, and Joshua his son.
Their possession and their settlements were Bethʹel and its dependent towns, and to the east Naʹa·ran, and to the west Geʹzer and its dependent towns, and Sheʹchem and its dependent towns, as far as Ayʹyah and its dependent towns;
and next to the descendants of Ma·nasʹseh, Beth-sheʹan and its dependent towns, Taʹa·nach and its dependent towns, Me·gidʹdo and its dependent towns, and Dor and its dependent towns. In these the descendants of Joseph the son of Israel lived.
The sons of Ashʹer were Imʹnah, Ishʹvah, Ishʹvi, and Be·riʹah, and their sister was Seʹrah.
The sons of Be·riʹah were Heʹber and Malʹchi·el, who was the father of Birʹza·ith.
Heʹber became father to Japhʹlet, Shoʹmer, and Hoʹtham, and to Shuʹa their sister.
The sons of Japhʹlet were Paʹsach, Bimʹhal, and Ashʹvath. These were the sons of Japhʹlet.
The sons of Sheʹmer were Aʹhi, Rohʹgah, Je·hubʹbah, and Aʹram.
The sons of Heʹlem his brother were Zoʹphah, Imʹna, Sheʹlesh, and Aʹmal.
The sons of Zoʹphah were Suʹah, Harʹne·pher, Shuʹal, Beʹri, Imʹrah,
Beʹzer, Hod, Shamʹma, Shilʹshah, Ithʹran, and Be·eʹra.
The sons of Jeʹther were Je·phunʹneh, Pisʹpah, and Aʹra.
The sons of Ulʹla were Aʹrah, Hanʹni·el, and Ri·ziʹa.
All of these were the sons of Ashʹer, heads of their paternal houses, select, mighty warriors, heads of the chieftains; and their number listed in the genealogical enrollment was 26,000 men in the army available for war.
Further, David and the chiefs of the groups for the service separated some of the sons of Aʹsaph, Heʹman, and Je·duʹthun to serve by prophesying with the harps, the stringed instruments, and the cymbals. The list of the official men for this service was,
of the sons of Aʹsaph: Zacʹcur, Joseph, Neth·a·niʹah, and Ash·a·reʹlah, the sons of Aʹsaph under the direction of Aʹsaph, who prophesied under the direction of the king.
Of Je·duʹthun, the sons of Je·duʹthun: Ged·a·liʹah, Zeʹri, Je·shaʹiah, Shimʹe·i, Hash·a·biʹah, and Mat·ti·thiʹah, six, under the direction of their father Je·duʹthun, who prophesied with the harp, thanking and praising Jehovah.
Of Heʹman, the sons of Heʹman: Buk·kiʹah, Mat·ta·niʹah, Uzʹzi·el, Shebʹu·el, Jerʹi·moth, Han·a·niʹah, Ha·naʹni, E·liʹa·thah, Gid·dalʹti, Ro·mamʹti-eʹzer, Josh·be·kashʹah, Mal·loʹthi, Hoʹthir, and Ma·haʹzi·oth.
All of these were sons of Heʹman, a visionary of the king in matters pertaining to the true God to his glory; thus the true God gave Heʹman 14 sons and 3 daughters.
All of these were under the direction of their father for singing at the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps for the service of the house of the true God. Under the king’s direction were Aʹsaph, Je·duʹthun, and Heʹman.
The number of them and their brothers who were trained in song to Jehovah, all experts, was 288.
So they cast lots for their duties, the small and the great alike, the expert along with the learner.
The first lot to come out belonged to Aʹsaph for Joseph, the second for Ged·a·liʹah (he and his brothers and his sons were 12);
the third for Zacʹcur, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the fourth for Izʹri, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the fifth for Neth·a·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the sixth for Buk·kiʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the seventh for Jesh·a·reʹlah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the eighth for Je·shaʹiah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the ninth for Mat·ta·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the tenth for Shimʹe·i, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the 11th for Azʹar·el, his sons and his brothers, 12;
the 12th for Hash·a·biʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 13th, Shuʹba·el, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 14th, Mat·ti·thiʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 15th, for Jerʹe·moth, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 16th, for Han·a·niʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 17th, for Josh·be·kashʹah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 18th, for Ha·naʹni, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 19th, for Mal·loʹthi, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 20th, for E·liʹa·thah, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 21st, for Hoʹthir, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 22nd, for Gid·dalʹti, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 23rd, for Ma·haʹzi·oth, his sons and his brothers, 12;
for the 24th, for Ro·mamʹti-eʹzer, his sons and his brothers, 12.
David consulted with the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds and with every leader.
Then David said to all the congregation of Israel: “If it seems good to you and it is acceptable to Jehovah our God, let us send word to our remaining brothers in all regions of Israel and also to the priests and the Levites in their cities with pastures to come and join us.
And let us bring back the Ark of our God.” For they had not cared for it in the days of Saul.
All the congregation agreed to do that, for it seemed right to all the people.
So David congregated all Israel, from the river of Egypt as far as Leʹbo-haʹmath, to bring the Ark of the true God from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim.
David and all Israel went up to Baʹal·ah, to Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, which belongs to Judah, to bring up from there the Ark of the true God, Jehovah, who sits enthroned above the cherubs, where his name is called on.
However, they placed the Ark of the true God on a new wagon and brought it from the house of A·binʹa·dab, and Uzʹzah and A·hiʹo were leading the wagon.
David and all Israel were celebrating before the true God with all their might, accompanied by songs, harps, other stringed instruments, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.
But when they came to the threshing floor of Chiʹdon, Uzʹzah thrust his hand out and grabbed hold of the Ark, for the cattle nearly upset it.
At that Jehovah’s anger blazed against Uzʹzah, and He struck him down because he had thrust his hand out to the Ark, and he died there before God.
But David became angry because Jehovah’s wrath had broken through against Uzʹzah; and that place has been called Peʹrez-uzʹzah down to this day.
So David became fearful of the true God on that day and said: “How can I bring the Ark of the true God to me?”
David did not bring the Ark to where he was in the City of David, but he had it taken to the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom the Gitʹtite.
The Ark of the true God was with the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom, remaining at his house for three months, and Jehovah kept blessing the household of Oʹbed-eʹdom and all he had.
Then Satan stood up against Israel and incited David to number Israel.
So David said to Joʹab and the chiefs of the people: “Go, count Israel from Beʹer-sheʹba to Dan; then report to me so that I may know their number.”
But Joʹab said: “May Jehovah multiply his people 100 times! My lord the king, are not all of them already servants of my lord? Why does my lord want to do this? Why should he become a cause of guilt to Israel?”
But the king’s word prevailed over Joʹab. So Joʹab went out and traveled throughout Israel, after which he came to Jerusalem.
Joʹab now gave to David the number of the people who were registered. All Israel amounted to 1,100,000 men armed with swords, and Judah, 470,000 men armed with swords.
But Leʹvi and Benjamin were not registered among them, because the king’s word was detestable to Joʹab.
Now this was very displeasing to the true God, so he struck Israel.
David then said to the true God: “I have sinned greatly by doing this. And now, please, forgive your servant’s error, for I have acted very foolishly.”
Jehovah then spoke to Gad, David’s visionary, saying:
“Go and say to David, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I am giving you three options. Choose the one that I should bring on you.”’”
So Gad came in to David and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Take your pick
whether there should be three years of famine, or three months of being swept away by your adversaries while the sword of your enemies overtakes you, or three days of the sword of Jehovah—pestilence in the land—with Jehovah’s angel bringing destruction in all the territory of Israel.’ Now consider what I should reply to the One who sent me.”
So David said to Gad: “It is very distressing to me. Please, let me fall into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercy is very great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”
Then Jehovah sent a pestilence on Israel, so that 70,000 people out of Israel fell.
Moreover, the true God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it; but as he was about to do so, Jehovah saw it and felt regret over the calamity, and he said to the angel bringing destruction: “It is enough! Now let your hand drop.” Jehovah’s angel was standing close to the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site.
When David raised his eyes, he saw Jehovah’s angel standing between the earth and the heavens with a drawn sword in his hand extended toward Jerusalem. David and the elders, covered with sackcloth, at once threw themselves down with their faces to the ground.
David said to the true God: “Was it not I who said to number the people? I am the one who sinned, and I am the one who did wrong; but these sheep—what have they done? O Jehovah my God, let your hand, please, come against me and my father’s house; but do not bring this scourge on your people.”
Jehovah’s angel then told Gad to tell David to go up and erect an altar to Jehovah on the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site.
So David went up at the word of Gad, which he had spoken in the name of Jehovah.
Meanwhile, Orʹnan turned around and saw the angel, and his four sons who were with him hid themselves. Now Orʹnan had been threshing wheat.
When David came up to him, Orʹnan looked and saw David, and he immediately went out from the threshing floor and bowed down to David with his face to the ground.
David said to Orʹnan: “Sell me the site of the threshing floor, so that I may build an altar to Jehovah on it. Sell it to me for the full price, so that the scourge against the people may be halted.”
But Orʹnan said to David: “Take it as your own, and let my lord the king do what seems good to him. Here, I am providing the cattle for burnt offerings and the threshing sledge for the wood and the wheat as a grain offering. I give all of it.”
However, King David said to Orʹnan: “No, I must buy it for the full price, because I will not take what is yours and give it to Jehovah or offer up burnt sacrifices that cost me nothing.”
So David gave Orʹnan 600 gold shekels by weight for the site.
And David built an altar there to Jehovah and offered up burnt sacrifices and communion sacrifices, and he called on Jehovah, who now answered him with fire from the heavens on the altar of burnt offering.
Then Jehovah ordered the angel to return his sword to its sheath.
At that time, when David saw that Jehovah had answered him at the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site, he continued to sacrifice there.
However, the tabernacle of Jehovah that Moses had made in the wilderness and the altar of burnt offering were at that time on the high place at Gibʹe·on.
But David had not been able to go before it to consult God, for he was terrified because of the sword of Jehovah’s angel.
These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebʹron: the firstborn Amʹnon, whose mother was A·hinʹo·am of Jezʹre·el; the second, Daniel, whose mother was Abʹi·gail the Carʹmel·ite;
the third, Abʹsa·lom the son of Maʹa·cah the daughter of Talʹmai the king of Geshʹur; the fourth, Ad·o·niʹjah the son of Hagʹgith;
the fifth, Sheph·a·tiʹah, whose mother was A·biʹtal; and the sixth, Ithʹre·am, whose mother was David’s wife Egʹlah.
These six were born to him in Hebʹron; he reigned there for 7 years and 6 months, and for 33 years he reigned in Jerusalem.
These were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimʹe·a, Shoʹbab, Nathan, and Solʹo·mon; the mother of these four was Bath-sheʹba the daughter of Amʹmi·el.
And nine other sons were Ibʹhar, E·lishʹa·ma, E·liphʹe·let,
Noʹgah, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa,
E·lishʹa·ma, E·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.
All of these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines, and Taʹmar was their sister.
The son of Solʹo·mon was Re·ho·boʹam; A·biʹjah was his son, Aʹsa his son, Je·hoshʹa·phat his son,
Je·hoʹram his son, A·ha·ziʹah his son, Je·hoʹash his son,
Am·a·ziʹah his son, Az·a·riʹah his son, Joʹtham his son,
Aʹhaz his son, Hez·e·kiʹah his son, Ma·nasʹseh his son,
Aʹmon his son, Jo·siʹah his son.
The sons of Jo·siʹah were the firstborn, Jo·haʹnan, the second, Je·hoiʹa·kim, the third, Zed·e·kiʹah, the fourth, Shalʹlum.
The sons of Je·hoiʹa·kim were Jec·o·niʹah his son and Zed·e·kiʹah his son.
The sons of Jec·o·niʹah the prisoner were She·alʹti·el,
Mal·chiʹram, Pe·daiʹah, She·nazʹzar, Jek·a·miʹah, Hoshʹa·ma, and Ned·a·biʹah.
The sons of Pe·daiʹah were Ze·rubʹba·bel and Shimʹe·i; and the sons of Ze·rubʹba·bel were Me·shulʹlam and Han·a·niʹah (and She·loʹmith was their sister);
and five other sons were Ha·shuʹbah, Oʹhel, Ber·e·chiʹah, Has·a·diʹah, and Juʹshab-heʹsed.
And the sons of Han·a·niʹah were Pel·a·tiʹah and Je·shaʹiah; the son of Je·shaʹiah was Re·phaʹiah; the son of Re·phaʹiah was Arʹnan; the son of Arʹnan was O·ba·diʹah; the son of O·ba·diʹah was Shec·a·niʹah;
and the sons of Shec·a·niʹah were She·maiʹah and the sons of She·maiʹah: Hatʹtush, Iʹgal, Ba·riʹah, Ne·a·riʹah, and Shaʹphat—six in all.
And the sons of Ne·a·riʹah were Eli·o·eʹnai, Hiz·kiʹah, and Az·riʹkam, three.
And the sons of Eli·o·eʹnai were Hod·a·viʹah, E·liʹa·shib, Pe·laʹiah, Akʹkub, Jo·haʹnan, De·laʹiah, and A·naʹni, seven.
All the Israelites were enrolled genealogically, and they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel. And Judah was taken into exile to Babylon for their unfaithfulness.
The first inhabitants to return to their possession in their cities were some Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants.
And some of the descendants of Judah, of Benjamin, of Eʹphra·im, and of Ma·nasʹseh settled in Jerusalem:
Uʹthai son of Am·miʹhud son of Omʹri son of Imʹri son of Baʹni, of the descendants of Peʹrez son of Judah.
And of the Shiʹlo·nites, A·saiʹah the firstborn and his sons.
And of the sons of Zeʹrah, Je·uʹel and 690 of their brothers.
And of the descendants of Benjamin, Salʹlu son of Me·shulʹlam son of Hod·a·viʹah son of Has·se·nuʹah,
Ib·neʹiah son of Je·roʹham, Eʹlah son of Uzʹzi son of Michʹri, and Me·shulʹlam son of Sheph·a·tiʹah son of Reuʹel son of Ib·niʹjah.
And their brothers by line of descent were 956. All these men were heads of their paternal houses.
And of the priests, there were Je·daʹiah, Je·hoiʹa·rib, Jaʹchin,
Az·a·riʹah son of Hil·kiʹah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Zaʹdok son of Me·raʹioth son of A·hiʹtub, a leader of the house of the true God,
A·daiʹah son of Je·roʹham son of Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah, Maʹa·sai son of Adʹi·el son of Jahʹze·rah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Me·shilʹle·mith son of Imʹmer,
and their brothers, heads of the paternal houses, 1,760 mighty, capable men available for the service of the house of the true God.
And of the Levites, there were She·maiʹah son of Hasʹshub son of Az·riʹkam son of Hash·a·biʹah from the descendants of Me·rarʹi;
and Bak·bakʹkar, Heʹresh, Gaʹlal, Mat·ta·niʹah son of Miʹca son of Zichʹri son of Aʹsaph,
O·ba·diʹah son of She·maiʹah son of Gaʹlal son of Je·duʹthun, and Ber·e·chiʹah son of Aʹsa son of El·kaʹnah, who was dwelling in the settlements of the Ne·tophʹa·thites.
The gatekeepers were Shalʹlum, Akʹkub, Talʹmon, A·hiʹman, and their brother Shalʹlum the head,
and until then he was at the king’s gate to the east. These were the gatekeepers of the camps of the Levites.
And Shalʹlum son of Koʹre son of E·biʹa·saph son of Korʹah, and his brothers of his paternal house, the Korʹah·ites, were over the duties of the service, the doorkeepers of the tent, and their fathers had been over the camp of Jehovah as the keepers of the entryway.
It was Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar who had been their leader in the past; Jehovah was with him.
Zekariah the son of Me·shel·e·miʹah was the gatekeeper of the entrance of the tent of meeting.
All those selected as gatekeepers at the thresholds numbered 212. They were in their settlements by their genealogical enrollment. David and Samuel the seer appointed these to their office of trust.
They and their sons were over the guard service for the gates of the house of Jehovah, the house of the tent.
The gatekeepers were on the four sides—east, west, north, and south.
From time to time, their brothers were to come in from their settlements for seven days to serve along with them.
There were four chief gatekeepers in the office of trust. They were Levites, and they were in charge of the chambers and of the treasuries of the house of the true God.
They would spend the night in their stations all around the house of the true God, for they cared for the guard service and were in charge of the key and would open up the house from morning to morning.
Some of them were in charge of the utensils of the service; they would count them when they brought them in and count them when they took them out.
Some of them were appointed over the utensils, over all the holy utensils, and over the fine flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the balsam oil.
Some of the sons of the priests mixed the ointment of balsam oil.
And Mat·ti·thiʹah of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shalʹlum the Korʹah·ite, was in the office of trust over the things baked in pans.
Some of their brothers of the Koʹhath·ites were in charge of the layer bread, to prepare it every sabbath.
These were the singers, the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites in the chambers, those set free from other duties; for by day and by night it was their responsibility to be on duty.
These were the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites by their line of descent, headmen. These lived in Jerusalem.
The father of Gibʹe·on, Je·iʹel, lived in Gibʹe·on. His wife’s name was Maʹa·cah.
And his firstborn son was Abʹdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baʹal, Ner, Naʹdab,
Geʹdor, A·hiʹo, Zekariah, and Mikʹloth.
Mikʹloth became father to Shimʹe·am. And they all lived near their brothers in Jerusalem, along with their other brothers.
Ner became father to Kish; Kish became father to Saul; Saul became father to Jonʹa·than, Malʹchi-shuʹa, A·binʹa·dab, and Esh·baʹal.
And Jonʹa·than’s son was Merʹib-baʹal. Merʹib-baʹal became father to Miʹcah.
And the sons of Miʹcah were Piʹthon, Melʹech, Tahrʹe·a, and Aʹhaz.
Aʹhaz became father to Jaʹrah; Jaʹrah became father to Alʹe·meth, Azʹma·veth, and Zimʹri. Zimʹri became father to Moʹza.
Moʹza became father to Binʹe·a and Re·phaʹiah his son, El·e·aʹsah his son, Aʹzel his son.
Aʹzel had six sons, and their names were Az·riʹkam, Boʹche·ru, Ishʹma·el, She·a·riʹah, O·ba·diʹah, and Haʹnan. These were the sons of Aʹzel.
Now the divisions of the descendants of Aaron were these: The sons of Aaron were Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.
However, Naʹdab and A·biʹhu died before their father, and they did not have any sons; but El·e·aʹzar and Ithʹa·mar continued to serve as priests.
David, along with Zaʹdok from the sons of El·e·aʹzar and A·himʹe·lech from the sons of Ithʹa·mar, made divisions of them for the office of their service.
Since the sons of El·e·aʹzar had more headmen than the sons of Ithʹa·mar had, they divided them accordingly: The sons of El·e·aʹzar had 16 as heads of their paternal houses, and the sons of Ithʹa·mar had 8 as heads of their paternal houses.
Further, they divided them by lots, the one group along with the other, for there were chiefs of the holy place and chiefs of the true God from both the sons of El·e·aʹzar and the sons of Ithʹa·mar.
Then She·maiʹah the son of Ne·thanʹel the secretary of the Levites recorded their names before the king, the princes, Zaʹdok the priest, A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar, and the heads of the paternal houses of the priests and of the Levites, one paternal house being selected for El·e·aʹzar and one being selected for Ithʹa·mar.
The first lot came out to Je·hoiʹa·rib; the second to Je·daʹiah,
the third to Haʹrim, the fourth to Se·oʹrim,
the fifth to Mal·chiʹjah, the sixth to Mijʹa·min,
the seventh to Hakʹkoz, the eighth to A·biʹjah,
the ninth to Jeshʹu·a, the tenth to Shec·a·niʹah,
the 11th to E·liʹa·shib, the 12th to Jaʹkim,
the 13th to Hupʹpah, the 14th to Je·shebʹe·ab,
the 15th to Bilʹgah, the 16th to Imʹmer,
the 17th to Heʹzir, the 18th to Hapʹpiz·zez,
the 19th to Peth·a·hiʹah, the 20th to Je·hezʹkel,
the 21st to Jaʹchin, the 22nd to Gaʹmul,
the 23rd to De·laʹiah, the 24th to Ma·a·ziʹah.
These were their offices for their service when they would come into the house of Jehovah according to the procedure set by their forefather Aaron, just as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded him.
And of the rest of the Levites: of the sons of Amʹram, there was Shuʹba·el; of the sons of Shuʹba·el, Jeh·deʹiah;
of Re·ha·biʹah: of the sons of Re·ha·biʹah, Is·shiʹah the head;
of the Izʹhar·ites, She·loʹmoth; of the sons of She·loʹmoth, Jaʹhath;
and of the sons of Hebʹron, Je·riʹah the head, Am·a·riʹah the second, Ja·ha·ziʹel the third, Jek·a·meʹam the fourth;
of the sons of Uzʹzi·el, Miʹcah; of the sons of Miʹcah, Shaʹmir.
The brother of Miʹcah was Is·shiʹah; of the sons of Is·shiʹah, Zekariah.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi; of the sons of Ja·a·ziʹah, Beʹno.
The sons of Me·rarʹi: of Ja·a·ziʹah, Beʹno, Shoʹham, Zacʹcur, and Ibʹri;
of Mahʹli, El·e·aʹzar, who did not have any sons;
of Kish: the sons of Kish, Je·rahʹme·el;
and the sons of Muʹshi were Mahʹli, Eʹder, and Jerʹi·moth. These were the sons of Leʹvi by their paternal houses.
And they also cast lots just as their brothers the sons of Aaron did in the presence of King David, Zaʹdok, A·himʹe·lech, and the heads of the paternal houses of the priests and of the Levites. Regarding the paternal houses, the head one was just as his younger brother.
This is the number of Israelites, the heads of the paternal houses, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, and their officers who ministered to the king in every matter of the divisions that would come in and go out month by month during all the months of the year; there were 24,000 in each division.
Over the first division of the first month was Ja·shoʹbe·am the son of Zabʹdi·el, and 24,000 were in his division.
Of the sons of Peʹrez, he was the head of all the chiefs of the groups assigned to serve during the first month.
Over the division of the second month was Doʹdai the A·hoʹhite with his division, and Mikʹloth was the leader, and 24,000 were in his division.
The chief of the third group assigned to serve during the third month was Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da the chief priest, and 24,000 were in his division.
This Be·naiʹah was a mighty warrior of the thirty and in charge of the thirty, and over his division was his son Am·mizʹa·bad.
The fourth for the fourth month was Asʹa·hel, Joʹab’s brother, and his son Zeb·a·diʹah after him, and 24,000 were in his division.
The fifth chief for the fifth month was Shamʹhuth the Izʹrah·ite, and 24,000 were in his division.
The sixth for the sixth month was Iʹra the son of Ikʹkesh the Te·koʹite, and 24,000 were in his division.
The seventh for the seventh month was Heʹlez the Pelʹo·nite of the Eʹphra·im·ites, and 24,000 were in his division.
The eighth for the eighth month was Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite of the Zeʹrah·ites, and 24,000 were in his division.
The ninth for the ninth month was Abi-eʹzer the Anʹa·thoth·ite of the Benʹja·min·ites, and 24,000 were in his division.
The tenth for the tenth month was Maʹha·rai the Ne·tophʹa·thite of the Zeʹrah·ites, and 24,000 were in his division.
The 11th for the 11th month was Be·naiʹah the Pirʹa·thon·ite of the sons of Eʹphra·im, and 24,000 were in his division.
The 12th for the 12th month was Helʹdai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, of Othʹni·el, and 24,000 were in his division.
These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel: Of the Reuʹben·ites, E·li·eʹzer the son of Zichʹri was leader; of the Simʹe·on·ites, Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of Maʹa·cah;
of Leʹvi, Hash·a·biʹah the son of Kem·uʹel; of Aaron, Zaʹdok;
of Judah, E·liʹhu, one of David’s brothers; of Isʹsa·char, Omʹri the son of Miʹcha·el;
of Zebʹu·lun, Ish·maʹiah the son of O·ba·diʹah; of Naphʹta·li, Jerʹi·moth the son of Azʹri·el;
of the Eʹphra·im·ites, Ho·sheʹa the son of Az·a·ziʹah; of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Joel the son of Pe·daiʹah;
of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Gilʹe·ad, Idʹdo the son of Zekariah; of Benjamin, Ja·a·siʹel the son of Abʹner;
of Dan, Azʹar·el the son of Je·roʹham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.
David did not count those 20 years of age and under, because Jehovah had promised to make Israel as many as the stars of the heavens.
Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah had started to take the count, but he did not finish; and God’s anger came against Israel because of this, and the number was not entered into the account of the history of the times of King David.
Over the treasuries of the king was Azʹma·veth the son of Adʹi·el. Jonʹa·than the son of Uz·ziʹah was over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, in the villages, and in the towers.
Over the field workers who cultivated the soil was Ezʹri the son of Cheʹlub.
Shimʹe·i the Raʹmath·ite was over the vineyards; over the produce of the vineyards for the wine supplies was Zabʹdi the Shiphʹmite.
Over the olive groves and the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah was Baʹal-haʹnan the Ge·deʹrite; over the oil supplies was Joʹash.
Over the herds that grazed in Sharʹon was Shitʹrai the Sharʹon·ite, and Shaʹphat the son of Adʹlai was over the herds in the valley plains.
Over the camels was Oʹbil the Ishʹma·el·ite; over the donkeys was Jeh·deʹiah the Me·ronʹo·thite.
Over the flocks was Jaʹziz the Hagʹrite. All of these were the chiefs of King David’s property.
Jonʹa·than, David’s nephew, was an adviser, a man of understanding and a secretary, and Je·hiʹel the son of Hachʹmo·ni looked after the king’s sons.
A·hithʹo·phel was an adviser to the king, and Huʹshai the Arʹchite was the king’s friend.
After A·hithʹo·phel there were Je·hoiʹa·da the son of Be·naiʹah and A·biʹa·thar; and Joʹab was chief of the king’s army.
These were the sons of Israel: Reuʹben, Simʹe·on, Leʹvi, Judah, Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun,
Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphʹta·li, Gad, and Ashʹer.
The sons of Judah were Er, Oʹnan, and Sheʹlah. These three were born to him from Shuʹa’s daughter, the Caʹnaan·it·ess. But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was displeasing to Jehovah, so He put him to death.
Taʹmar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore to him Peʹrez and Zeʹrah. Judah had five sons in all.
The sons of Peʹrez were Hezʹron and Haʹmul.
The sons of Zeʹrah were Zimʹri, Eʹthan, Heʹman, Calʹcol, and Daʹra. There were five of them in all.
The son of Carʹmi was Aʹchar, who brought disaster on Israel, who was unfaithful with regard to what had been devoted to destruction.
The son of Eʹthan was Az·a·riʹah.
The sons of Hezʹron who were born to him were Je·rahʹme·el, Ram, and Che·luʹbai.
Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab. Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon the chieftain of the descendants of Judah.
Nahʹshon became father to Salʹma. Salʹma became father to Boʹaz.
Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed. Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse.
Jesʹse became father to his firstborn E·liʹab, A·binʹa·dab the second, Shimʹe·a the third,
Ne·thanʹel the fourth, Radʹdai the fifth,
Oʹzem the sixth, and David the seventh.
Their sisters were Ze·ruʹiah and Abʹi·gail. The sons of Ze·ruʹiah were A·bishʹai, Joʹab, and Asʹa·hel, three.
Abʹi·gail gave birth to A·maʹsa, and the father of A·maʹsa was Jeʹther the Ishʹma·el·ite.
Caʹleb the son of Hezʹron became father to sons by his wife A·zuʹbah and by Jerʹi·oth; and these were her sons: Jeʹsher, Shoʹbab, and Arʹdon.
When A·zuʹbah died, Caʹleb married Ephʹrath, and she bore Hur to him.
Hur became father to Uʹri. Uʹri became father to Bezʹal·el.
Afterward Hezʹron had relations with the daughter of Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad. He married her when he was 60 years old, and she bore Seʹgub to him.
Seʹgub became father to Jaʹir, who had 23 cities in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
Later Geshʹur and Syria took Havʹvoth-jaʹir from them, along with Keʹnath and its dependent towns, 60 cities. All of these were the descendants of Maʹchir the father of Gilʹe·ad.
After the death of Hezʹron in Caʹleb-ephʹra·thah, A·biʹjah the wife of Hezʹron bore him Ashʹhur the father of Te·koʹa.
The sons of Je·rahʹme·el the firstborn of Hezʹron were Ram the firstborn, Buʹnah, Oʹren, Oʹzem, and A·hiʹjah.
Je·rahʹme·el had another wife, whose name was Atʹa·rah. She was the mother of Oʹnam.
The sons of Ram the firstborn of Je·rahʹme·el were Maʹaz, Jaʹmin, and Eʹker.
The sons of Oʹnam were Shamʹmai and Jaʹda. The sons of Shamʹmai were Naʹdab and A·biʹshur.
The name of A·biʹshur’s wife was Abʹi·ha·il, who bore him Ahʹban and Moʹlid.
The sons of Naʹdab were Seʹled and Apʹpa·im. But Seʹled died without sons.
The son of Apʹpa·im was Ishʹi. And the son of Ishʹi was Sheʹshan, and the son of Sheʹshan, Ahʹlai.
The sons of Jaʹda the brother of Shamʹmai were Jeʹther and Jonʹa·than. But Jeʹther died without sons.
The sons of Jonʹa·than were Peʹleth and Zaʹza. These were the descendants of Je·rahʹme·el.
Sheʹshan had no sons, only daughters. Now Sheʹshan had an Egyptian servant whose name was Jarʹha.
Sheʹshan gave his daughter to be the wife of his servant Jarʹha, and she bore him Atʹtai.
Atʹtai became father to Nathan. Nathan became father to Zaʹbad.
Zaʹbad became father to Ephʹlal. Ephʹlal became father to Oʹbed.
Oʹbed became father to Jeʹhu. Jeʹhu became father to Az·a·riʹah.
Az·a·riʹah became father to Heʹlez. Heʹlez became father to El·e·aʹsah.
El·e·aʹsah became father to Sisʹmai. Sisʹmai became father to Shalʹlum.
Shalʹlum became father to Jek·a·miʹah. Jek·a·miʹah became father to E·lishʹa·ma.
The sons of Caʹleb the brother of Je·rahʹme·el were Meʹsha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and the sons of Ma·reʹshah the father of Hebʹron.
The sons of Hebʹron were Korʹah, Tapʹpu·ah, Reʹkem, and Sheʹma.
Sheʹma became father to Raʹham the father of Jorʹke·am. Reʹkem became father to Shamʹmai.
The son of Shamʹmai was Maʹon. Maʹon was the father of Beth-zur.
Caʹleb’s concubine Eʹphah gave birth to Haʹran, Moʹza, and Gaʹzez. Haʹran became father to Gaʹzez.
The sons of Jahʹdai were Reʹgem, Joʹtham, Geʹshan, Pelʹet, Eʹphah, and Shaʹaph.
Caʹleb’s concubine Maʹa·cah gave birth to Sheʹber and Tirʹha·nah.
In time she bore Shaʹaph the father of Mad·manʹnah and Sheʹva the father of Mach·beʹnah and Gibʹe·a. Caʹleb’s daughter was Achʹsah.
These were the descendants of Caʹleb. The sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephʹra·thah were Shoʹbal the father of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim,
Salʹma the father of Bethʹle·hem, and Haʹreph the father of Beth-gaʹder.
Shoʹbal the father of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim had sons: Ha·roʹeh and half of the Me·nuʹhoth.
The families of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim were the Ithʹrites, the Puʹthites, the Shuʹmath·ites, and the Mishʹra·ites. It was from these that the Zoʹrath·ites and the Eshʹta·ol·ites came.
The sons of Salʹma were Bethʹle·hem, the Ne·tophʹa·thites, Atʹroth-beth-joʹab, half of the Man·a·haʹthites, and the Zorʹites.
The families of the scribes dwelling at Jaʹbez were the Tiʹrath·ites, the Shimʹe·ath·ites, and the Suʹcath·ites. These were the Kenʹites who came from Hamʹmath the father of the house of Reʹchab.
Now the Phi·lisʹtines were fighting against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Phi·lisʹtines, and many fell slain on Mount Gil·boʹa.
The Phi·lisʹtines kept in close range of Saul and his sons, and the Phi·lisʹtines struck down Jonʹa·than, A·binʹa·dab, and Malʹchi-shuʹa, Saul’s sons.
The fighting grew fierce against Saul, and the archers found him, and he was wounded by the archers.
Then Saul said to his armor-bearer: “Draw your sword and run me through with it, so that these uncircumcised men may not come and deal ruthlessly with me.” But his armor-bearer was unwilling, because he was very much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died.
Thus Saul and his three sons died, and all those of his house died together.
When all the people of Israel in the valley saw that everyone had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they began to abandon their cities and flee; the Phi·lisʹtines then came and occupied them.
The next day, when the Phi·lisʹtines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gil·boʹa.
So they stripped him and took off his head and his armor, and they sent word throughout the land of the Phi·lisʹtines to spread the news to their idols and the people.
Then they put his armor in the house of their god and fastened his skull to the house of Daʹgon.
When all those of Jaʹbesh in Gilʹe·ad heard about all that the Phi·lisʹtines had done to Saul,
all the warriors rose up and carried off the corpse of Saul and the corpses of his sons. They brought them to Jaʹbesh and buried their bones under the big tree in Jaʹbesh, and they fasted for seven days.
Thus Saul died for the unfaithfulness he had shown against Jehovah because he had not obeyed the word of Jehovah, also for consulting a spirit medium
instead of inquiring of Jehovah. So He put him to death and turned the kingship over to David the son of Jesʹse.
So they brought the Ark of the true God in and placed it inside the tent that David had pitched for it; and they presented burnt offerings and communion sacrifices before the true God.
When David finished offering up the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah.
Further, he distributed to all the Israelites, to each man and woman, a round loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake.
Then he appointed some of the Levites to minister before the Ark of Jehovah, to honor, thank, and praise Jehovah the God of Israel.
Aʹsaph was the head, and second to him was Zekariah; and Je·iʹel, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liʹab, Be·naiʹah, Oʹbed-eʹdom, and Je·iʹel played stringed instruments and harps; and Aʹsaph played the cymbals,
and Be·naiʹah and Ja·ha·ziʹel the priests blew the trumpets constantly before the ark of the covenant of the true God.
It was on that day that David first contributed a song of thanks to Jehovah through Aʹsaph and his brothers:
“Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples!
Sing to him, sing praises to him,Ponder over all his wonderful works.
Boast about his holy name. Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
Search for Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face constantly.
Remember the wonderful works he has performed,His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,
You offspring of Israel his servant,You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are throughout the earth.
Remember his covenant forever,The promise he made, to a thousand generations,
The covenant he made with Abraham,And the oath he swore to Isaac,
Which he established as a decree to JacobAnd as a lasting covenant to Israel,
Saying, ‘I will give you the land of CaʹnaanAs your allotted inheritance.’
This was when you were few in number,Yes, very few, and you were foreigners in the land.
They walked about from nation to nation,From one kingdom to another people.
He did not allow any man to oppress them,But on their account he reproved kings,
Saying, ‘Do not touch my anointed ones,And to my prophets do nothing bad.’
Sing to Jehovah, all the earth! Announce his salvation day after day!
Declare his glory among the nations,His wonderful works among all the peoples.
For Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.
All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods,But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.
In his presence are majesty and splendor;Strength and joy are in his dwelling place.
Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.
Give Jehovah the glory due his name;Bring a gift and come in before him. Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment.
Tremble before him, all the earth! The earth is firmly established; it cannot be moved.
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful;Declare among the nations: ‘Jehovah has become King!’
Let the sea thunder and all that fills it;Let the fields and everything in them rejoice.
At the same time let the trees of the forest shout joyfully before Jehovah,For he is coming to judge the earth.
Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
And say, ‘Save us, O God of our salvation,Gather us and rescue us from the nations,So that we may give thanks to your holy nameAnd exult in praising you.
May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity.’” And all the people said, “Amen!” and they praised Jehovah.
Then David left Aʹsaph and his brothers there before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to minister continually before the Ark, according to the daily routine.
Oʹbed-eʹdom and his brothers, numbering 68, and Oʹbed-eʹdom, the son of Je·duʹthun, and Hoʹsah were gatekeepers;
and Zaʹdok the priest and his fellow priests were before the tabernacle of Jehovah on the high place at Gibʹe·on
to offer up burnt offerings to Jehovah regularly on the altar of burnt offering, morning and evening, and to do all that is written in the Law of Jehovah that he commanded Israel.
With them were Heʹman and Je·duʹthun and the rest of the selected men who were designated by their names to thank Jehovah, because “his loyal love endures forever”;
and with them were Heʹman and Je·duʹthun to sound the trumpets, cymbals, and the instruments used to praise the true God; and the sons of Je·duʹthun were at the gate.
Then all the people went to their homes, and David went to bless his own household.
These are the sons of Reuʹben, Israel’s firstborn. He was the firstborn, but because he defiled the bed of his father, his right as firstborn was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, so he was not enrolled genealogically for the right of the firstborn.
Though Judah was superior to his brothers and from him came the one to be the leader, the right as firstborn belonged to Joseph.
The sons of Reuʹben the firstborn of Israel were Haʹnoch, Palʹlu, Hezʹron, and Carʹmi.
The sons of Joel were She·maiʹah his son, Gog his son, Shimʹe·i his son,
Miʹcah his son, Re·aʹiah his son, Baʹal his son,
and Be·erʹah his son, whom King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a took into exile; he was a chieftain of the Reuʹben·ites.
His brothers by their families in the genealogical enrollment by their descendants were, as the head, Je·iʹel, Zekariah,
and Beʹla son of Aʹzaz son of Sheʹma son of Joel, who lived in A·roʹer and as far as Neʹbo and Baʹal-meʹon.
To the east he settled as far as the beginning of the wilderness at the Eu·phraʹtes River, for their livestock had become numerous in the land of Gilʹe·ad.
In the days of Saul, they waged war against the Hagʹrites, who were defeated before them, so they dwelled in their tents throughout all the territory east of Gilʹe·ad.
Now the descendants of Gad lived next to them in the land of Baʹshan as far as Salʹe·cah.
Joel was the head, Shaʹpham the second, and Jaʹnai and Shaʹphat in Baʹshan.
And their brothers belonging to their paternal houses were Miʹcha·el, Me·shulʹlam, Sheʹba, Joʹrai, Jaʹcan, Ziʹa, and Eʹber, seven in all.
These were the sons of Abʹi·ha·il son of Huʹri son of Ja·roʹah son of Gilʹe·ad son of Miʹcha·el son of Je·shishʹai son of Jahʹdo son of Buz.
Aʹhi son of Abʹdi·el son of Guʹni was head of their paternal house.
They lived in Gilʹe·ad, in Baʹshan and its dependent towns, and in all the pastures of Sharʹon as far as they extended.
They were all enrolled genealogically in the days of King Joʹtham of Judah and in the days of King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel.
The Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh had 44,760 mighty warriors in their army who carried shields and swords and were armed with bows, and they were trained in war.
They waged war against the Hagʹrites, Jeʹtur, Naʹphish, and Noʹdab.
And they were helped in fighting them, so that the Hagʹrites and all who were with them were given into their hand, for they called to God for help in the war, and he responded to their entreaty because they trusted in him.
They captured their livestock—50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys—as well as 100,000 people.
Many had fallen slain, because the war was waged by the true God. And they lived in their place until the time of the exile.
The descendants of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh lived in the land from Baʹshan to Baʹal-herʹmon and Seʹnir and Mount Herʹmon. They were numerous.
These were the heads of their paternal houses: Eʹpher, Ishʹi, Eʹli·el, Azʹri·el, Jeremiah, Hod·a·viʹah, and Jahʹdi·el; they were mighty warriors, men of fame, and heads of their paternal houses.
But they acted unfaithfully toward the God of their forefathers and prostituted themselves to the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had annihilated from before them.
So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of King Pul of As·syrʹi·a (that is, King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a) so that he took into exile those of the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh and brought them to Haʹlah, Haʹbor, Haʹra, and the river Goʹzan, where they are until this day.
King Hiʹram of Tyre sent messengers to David, along with cedar timbers, stonemasons, and woodworkers to build a house for him.
And David knew that Jehovah had firmly established him as king over Israel, for his kingship was highly exalted for the sake of His people Israel.
David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David became father to more sons and daughters.
These are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Sham·muʹa, Shoʹbab, Nathan, Solʹo·mon,
Ibʹhar, E·liʹshu·a, Elʹpe·let,
Noʹgah, Neʹpheg, Ja·phiʹa,
E·lishʹa·ma, Be·e·liʹa·da, and E·liphʹe·let.
When the Phi·lisʹtines heard that David had been anointed as king over all Israel, all the Phi·lisʹtines came up to search for David. When David heard about it, he went out against them.
Then the Phi·lisʹtines came in and kept making raids in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
David inquired of God, saying: “Should I go up against the Phi·lisʹtines? Will you give them into my hand?” At this Jehovah said to him: “Go up, and I will surely give them into your hand.”
So David went up to Baʹal-pe·raʹzim, and he struck them down there. At that David said: “The true God has broken through my enemies by my hand, like a breach made by waters.” That is why they named that place Baʹal-pe·raʹzim.
The Phi·lisʹtines abandoned their gods there, and when David gave the order, these were burned in the fire.
Later the Phi·lisʹtines once again made a raid in the valley.
David again inquired of God, but the true God said to him: “Do not go directly up after them. Instead, go around behind them, and come against them in front of the baʹca bushes.
And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the baʹca bushes, launch your attack, for the true God will have gone out before you to strike down the army of the Phi·lisʹtines.”
So David did just as the true God commanded him, and they struck down the Phi·lisʹtine army from Gibʹe·on to Geʹzer.
And David’s fame spread into all the lands, and Jehovah put the dread of him upon all the nations.
David then congregated all the princes of Israel to Jerusalem: the princes of the tribes, the chiefs of the divisions ministering to the king, the chiefs of thousands and the chiefs of hundreds, the chiefs of all the property and livestock of the king and of his sons, together with the court officials and every mighty and capable man.
Then King David rose to his feet and said: “Hear me, my brothers and my people. It was my heart’s desire to build a house as the resting-place for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and as the footstool of our God, and I made preparations to build.
But the true God told me, ‘You will not build a house for my name, for you are a man of wars, and you have shed blood.’
However, Jehovah the God of Israel chose me out of all the house of my father to become king over Israel forever, for he chose Judah as leader and of the house of Judah, my father’s house, and of my father’s sons, I was the one whom he approved, to make me king over all Israel.
And of all my sons—for Jehovah has given me many sons—he chose my son Solʹo·mon to sit on the throne of the kingship of Jehovah over Israel.
“He said to me, ‘Your son Solʹo·mon is the one who will build my house and my courtyards, for I have chosen him as my son and I will become his father.
I will firmly establish his kingship forever if he resolutely observes my commandments and my judicial decisions, as he is now doing.’
So I say before the eyes of all Israel, Jehovah’s congregation, and in the ears of our God: Carefully observe and search for all the commandments of Jehovah your God, so that you may possess the good land and pass it on as a permanent inheritance to your sons after you.
“And you, Solʹo·mon my son, know the God of your father and serve him with a complete heart and with a delightful soul, for Jehovah searches through all hearts, and he discerns every inclination of the thoughts. If you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you leave him, he will reject you forever.
See, now, for Jehovah has chosen you to build a house as a sanctuary. Be courageous and go to work.”
David then gave to his son Solʹo·mon the architectural plan of the porch and of its houses, its storerooms, its roof chambers, its inner rooms, and the house of the propitiatory cover.
He gave him the architectural plan of everything that had been conveyed to him through inspiration for the courtyards of Jehovah’s house, for all the dining rooms around it, for the treasuries of the house of the true God, and for the treasuries of the things made holy;
also for the divisions of the priests and of the Levites, for all the duties of the service of Jehovah’s house, and for all the utensils of the service of Jehovah’s house;
also for the weight of the gold, the gold for all the utensils for the different services, the weight of all the utensils of silver, and for all the utensils for the different services;
also the weight for the gold lampstands and their gold lamps, the weight of the different lampstands and their lamps, and the weight of the silver lampstands, for each lampstand and its lamps according to its use;
also the weight of the gold for the tables of the layer bread, for each table, as well as the silver for the tables of silver,
for the forks, the bowls, the pitchers of pure gold, and the weight of the small gold bowls, for each small bowl, and the weight of the small silver bowls, for each small bowl.
He also gave the weight for the refined gold for the incense altar and for the representation of the chariot, namely, the cherubs of gold that spread their wings out and overshadow the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
David said: “The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he gave me insight to put all the details of the architectural plan in writing.”
Then David said to his son Solʹo·mon: “Be courageous and strong and go to work. Do not be afraid or be terrified, for Jehovah God, my God, is with you. He will not desert you or abandon you, but he will be with you until all the work for the service of Jehovah’s house is finished.
And here are the divisions of the priests and of the Levites for all the service of the house of the true God. You have willing, skilled workers to perform every kind of service, as well as the princes and all the people who will carry out all your instructions.”
David then said: “This is the house of Jehovah the true God, and this is an altar for burnt offering for Israel.”
David then gave orders to bring together the foreign residents who were in the land of Israel, and he assigned them to be stonecutters to cut and shape stones for building the house of the true God.
David also prepared iron in great quantity for nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, and so much copper that it was beyond weighing,
and also cedar timbers without number, for the Si·doʹni·ans and the Tyrʹi·ans brought great quantities of cedar timbers to David.
And David said: “My son Solʹo·mon is young and inexperienced, and the house to be built for Jehovah is to be exceedingly magnificent, so that its fame and beauty will be known in all lands. Therefore, I will make preparation for him.” So David prepared materials in great quantity before his death.
Moreover, he summoned his son Solʹo·mon and instructed him to build a house for Jehovah the God of Israel.
David told his son Solʹo·mon: “As for me, it was my heart’s desire to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God.
But Jehovah’s word came to me, saying, ‘You have shed a great deal of blood, and you have fought great wars. You will not build a house for my name, for you have shed a great deal of blood on the earth before me.
Look! You will have a son who will be a man of peace, and I will give him rest from all his enemies who surround him, for Solʹo·mon will be his name and I will grant Israel peace and quiet in his days.
He is the one who will build a house for my name. He will become my son, and I will be his father. I will firmly establish the throne of his kingship over Israel forever.’
“Now, my son, may Jehovah be with you, and may you be successful and build the house of Jehovah your God, just as he has spoken concerning you.
Only may Jehovah give you discretion and understanding when he gives you authority over Israel, so that you may keep the law of Jehovah your God.
Then you will be successful if you carefully observe the regulations and the judgments that Jehovah ordered Moses to give Israel. Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified.
Here I have taken great pains to prepare for Jehovah’s house 100,000 talents of gold and 1,000,000 talents of silver and such great quantities of copper and iron that they cannot be weighed, and I have prepared timbers and stones, but you will add to them.
A great number of workmen are with you—stonecutters, stonemasons, woodworkers, and all kinds of skilled workers.
The gold, silver, copper, and iron are beyond measure. Get up and begin the work, and may Jehovah be with you.”
David then ordered all the princes of Israel to help his son Solʹo·mon:
“Is not Jehovah your God with you, and has he not given you rest on every side? For he handed over to me the inhabitants of the land, and the land has been subdued before Jehovah and before his people.
Now determine with all your heart and soul to seek Jehovah your God, and start building the sanctuary of Jehovah the true God, in order to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and the holy utensils of the true God to the house built for the name of Jehovah.”
And he continued building houses for himself in the City of David, and he prepared a place for the Ark of the true God and pitched a tent for it.
It was then that David said: “No one is to carry the Ark of the true God except the Levites, for Jehovah has chosen them to carry the Ark of Jehovah and to minister to him always.”
Then David congregated all Israel at Jerusalem to bring the Ark of Jehovah up to the place that he had prepared for it.
David gathered the descendants of Aaron and the Levites:
from the Koʹhath·ites, U·riʹel the chief and 120 of his brothers;
from the Me·rarʹites, A·saiʹah the chief and 220 of his brothers;
from the Gerʹshom·ites, Joel the chief and 130 of his brothers;
from the descendants of E·li·zaʹphan, She·maiʹah the chief and 200 of his brothers;
from the descendants of Hebʹron, Eʹli·el the chief and 80 of his brothers;
from the descendants of Uzʹzi·el, Am·minʹa·dab the chief and 112 of his brothers.
Furthermore, David called the priests Zaʹdok and A·biʹa·thar and the Levites U·riʹel, A·saiʹah, Joel, She·maiʹah, Eʹli·el, and Am·minʹa·dab,
and he said to them: “You are the heads of the paternal houses of the Levites. Sanctify yourselves, you and your brothers, and bring the Ark of Jehovah the God of Israel up to the place that I have prepared for it.
Since you did not carry it the first time, the anger of Jehovah our God broke out against us, because we did not search out the proper procedure.”
So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the Ark of Jehovah the God of Israel.
Then the Levites carried the Ark of the true God on their shoulders with the poles, just as Moses had commanded by Jehovah’s word.
David then told the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their brothers the singers to sing out joyfully, accompanied by musical instruments: stringed instruments, harps, and cymbals.
So the Levites appointed Heʹman the son of Joel and, of his brothers, Aʹsaph the son of Ber·e·chiʹah and, of the Me·rarʹites their brothers, Eʹthan the son of Kush·aʹiah.
Together with them were their brothers of the second division, Zekariah, Ben, Ja·aʹzi·el, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Unʹni, E·liʹab, Be·naiʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liphʹe·le·hu, and Mik·neʹiah and Oʹbed-eʹdom and Je·iʹel the gatekeepers.
The singers Heʹman, Aʹsaph, and Eʹthan were to play the copper cymbals;
and Zekariah, Aʹzi·el, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·hiʹel, Unʹni, E·liʹab, Ma·a·seiʹah, and Be·naiʹah played stringed instruments tuned to Alʹa·moth;
and Mat·ti·thiʹah, E·liphʹe·le·hu, Mik·neʹiah, Oʹbed-eʹdom, Je·iʹel, and Az·a·ziʹah played harps tuned to Shemʹi·nith, to act as directors.
Chen·a·niʹah the chief of the Levites supervised the transport, for he was an expert,
and Ber·e·chiʹah and El·kaʹnah were gatekeepers for the Ark.
The priests Sheb·a·niʹah, Joshʹa·phat, Ne·thanʹel, A·maʹsai, Zekariah, Be·naiʹah, and E·li·eʹzer loudly sounded the trumpets before the Ark of the true God, and Oʹbed-eʹdom and Je·hiʹah also served as gatekeepers for the Ark.
Then David and the elders of Israel and the chiefs of the thousands were walking along to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah up from the house of Oʹbed-eʹdom with rejoicing.
When the true God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, they sacrificed seven young bulls and seven rams.
David was dressed in a sleeveless coat of fine fabric, as were all the Levites carrying the Ark, the singers, and Chen·a·niʹah the chief of the transport and the singers; David was also wearing a linen ephʹod.
All the Israelites were bringing up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with joyful shouting, with the sound of the horn, with trumpets, with cymbals, playing loudly on stringed instruments and harps.
But when the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came to the City of David, Saul’s daughter Miʹchal looked down through the window and saw King David skipping about and celebrating; and she began to despise him in her heart.
The sons of Judah were Peʹrez, Hezʹron, Carʹmi, Hur, and Shoʹbal.
Re·aʹiah the son of Shoʹbal became father to Jaʹhath; Jaʹhath became father to A·huʹmai and Laʹhad. These were the families of the Zoʹrath·ites.
These were the sons of the father of Eʹtam: Jezʹre·el, Ishʹma, and Idʹbash (and the name of their sister was Haz·ze·lel·poʹni),
and Pe·nuʹel was the father of Geʹdor, and Eʹzer was the father of Huʹshah. These were the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephʹra·thah and the father of Bethʹle·hem.
Ashʹhur the father of Te·koʹa had two wives, Heʹlah and Naʹa·rah.
Naʹa·rah bore to him A·huzʹzam, Heʹpher, Teʹme·ni, and Ha·a·hashʹta·ri. These were the sons of Naʹa·rah.
And the sons of Heʹlah were Zeʹreth, Izʹhar, and Ethʹnan.
Koz became father to Aʹnub, Zo·beʹbah, and the families of A·harʹhel the son of Haʹrum.
Jaʹbez was more honorable than his brothers; and his mother named him Jaʹbez, saying: “I gave birth to him in pain.”
Jaʹbez called on the God of Israel, saying: “O that you would bless me and enlarge my territory and let your hand be with me and preserve me from calamity, so that it may bring no harm to me!” So God brought about what he had asked for.
Cheʹlub the brother of Shuʹhah became father to Meʹhir, who was the father of Eshʹton.
Eshʹton became father to Beth-raʹpha, Pa·seʹah, and Te·hinʹnah, the father of Ir-naʹhash. These were the men of Reʹcah.
And the sons of Keʹnaz were Othʹni·el and Se·raiʹah, and the son of Othʹni·el was Haʹthath.
Me·oʹno·thai became father to Ophʹrah. Se·raiʹah became father to Joʹab the father of Ge-harʹa·shim, so called because they were craftsmen.
The sons of Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh were Iʹru, Eʹlah, and Naʹam; and the son of Eʹlah was Keʹnaz.
The sons of Je·halʹle·lel were Ziph, Ziʹphah, Tirʹi·a, and Asʹa·rel.
The sons of Ezʹrah were Jeʹther, Meʹred, Eʹpher, and Jaʹlon; she conceived and bore Mirʹi·am, Shamʹmai, and Ishʹbah the father of Esh·te·moʹa.
(And his Jewish wife gave birth to Jeʹred the father of Geʹdor, Heʹber the father of Soʹco, and Je·kuʹthi·el the father of Za·noʹah.) These were the sons of Bi·thiʹah, the daughter of Pharʹaoh, whom Meʹred married.
The sons of Ho·diʹah’s wife, the sister of Naʹham, were the fathers of Keiʹlah the Garʹmite and Esh·te·moʹa the Ma·acʹa·thite.
And the sons of Shiʹmon were Amʹnon, Rinʹnah, Ben-haʹnan, and Tiʹlon. And the sons of Ishʹi were Zoʹheth and Ben-zoʹheth.
The sons of Sheʹlah the son of Judah were Er the father of Leʹcah, Laʹa·dah the father of Ma·reʹshah, and the families of the workers of fine fabric of the house of Ash·beʹa,
and Joʹkim, the men of Co·zeʹba, Joʹash, and Saʹraph, who became husbands of Moʹab·ite women, and Jashʹu·bi-leʹhem. These records are ancient.
They were potters who lived in Ne·taʹim and Ge·deʹrah. They lived there and worked for the king.
The sons of Simʹe·on were Nemʹu·el, Jaʹmin, Jaʹrib, Zeʹrah, and Shaʹul.
Shalʹlum was his son, Mibʹsam his son, and Mishʹma his son.
And the sons of Mishʹma were Hamʹmu·el his son, Zacʹcur his son, Shimʹe·i his son.
And Shimʹe·i had 16 sons and 6 daughters; but his brothers did not have many sons, and none of their families had as many as the men of Judah had.
They lived in Beʹer-sheʹba, Mo·laʹdah, Haʹzar-shuʹal,
Bilʹhah, Eʹzem, Toʹlad,
Be·thuʹel, Horʹmah, Zikʹlag,
Beth-marʹca·both, Haʹzar-suʹsim, Beth-birʹi, and Shaʹa·raʹim. These were their cities until the reign of David.
Their settlements were Eʹtam, Aʹin, Rimʹmon, Toʹchen, and Aʹshan, five cities,
along with their settlements that were all around these cities as far as Baʹal. These were their genealogical enrollments and the places where they lived.
And Me·shoʹbab, Jamʹlech, Joʹshah the son of Am·a·ziʹah,
Joel, Jeʹhu son of Josh·i·biʹah son of Se·raiʹah son of Asʹi·el,
and Eli·o·eʹnai, Ja·a·koʹbah, Jesh·o·haiʹah, A·saiʹah, Adʹi·el, Je·simʹi·el, Be·naiʹah,
and Ziʹza son of Shiʹphi son of Alʹlon son of Je·daʹiah son of Shimʹri son of She·maiʹah;
these mentioned by name were the chieftains among their families, and the household of their forefathers increased in number.
And they went to the entrance of Geʹdor, to the east side of the valley, to look for pastures for their flocks.
They eventually found rich and good pastures, and the land was spacious, quiet, and undisturbed. Those who previously lived there were Hamʹites.
These whose names are listed came during the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and struck down the tents of the Hamʹites and the Me·uʹnim who were there. They devoted them to destruction down to this day; and they settled in their place because there were pastures for their flocks there.
Some of the Simʹe·on·ites, 500 men, went to Mount Seʹir with Pel·a·tiʹah, Ne·a·riʹah, Re·phaʹiah, and Uzʹzi·el, the sons of Ishʹi who led them.
And they struck down the rest of the A·malʹek·ites who had escaped, and they have lived there down to this day.
At the start of the year, at the time when kings go on campaigns, Joʹab led a military expedition and devastated the land of the Amʹmon·ites; he came and besieged Rabʹbah, while David stayed in Jerusalem. Joʹab attacked Rabʹbah and tore it down.
Then David took the crown of Malʹcam from its head, and found that it weighed a talent of gold, and in it there were precious stones; and it was placed on David’s head. He also took a vast amount of spoil from the city.
And he brought out the people who were in it and put them to work at sawing stones and at working with sharp iron instruments and with axes. That was what David did to all the cities of the Amʹmon·ites. Finally David and all the troops returned to Jerusalem.
After this, war broke out at Geʹzer with the Phi·lisʹtines. At that time Sibʹbe·cai the Huʹshath·ite struck down Sipʹpai, who was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im, and they were subdued.
And there was war again with the Phi·lisʹtines, and El·haʹnan the son of Jaʹir struck down Lahʹmi the brother of Go·liʹath the Gitʹtite, whose spear had a shaft like the beam of loom workers.
War broke out yet again at Gath, where there was a man of extraordinary size, with 6 fingers on each hand and 6 toes on each foot, 24 in all; and he too was a descendant of the Rephʹa·im.
He kept taunting Israel. So Jonʹa·than the son of Shimʹe·a, David’s brother, struck him down.
These were descendants of the Rephʹa·im in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.
These were the men who came to David at Zikʹlag while he was unable to move about freely because of Saul the son of Kish, and they were among the mighty warriors who supported him in battle.
They were armed with the bow, and they could use both the right hand and the left hand to sling stones or to shoot arrows with the bow. They were of the brothers of Saul, from Benjamin.
The head was A·hi·eʹzer, along with Joʹash, both sons of She·maʹah the Gibʹe·ath·ite; Jeʹzi·el and Pelʹet the sons of Azʹma·veth, Berʹa·cah, Jeʹhu the Anʹa·thoth·ite,
Ish·maʹiah the Gibʹe·on·ite, a mighty warrior among the thirty and over the thirty; also Jeremiah, Ja·ha·ziʹel, Jo·haʹnan, Joʹza·bad the Ge·deʹrath·ite,
E·luʹzai, Jerʹi·moth, Be·a·liʹah, Shem·a·riʹah, Sheph·a·tiʹah the Harʹi·phite,
El·kaʹnah, Is·shiʹah, Azʹar·el, Jo·eʹzer, and Ja·shoʹbe·am, the Korʹah·ites;
and Jo·eʹlah and Zeb·a·diʹah the sons of Je·roʹham of Geʹdor.
Some of the Gadʹites went over to David’s side at the stronghold in the wilderness; they were mighty warriors, soldiers trained for war, standing ready with the large shield and the lance, whose faces were like those of lions and who were as swift as the gazelles on the mountains.
Eʹzer was the head, O·ba·diʹah the second, E·liʹab the third,
Mish·manʹnah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
Atʹtai the sixth, Eʹli·el the seventh,
Jo·haʹnan the eighth, El·zaʹbad the ninth,
Jeremiah the tenth, Machʹban·nai the eleventh.
These were of the Gadʹites, heads of the army. The least one was equal to 100, and the greatest to 1,000.
These are the men who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was overflowing its banks, and they chased away all those living in the lowlands, to the east and to the west.
Some of the men of Benjamin and Judah also came to David at his stronghold.
Then David went out before them and said to them: “If you have come to me in peace to help me, my heart will be united with you. But if it is to betray me to my adversaries when my hands have done no wrong, let the God of our forefathers see it and judge.”
Then the spirit came upon A·maʹsai, the head of the thirty: “We are yours, O David, and we are with you, O son of Jesʹse. Peace, peace be yours, and peace to the one helping you,For your God is helping you.” So David received them and appointed them among the heads of the troops.
Some from Ma·nasʹseh also deserted to David when he came with the Phi·lisʹtines to battle against Saul; but he did not help the Phi·lisʹtines, for after consultation, the lords of the Phi·lisʹtines sent him away, saying: “He will desert to his lord Saul, and it will cost us our heads.”
When he went to Zikʹlag, these deserted to him from Ma·nasʹseh: Adʹnah, Joʹza·bad, Je·diʹa·el, Miʹcha·el, Joʹza·bad, E·liʹhu, and Zilʹle·thai, heads of the thousands of Ma·nasʹseh.
They helped David against the marauder band, because all of them were mighty, courageous men, and they became chiefs in the army.
Day after day people kept coming to David to help him until it was a camp as great as the camp of God.
This is the number of the heads of those armed for battle who came to David at Hebʹron to turn the kingship of Saul over to him according to Jehovah’s order.
The men of Judah carrying the large shield and the lance were 6,800, armed for battle.
Of the Simʹe·on·ites, the mighty, courageous men of the army were 7,100.
Of the Levites, 4,600.
Je·hoiʹa·da was the leader of the sons of Aaron, and with him were 3,700,
as well as Zaʹdok, a mighty and courageous young man, along with 22 chiefs from his paternal house.
Of the Benʹja·min·ites, the brothers of Saul, there were 3,000, of whom the greater number had previously been guarding the interests of the house of Saul.
Of the Eʹphra·im·ites, there were 20,800 mighty, courageous men of fame among their paternal houses.
Of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, there were 18,000 who had been designated by name to come to make David king.
Of the tribe of Isʹsa·char, who understood the times and knew what Israel should do, there were 200 of their headmen, and all their brothers were under their command.
Of Zebʹu·lun, there were 50,000 who could serve in the army, drawing up in battle formation with all the weapons of war, all joining David with undivided loyalty.
Of Naphʹta·li, there were 1,000 chiefs, and with them were 37,000 with the large shield and the spear.
Of the Danʹites, those drawing up in battle formation were 28,600.
And of Ashʹer, those who could serve in the army for drawing up in battle formation were 40,000.
From across the Jordan, of the Reuʹben·ites, the Gadʹites, and the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, there were 120,000 soldiers with all kinds of weapons of war.
All of these were men of war, joining together in battle line; they came with a complete heart to Hebʹron to make David king over all Israel, and also all the rest of Israel were united in wanting to make David king.
And they remained there with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their brothers had made preparation for them.
Also those near them, and even those as far as Isʹsa·char, Zebʹu·lun, and Naphʹta·li, were bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and cattle—provisions of flour, cakes of pressed figs and raisins, wine, oil, and cattle and sheep in great quantity, for there was rejoicing in Israel.
Some time later, David defeated the Phi·lisʹtines and subdued them and took Gath and its dependent towns out of the hands of the Phi·lisʹtines.
Then he defeated Moʹab, and the Moʹab·ites became David’s servants and brought tribute.
David defeated King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah near Haʹmath as he was on his way to establish his authority at the Eu·phraʹtes River.
David captured 1,000 chariots, 7,000 horsemen, and 20,000 foot soldiers from him. Then David hamstrung all but 100 of the chariot horses.
When the Syrians of Damascus came to help King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah, David struck down 22,000 of the Syrians.
David then established garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became David’s servants and brought tribute. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went.
Moreover, David took the circular shields of gold from the servants of Had·ad·eʹzer and brought them to Jerusalem.
From Tibʹhath and Cun, cities of Had·ad·eʹzer, David took a great quantity of copper. With it Solʹo·mon made the copper Sea, the pillars, and the copper utensils.
When King Toʹu of Haʹmath heard that David had defeated the entire army of King Had·ad·eʹzer of Zoʹbah,
he immediately sent his son Ha·doʹram to King David to ask about his welfare and to congratulate him because he had fought and defeated Had·ad·eʹzer (for Had·ad·eʹzer had often fought against Toʹu), and he brought all sorts of articles of gold, silver, and copper.
King David sanctified these to Jehovah, along with the silver and the gold that he had carried off from all the nations: from Eʹdom and Moʹab, from the Amʹmon·ites, the Phi·lisʹtines, and the A·malʹek·ites.
A·bishʹai the son of Ze·ruʹiah struck down 18,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt.
He established garrisons in Eʹdom, and all the Eʹdom·ites became David’s servants. Jehovah gave David victory wherever he went.
David kept reigning over all Israel, and he was administering justice and righteousness for all his people.
Joʹab the son of Ze·ruʹiah was over the army, Je·hoshʹa·phat the son of A·hiʹlud was recorder,
Zaʹdok the son of A·hiʹtub and A·himʹe·lech the son of A·biʹa·thar were priests, and Shavʹsha was secretary.
Be·naiʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da was over the Cherʹe·thites and the Pelʹe·thites. And David’s sons were first in position next to the king.
When David had grown old and was near the end of his life, he made his son Solʹo·mon king over Israel.
He then gathered all the princes of Israel, the priests, and the Levites.
The Levites who were 30 years old and up were numbered; their number, their head count man by man, was 38,000.
Of these, 24,000 served as supervisors over the work of Jehovah’s house, and there were 6,000 officers and judges,
and there were 4,000 gatekeepers, and 4,000 gave praise to Jehovah on the instruments about which David said, “I made them for giving praise.”
Then David organized them into divisions according to the sons of Leʹvi: Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.
Of the Gerʹshon·ites were Laʹdan and Shimʹe·i.
The sons of Laʹdan were Je·hiʹel the headman, Zeʹtham, and Joel, three.
The sons of Shimʹe·i were She·loʹmoth, Haʹzi·el, and Haʹran, three. These were the heads of the paternal houses for Laʹdan.
And the sons of Shimʹe·i were Jaʹhath, Ziʹna, Jeʹush, and Be·riʹah. These four were the sons of Shimʹe·i.
Jaʹhath was the head and Ziʹzah, the second. But since Jeʹush and Be·riʹah did not have many sons, they were counted as one paternal house with one area of responsibility.
The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el, four.
The sons of Amʹram were Aaron and Moses. But Aaron was permanently set apart to sanctify the Most Holy, he and his sons, to offer sacrifices before Jehovah, to minister to him, and to pronounce blessings in his name always.
As for Moses the man of the true God, his sons were named among the tribe of the Levites.
The sons of Moses were Gerʹshom and E·li·eʹzer.
Of the sons of Gerʹshom, Shebʹu·el was the head.
Of the descendants of E·li·eʹzer, Re·ha·biʹah was the head; E·li·eʹzer did not have other sons, but the sons of Re·ha·biʹah were very many.
Of the sons of Izʹhar, She·loʹmith was the headman.
The sons of Hebʹron were Je·riʹah the head, Am·a·riʹah the second, Ja·ha·ziʹel the third, and Jek·a·meʹam the fourth.
The sons of Uzʹzi·el were Miʹcah the head and Is·shiʹah the second.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi. The sons of Mahʹli were El·e·aʹzar and Kish.
El·e·aʹzar died, but he had no sons, only daughters. So the sons of Kish, their relatives, took them as wives.
The sons of Muʹshi were Mahʹli, Eʹder, and Jerʹe·moth, three.
These were the sons of Leʹvi according to their paternal houses, the heads of the paternal houses, by those registered who were counted and listed by their names and who carried out the work for the service of the house of Jehovah, from 20 years old and up.
For David had said: “Jehovah the God of Israel has given rest to his people, and he will reside in Jerusalem forever.
Also the Levites will not have to carry the tabernacle or any of its utensils for its service.”
For according to the last instructions of David, the Levites from 20 years old and up were numbered.
Their function was to assist the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah, to be in charge of the courtyards, the dining rooms, the purification of every holy thing, and any work needed for the service of the house of the true God.
They assisted with the layer bread, the fine flour for the grain offering, the wafers of unleavened bread, the griddle cakes, the mixed dough, and all measures of quantity and size.
They were to stand morning by morning to thank and praise Jehovah and likewise in the evening.
They assisted whenever the burnt sacrifices were offered to Jehovah on the Sabbaths, the new moons, and during the festival seasons, according to the number required by the rules concerning them, doing so regularly before Jehovah.
They also took care of their responsibilities toward the tent of meeting, toward the holy place, and toward their brothers the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah.
The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshon, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.
The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el.
The children of Amʹram were Aaron, Moses, and also Mirʹi·am. And the sons of Aaron were Naʹdab, A·biʹhu, El·e·aʹzar, and Ithʹa·mar.
El·e·aʹzar became father to Phinʹe·has; Phinʹe·has became father to Ab·i·shuʹa.
Ab·i·shuʹa became father to Bukʹki; Bukʹki became father to Uzʹzi.
Uzʹzi became father to Zer·a·hiʹah; Zer·a·hiʹah became father to Me·raʹioth.
Me·raʹioth became father to Am·a·riʹah; Am·a·riʹah became father to A·hiʹtub.
A·hiʹtub became father to Zaʹdok; Zaʹdok became father to A·himʹa·az.
A·himʹa·az became father to Az·a·riʹah; Az·a·riʹah became father to Jo·haʹnan.
Jo·haʹnan became father to Az·a·riʹah. He served as priest in the house that Solʹo·mon built in Jerusalem.
Az·a·riʹah became father to Am·a·riʹah; Am·a·riʹah became father to A·hiʹtub.
A·hiʹtub became father to Zaʹdok; Zaʹdok became father to Shalʹlum.
Shalʹlum became father to Hil·kiʹah; Hil·kiʹah became father to Az·a·riʹah.
Az·a·riʹah became father to Se·raiʹah; Se·raiʹah became father to Je·hozʹa·dak.
And Je·hozʹa·dak went into exile when Jehovah took Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
The sons of Leʹvi were Gerʹshom, Koʹhath, and Me·rarʹi.
These are the names of the sons of Gerʹshom: Libʹni and Shimʹe·i.
The sons of Koʹhath were Amʹram, Izʹhar, Hebʹron, and Uzʹzi·el.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli and Muʹshi. These were the families of the Levites by their forefathers:
Of Gerʹshom, Libʹni his son, Jaʹhath his son, Zimʹmah his son,
Joʹah his son, Idʹdo his son, Zeʹrah his son, Je·athʹe·rai his son.
The sons of Koʹhath were Am·minʹa·dab his son, Korʹah his son, Asʹsir his son,
El·kaʹnah his son, E·biʹa·saph his son, Asʹsir his son,
Taʹhath his son, U·riʹel his son, Uz·ziʹah his son, and Shaʹul his son.
The sons of El·kaʹnah were A·maʹsai and A·hiʹmoth.
As for El·kaʹnah, the sons of El·kaʹnah were Zoʹphai his son, Naʹhath his son,
E·liʹab his son, Je·roʹham his son, El·kaʹnah his son.
The sons of Samuel were Joel the firstborn and A·biʹjah the second.
The sons of Me·rarʹi were Mahʹli, Libʹni his son, Shimʹe·i his son, Uzʹzah his son,
Shimʹe·a his son, Hag·giʹah his son, and A·saiʹah his son.
These were the ones whom David appointed to direct the singing at the house of Jehovah after the Ark came to rest there.
They were responsible for the singing at the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solʹo·mon built the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, and they carried out their service as prescribed for them.
These are the men who served with their sons: Of the Koʹhath·ites, Heʹman the singer, son of Joel son of Samuel
son of El·kaʹnah son of Je·roʹham son of Eʹli·el son of Toʹah
son of Zuph son of El·kaʹnah son of Maʹhath son of A·maʹsai
son of El·kaʹnah son of Joel son of Az·a·riʹah son of Zeph·a·niʹah
son of Taʹhath son of Asʹsir son of E·biʹa·saph son of Korʹah
son of Izʹhar son of Koʹhath son of Leʹvi son of Israel.
His brother Aʹsaph stood at his right hand; Aʹsaph was son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Shimʹe·a
son of Miʹcha·el son of Ba·a·seʹiah son of Mal·chiʹjah
son of Ethʹni son of Zeʹrah son of A·daiʹah
son of Eʹthan son of Zimʹmah son of Shimʹe·i
son of Jaʹhath son of Gerʹshom son of Leʹvi.
The descendants of Me·rarʹi their brothers were at the left hand; there was Eʹthan son of Kishʹi son of Abʹdi son of Malʹluch
son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Am·a·ziʹah son of Hil·kiʹah
son of Amʹzi son of Baʹni son of Sheʹmer
son of Mahʹli son of Muʹshi son of Me·rarʹi son of Leʹvi.
Their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle, the house of the true God.
Aaron and his sons made the sacrifices smoke on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense, performing the duties connected with the most holy things, to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of the true God had commanded.
These were the descendants of Aaron: El·e·aʹzar his son, Phinʹe·has his son, Ab·i·shuʹa his son,
Bukʹki his son, Uzʹzi his son, Zer·a·hiʹah his son,
Me·raʹioth his son, Am·a·riʹah his son, A·hiʹtub his son,
Zaʹdok his son, and A·himʹa·az his son.
These were their settlements by their encampments in their territory: for the descendants of Aaron belonging to the family of the Koʹhath·ites, as the first lot fell to them,
they gave them Hebʹron in the land of Judah, with its surrounding pastures.
But the field of the city and its settlements they gave to Caʹleb the son of Je·phunʹneh.
And to the descendants of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, Hebʹron, also Libʹnah with its pastures, Jatʹtir, Esh·te·moʹa with its pastures,
Hiʹlen with its pastures, Deʹbir with its pastures,
Aʹshan with its pastures, and Beth-sheʹmesh with its pastures;
and from the tribe of Benjamin, Geʹba with its pastures, Alʹe·meth with its pastures, and Anʹa·thoth with its pastures. All their cities for their families were 13 cities.
To the rest of the Koʹhath·ites, there were allotted ten cities, from the family of the tribe, from the half tribe, the half of Ma·nasʹseh.
To the Gerʹshom·ites by their families they assigned 13 cities from the tribe of Isʹsa·char, the tribe of Ashʹer, the tribe of Naphʹta·li, and the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh in Baʹshan.
To the Me·rarʹites by their families they assigned by lot 12 cities from the tribe of Reuʹben, the tribe of Gad, and the tribe of Zebʹu·lun.
Thus the Israelites gave the Levites these cities with their pastures.
Furthermore, they assigned by lot these cities from the tribe of Judah, the tribe of Simʹe·on, and the tribe of Benjamin, which are mentioned by their names.
Some of the Koʹhath·ite families had cities from the tribe of Eʹphra·im as their territory.
They gave them the cities of refuge, Sheʹchem with its pastures in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, Geʹzer with its pastures,
Jokʹme·am with its pastures, Beth-hoʹron with its pastures,
Aiʹja·lon with its pastures, and Gath-rimʹmon with its pastures;
and from half of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Aʹner with its pastures and Bilʹe·am with its pastures, to the rest of the families of the Koʹhath·ites.
To the Gerʹshom·ites they assigned from the family of the half tribe of Ma·nasʹseh, Goʹlan in Baʹshan with its pastures and Ashʹta·roth with its pastures;
and from the tribe of Isʹsa·char, Keʹdesh with its pastures, Dabʹe·rath with its pastures,
Raʹmoth with its pastures, and Aʹnem with its pastures;
and from the tribe of Ashʹer, Maʹshal with its pastures, Abʹdon with its pastures,
Huʹkok with its pastures, and Reʹhob with its pastures;
and from the tribe of Naphʹta·li, Keʹdesh in Galilee with its pastures, Hamʹmon with its pastures, and Kir·i·a·thaʹim with its pastures.
To the rest of the Me·rarʹites they assigned from the tribe of Zebʹu·lun, Rimʹmo·no with its pastures, Taʹbor with its pastures;
and in the region of the Jordan at Jerʹi·cho, to the east of the Jordan, from the tribe of Reuʹben, they were given Beʹzer in the wilderness with its pastures, Jaʹhaz with its pastures,
Kedʹe·moth with its pastures, and Mephʹa·ath with its pastures;
and from the tribe of Gad, Raʹmoth in Gilʹe·ad with its pastures, Ma·ha·naʹim with its pastures,
Heshʹbon with its pastures, and Jaʹzer with its pastures.
King David now said to all the congregation: “My son Solʹo·mon, the one whom God has chosen, is young and inexperienced, and the work is great, for it is not a temple for man but for Jehovah God.
And I have spared no effort to prepare for the house of my God, providing the gold for the goldwork, the silver for the silverwork, the copper for the copperwork, the iron for the ironwork, the timbers for the timberwork, onyx stones, and stones to be set with mortar, mosaic pebbles, every kind of precious stone, and alabaster stones in great quantity.
Moreover, because of my delight in the house of my God, there is also my private treasure of gold and silver that I am giving to the house of my God, in addition to all that I have prepared for the holy house,
including 3,000 talents of gold from Oʹphir and 7,000 talents of refined silver, for coating the walls of the houses,
the gold for the goldwork and the silver for the silverwork, and for all the work to be done by the craftsmen. Now who volunteers to come forward today with a gift in hand for Jehovah?”
So the princes of the paternal houses, the princes of the tribes of Israel, the chiefs of thousands and of hundreds, and the chiefs of the business of the king came forward voluntarily.
And they gave to the service of the house of the true God: 5,000 talents of gold, 10,000 darics, 10,000 talents of silver, 18,000 talents of copper, and 100,000 talents of iron.
Whoever had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house of Jehovah, under the care of Je·hiʹel the Gerʹshon·ite.
The people rejoiced over making these voluntary offerings, for they made the voluntary offerings to Jehovah with a complete heart, and David the king also rejoiced greatly.
Then David praised Jehovah before the eyes of all the congregation. David said: “May you be praised, O Jehovah the God of Israel our father, throughout all eternity.
Yours, O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the beauty and the splendor and the majesty, for everything in the heavens and on the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah. You are the One exalting yourself as head over all.
The riches and the glory are from you, and you rule over everything, and in your hand there are power and mightiness, and your hand is able to make great and to give strength to all.
And now, O our God, we thank you and praise your beautiful name.
“And yet, who am I and who are my people that we should be in a position to make voluntary offerings like this? For everything is from you, and we have given to you what comes from your own hand.
For we are foreign residents in your presence and settlers, just like all our forefathers. For our days on the earth are like a shadow—without hope.
O Jehovah our God, all this wealth that we have prepared to build for you a house for your holy name is from your own hand, and it all belongs to you.
I well know, O my God, that you examine the heart and that you take pleasure in integrity. In the uprightness of my heart, I have voluntarily offered all these things, and I am overjoyed to see your people who are present here make voluntary offerings to you.
O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our forefathers, keep these inclinations and thoughts in the hearts of your people forever, and direct their hearts to you.
And give a complete heart to my son Solʹo·mon, so that he may observe your commandments, your reminders, and your regulations and do all these things and build the temple for which I have made preparation.”
David then said to all the congregation: “Now praise Jehovah your God.” And all the congregation praised Jehovah the God of their forefathers and bowed low and prostrated themselves to Jehovah and to the king.
And they continued to offer sacrifices to Jehovah and to offer up burnt offerings to Jehovah on the following day, 1,000 young bulls, 1,000 rams, 1,000 male lambs, and their drink offerings; they offered sacrifices in great number for all Israel.
They continued eating and drinking before Jehovah on that day with great rejoicing, and for a second time they made Solʹo·mon the son of David king and anointed him before Jehovah as leader, and also Zaʹdok as priest.
And Solʹo·mon sat on Jehovah’s throne as king in place of David his father, and he was successful, and all the Israelites were obedient to him.
All the princes, the mighty warriors, and also all the sons of King David submitted themselves to Solʹo·mon the king.
And Jehovah made Solʹo·mon exceedingly great before the eyes of all Israel and bestowed on him royal majesty such as no king over Israel ever had before.
Thus David the son of Jesʹse reigned over all Israel,
and the length of his reign over Israel was 40 years. In Hebʹron he reigned for 7 years, and in Jerusalem he reigned for 33 years.
And he died at a good old age, satisfied with long life, wealth, and glory; and his son Solʹo·mon became king in his place.
As for the history of King David, from beginning to end, it is written among the words of Samuel the seer, Nathan the prophet, and Gad the visionary,
together with all his kingship, his mightiness, and the events of the times involving him and Israel and all the surrounding kingdoms.
Benjamin became father to Beʹla his firstborn, Ashʹbel the second, A·harʹah the third,
Noʹhah the fourth, and Raʹpha the fifth.
Beʹla’s sons were Adʹdar, Geʹra, A·biʹhud,
Ab·i·shuʹa, Naʹa·man, A·hoʹah,
Geʹra, She·phuʹphan, and Huʹram.
These were the sons of Eʹhud, the heads of the paternal houses of the inhabitants of Geʹba, who were taken into exile to Manʹa·hath:
Naʹa·man, A·hiʹjah, and Geʹra—he was the one who took them into exile and he became father to Uzʹza and A·hiʹhud.
Sha·ha·raʹim became father to children in the territory of Moʹab after he sent them away. Huʹshim and Baʹa·ra were his wives.
And by his wife Hoʹdesh, he became father to Joʹbab, Zibʹi·a, Meʹsha, Malʹcam,
Jeʹuz, Sa·chiʹa, and Mirʹmah. These were his sons, heads of the paternal houses.
By Huʹshim he became father to A·biʹtub and El·paʹal.
And the sons of El·paʹal were Eʹber, Miʹsham, Sheʹmed (who built Oʹno and Lod and its dependent towns),
Be·riʹah, and Sheʹma. These were heads of the paternal houses of the inhabitants of Aiʹja·lon. These drove out the inhabitants of Gath.
And there were A·hiʹo, Shaʹshak, Jerʹe·moth,
Zeb·a·diʹah, Aʹrad, Eʹder,
Miʹcha·el, Ishʹpah, Joʹha, the sons of Be·riʹah;
and Zeb·a·diʹah, Me·shulʹlam, Hizʹki, Heʹber,
Ishʹme·rai, Iz·liʹah, Joʹbab, the sons of El·paʹal;
and Jaʹkim, Zichʹri, Zabʹdi,
E·li·eʹnai, Zilʹle·thai, Eʹli·el,
A·daiʹah, Be·raʹiah, Shimʹrath, the sons of Shimʹe·i;
and Ishʹpan, Eʹber, Eʹli·el,
Abʹdon, Zichʹri, Haʹnan,
Han·a·niʹah, Eʹlam, An·tho·thiʹjah,
Iph·deʹiah, Pe·nuʹel, the sons of Shaʹshak;
and Shamʹshe·rai, She·ha·riʹah, Ath·a·liʹah,
Ja·a·re·shiʹah, E·liʹjah, Zichʹri, the sons of Je·roʹham.
These were heads of the paternal houses by their descendants. These headmen lived in Jerusalem.
The father of Gibʹe·on, Je·iʹel, lived in Gibʹe·on. His wife’s name was Maʹa·cah.
And his firstborn son was Abʹdon, followed by Zur, Kish, Baʹal, Naʹdab,
Geʹdor, A·hiʹo, and Zeʹcher.
Mikʹloth became father to Shimʹe·ah. And they all lived near their brothers in Jerusalem, along with their other brothers.
Ner became father to Kish; Kish became father to Saul; Saul became father to Jonʹa·than, Malʹchi-shuʹa, A·binʹa·dab, and Esh·baʹal.
And Jonʹa·than’s son was Merʹib-baʹal. Merʹib-baʹal became father to Miʹcah.
And the sons of Miʹcah were Piʹthon, Melʹech, Ta·reʹa, and Aʹhaz.
Aʹhaz became father to Je·hoʹad·dah; Je·hoʹad·dah became father to Alʹe·meth, Azʹma·veth, and Zimʹri. Zimʹri became father to Moʹza.
Moʹza became father to Binʹe·a, Raʹphah his son, El·e·aʹsah his son, Aʹzel his son.
Aʹzel had six sons, and their names were Az·riʹkam, Boʹche·ru, Ishʹma·el, She·a·riʹah, O·ba·diʹah, and Haʹnan. All of these were the sons of Aʹzel.
And the sons of his brother Eʹshek were Uʹlam his firstborn, Jeʹush the second, and E·liphʹe·let the third.
And the sons of Uʹlam were mighty warriors who could handle the bow, and they had many sons and grandsons, numbering 150. All of these were descendants of Benjamin.
And his son Je·hoshʹa·phat became king in his place, and he strengthened his position over Israel.
He stationed military forces in all the fortified cities of Judah and put garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Eʹphra·im that Aʹsa his father had captured.
Jehovah continued with Je·hoshʹa·phat because he walked in the former ways of his forefather David and did not search for the Baʹals.
For he searched for the God of his father and followed his commandment and not the practices of Israel.
Jehovah kept the kingdom firmly established in his hand; and all Judah continued to give gifts to Je·hoshʹa·phat, and he had riches and glory in abundance.
His heart became bold in the ways of Jehovah, and he even removed the high places and the sacred poles from Judah.
In the third year of his reign he sent for his princes, Ben-haʹil, O·ba·diʹah, Zekariah, Ne·thanʹel, and Mi·caiʹah, to teach in the cities of Judah.
There were Levites with them: She·maiʹah, Neth·a·niʹah, Zeb·a·diʹah, Asʹa·hel, She·mirʹa·moth, Je·honʹa·than, Ad·o·niʹjah, To·biʹjah, and Tob-ad·o·niʹjah, and along with them E·lishʹa·ma and Je·hoʹram the priests.
They began teaching in Judah, taking with them the book of Jehovah’s Law, and they went around through all the cities of Judah teaching among the people.
And the dread of Jehovah came upon all the kingdoms of the lands surrounding Judah, and they did not fight against Je·hoshʹa·phat.
And the Phi·lisʹtines brought to Je·hoshʹa·phat gifts and money as tribute. The Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 male goats from their flocks.
Je·hoshʹa·phat grew greater and greater, and he continued building fortified places and storage cities in Judah.
He carried out extensive projects in the cities of Judah, and he had soldiers, mighty warriors, in Jerusalem.
These were grouped by their paternal houses: of Judah the chiefs of thousands, Adʹnah the chief, and with him were 300,000 mighty warriors.
And under his command was Je·ho·haʹnan the chief, and with him were 280,000.
And also under his command was Am·a·siʹah the son of Zichʹri, who volunteered for Jehovah’s service, and with him were 200,000 mighty warriors.
And out of Benjamin was E·liʹa·da, a mighty warrior, and with him were 200,000 men equipped with the bow and shield.
And under his command was Je·hozʹa·bad, and with him were 180,000 men equipped for the army.
These were ministering to the king in addition to those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.
As soon as they had finished all of this, all the Israelites who were present went out to the cities of Judah, and they smashed the sacred pillars, cut down the sacred poles, and tore down the high places and the altars throughout Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, until they had destroyed them completely, after which all the Israelites returned to their cities, each one to his own possession.
Then Hez·e·kiʹah appointed the priests in their divisions and the Levites in their divisions, each of the priests and Levites for their service, for the burnt offerings and the communion sacrifices, to minister and to give thanks and praise in the gates of the courtyards of Jehovah.
A portion of the king’s own goods was given for the burnt offerings, including the morning and evening offerings, as well as the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the festivals, according to what is written in the Law of Jehovah.
Furthermore, he commanded the people living in Jerusalem to give the portion due the priests and the Levites, so that they might adhere strictly to the law of Jehovah.
As soon as the order was issued, the Israelites gave in great quantities the firstfruits of the grain, new wine, oil, and honey, and of all the produce of the field; they brought in abundantly the tenth of everything.
And the people of Israel and of Judah living in the cities of Judah also brought in the tenth of cattle and sheep and the tenth of the holy things that were sanctified to Jehovah their God. They brought it in and put it in many heaps.
In the third month they began laying their contributions in heaps; and in the seventh month they finished.
When Hez·e·kiʹah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they praised Jehovah and blessed his people Israel.
Hez·e·kiʹah asked the priests and the Levites about the heaps,
and Az·a·riʹah the chief priest of the house of Zaʹdok said to him: “From the time they started bringing the contributions into the house of Jehovah, the people have been eating to satisfaction and there is still an abundant surplus, for Jehovah has blessed his people, and this great plenty is left over.”
At this Hez·e·kiʹah told them to prepare storerooms in the house of Jehovah, so they prepared them.
They kept faithfully bringing in the contributions, the tenth parts, and the holy things; Con·a·niʹah the Levite was put in charge of all of this as supervisor, and his brother Shimʹe·i was second.
Je·hiʹel, Az·a·ziʹah, Naʹhath, Asʹa·hel, Jerʹi·moth, Joʹza·bad, Eʹli·el, Is·ma·chiʹah, Maʹhath, and Be·naiʹah were commissioners assisting Con·a·niʹah and his brother Shimʹe·i, by the order of King Hez·e·kiʹah, and Az·a·riʹah was supervisor of the house of the true God.
And Koʹre the son of Imʹnah, the Levite gatekeeper on the east side, was in charge of the voluntary offerings of the true God, and he distributed the contribution made to Jehovah and the most holy things.
And under his direction were Eʹden, Mi·niʹa·min, Jeshʹu·a, She·maiʹah, Am·a·riʹah, and Shec·a·niʹah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to distribute equally to their brothers in the divisions, to great and small alike.
This was in addition to the distribution made to the males from three years old and up who were listed in the genealogical enrollment, who came daily to serve in the house of Jehovah and to carry out the duties of their divisions.
The genealogical enrollment of the priests was by their paternal house, as was that of the Levites who were 20 years old and up, by the duties of their divisions.
The genealogical enrollment included all their children, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, their entire congregation—for they kept themselves sanctified for what was holy because of their office of trust—
as well as the descendants of Aaron, the priests who were living in the fields of the pastures surrounding their cities. In all the cities, men had been designated by name to give portions to every male among the priests and to everyone included in the genealogical enrollment of the Levites.
Hez·e·kiʹah did this throughout Judah, and he continued to do what was good and right and faithful before Jehovah his God.
And every work that he undertook to search for his God, whether in connection with the service of the house of the true God or in the Law and the commandment, he did wholeheartedly, and he was successful.
Then King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah returned safely to his own house in Jerusalem.
Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni the visionary went out to meet him and said to King Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Is it the wicked you should be helping, and is it those who hate Jehovah you should love? Because of this the indignation of Jehovah is against you.
Nevertheless, there are good things that have been found in you, because you cleared out the sacred poles from the land and you have prepared your heart to search for the true God.”
Je·hoshʹa·phat continued living in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people from Beʹer-sheʹba to the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, to bring them back to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
He also appointed judges throughout the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city.
And he said to the judges: “Pay attention to what you are doing, for you do not judge for man but for Jehovah, and he is with you when you pass judgment.
Now let the fear of Jehovah be upon you. Be careful about what you do, for with Jehovah our God there is no injustice, no partiality, no bribe-taking.”
In Jerusalem also, Je·hoshʹa·phat appointed some of the Levites and the priests and some of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel to serve as judges for Jehovah and to settle legal cases for the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And he commanded them: “This is what you should do in the fear of Jehovah, with faithfulness and a complete heart:
Whenever your brothers living in their cities bring a legal case that involves the shedding of blood or a question about a law, a commandment, regulations, or judgments, you should warn them so that they may not become guilty before Jehovah; otherwise his indignation will come against you and your brothers. This is what you should do, so that you may not incur guilt.
Here is Am·a·riʹah the chief priest who is over you for every matter of Jehovah. Zeb·a·diʹah the son of Ishʹma·el is the leader of the house of Judah for every matter pertaining to the king. And the Levites will serve as officers for you. Be strong and act, and let Jehovah be with those who do what is good.”
Ma·nasʹseh was 12 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 55 years in Jerusalem.
He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the people of Israel.
He rebuilt the high places that his father Hez·e·kiʹah had torn down, he set up altars to the Baʹals and made sacred poles, and he bowed down to all the army of the heavens and served them.
He also built altars in the house of Jehovah, about which Jehovah had said: “In Jerusalem my name will be forever.”
And he built altars to all the army of the heavens in two courtyards of the house of Jehovah.
And he made his own sons pass through the fire in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom; he practiced magic, used divination, practiced sorcery, and appointed spirit mediums and fortune-tellers. He did on a grand scale what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, to offend him.
He put the carved image that he made into the house of the true God about which God had said to David and to his son Solʹo·mon: “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will permanently put my name.
And I will never again remove the feet of Israel from the land that I assigned to their forefathers, provided they carefully observe all that I have commanded them, the entire Law, the regulations and the judicial decisions given through Moses.”
Ma·nasʹseh kept leading Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem astray, causing them to do worse than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated from before the Israelites.
Jehovah kept speaking to Ma·nasʹseh and his people, but they paid no attention.
So Jehovah brought against them the army chiefs of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and they captured Ma·nasʹseh with hooks and bound him with two copper fetters and took him to Babylon.
In his distress, he begged Jehovah his God for favor and kept humbling himself greatly before the God of his forefathers.
He kept praying to Him, and He was moved by his entreaty and heard his request for favor, and He restored him to Jerusalem to his kingship. Then Ma·nasʹseh came to know that Jehovah is the true God.
After this he built an outer wall for the City of David west of Giʹhon in the valley and as far as the Fish Gate, and he continued it around to Oʹphel, and he made it very high. Further, he appointed army chiefs in all the fortified cities in Judah.
He then removed the foreign gods and the idol image from the house of Jehovah and all the altars that he had built in the mountain of the house of Jehovah and in Jerusalem, and he had them thrown outside the city.
He also prepared the altar of Jehovah and began to offer up communion sacrifices and thanksgiving sacrifices on it, and he told Judah to serve Jehovah the God of Israel.
Nevertheless, the people were still sacrificing on the high places, although only to Jehovah their God.
As for the rest of the history of Ma·nasʹseh, his prayer to his God, and the words of the visionaries who spoke to him in the name of Jehovah the God of Israel, they are recorded in the history of the kings of Israel.
Also his prayer and how his entreaty was granted him, all his sins and his unfaithfulness, the locations where he built high places and set up the sacred poles and the graven images before he humbled himself, they are written among the words of his visionaries.
Then Ma·nasʹseh was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him at his house; and his son Aʹmon became king in his place.
Aʹmon was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem.
And he continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Ma·nasʹseh had done; and Aʹmon sacrificed to all the graven images that his father Ma·nasʹseh had made, and he kept serving them.
But he did not humble himself before Jehovah as Ma·nasʹseh his father had humbled himself; instead, Aʹmon greatly increased his guilt.
Eventually his servants conspired against him and put him to death in his own house.
But the people of the land struck down all those who conspired against King Aʹmon, and they made his son Jo·siʹah king in his place.
When Re·ho·boʹam arrived in Jerusalem, he immediately congregated the house of Judah and Benjamin, 180,000 trained warriors, to fight against Israel in order to restore the kingdom to Re·ho·boʹam.
Then the word of Jehovah came to She·maiʹah the man of the true God, saying:
“Say to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon the king of Judah and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin,
‘This is what Jehovah says: “You must not go up and fight against your brothers. Each of you return to his house, for I have caused this to happen.”’” So they obeyed the word of Jehovah and returned and did not go against Jer·o·boʹam.
Re·ho·boʹam lived in Jerusalem and built fortified cities in Judah.
Thus he built up Bethʹle·hem, Eʹtam, Te·koʹa,
Beth-zur, Soʹco, A·dulʹlam,
Gath, Ma·reʹshah, Ziph,
Ad·o·raʹim, Laʹchish, A·zeʹkah,
Zoʹrah, Aiʹja·lon, and Hebʹron, fortified cities that were in Judah and Benjamin.
Further, he reinforced the fortified places and put commanders in them and supplied them with food and oil and wine,
and he supplied all the different cities with large shields and lances; he reinforced them to a very great degree. And Judah and Benjamin remained his.
And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel took their stand with him, coming out of all their territories.
The Levites left their pastures and their possession and came to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jer·o·boʹam and his sons had dismissed them from serving as priests to Jehovah.
Jer·o·boʹam then appointed his own priests for the high places and for the goatlike demons and for the calves that he had made.
And those from all the tribes of Israel who had their heart set on seeking Jehovah the God of Israel followed them to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
For three years they strengthened the kingship of Judah and supported Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon, for they walked in the way of David and Solʹo·mon for three years.
Then Re·ho·boʹam took as his wife Maʹha·lath the daughter of David’s son Jerʹi·moth and of Abʹi·ha·il the daughter of Jesʹse’s son E·liʹab.
In time she bore him sons: Jeʹush, Shem·a·riʹah, and Zaʹham.
After her, he married Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of Abʹsa·lom. In time she bore him A·biʹjah, Atʹtai, Ziʹza, and She·loʹmith.
Re·ho·boʹam loved Maʹa·cah the granddaughter of Abʹsa·lom more than all his other wives and concubines, for he took 18 wives and 60 concubines, and he became father to 28 sons and 60 daughters.
So Re·ho·boʹam appointed A·biʹjah the son of Maʹa·cah as head and leader among his brothers, for he intended to make him king.
However, he acted with understanding and sent some of his sons to all the regions of Judah and Benjamin, to all the fortified cities, and gave them abundant provisions and acquired many wives for them.
Then all the people of Judah took Uz·ziʹah, who was 16 years old, and made him king in place of his father Am·a·ziʹah.
He rebuilt Eʹloth and restored it to Judah after the king was laid to rest with his forefathers.
Uz·ziʹah was 16 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 52 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·co·liʹah of Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Am·a·ziʹah had done.
And he kept searching for God in the days of Zekariah, who taught him to fear the true God. During the time he was searching for Jehovah, the true God made him prosper.
He went out and fought against the Phi·lisʹtines and broke through the wall of Gath, the wall of Jabʹneh, and the wall of Ashʹdod. Then he built cities in the territory of Ashʹdod and among the Phi·lisʹtines.
The true God continued to help him against the Phi·lisʹtines, against the Arabians who were dwelling in Gur·baʹal, and against the Me·uʹnim.
The Amʹmon·ites began to give tribute to Uz·ziʹah. His fame eventually spread as far as Egypt, for he became extremely powerful.
Moreover, Uz·ziʹah built towers in Jerusalem by the Corner Gate, the Valley Gate, and the Buttress, and he fortified them.
Further, he built towers in the wilderness and dug many cisterns (for he had a great deal of livestock); he also did so in the She·pheʹlah and on the plain. He had farmers and vinedressers in the mountains and in Carʹmel, for he loved agriculture.
Moreover, Uz·ziʹah came to have an army equipped for war. They would go out on military campaigns, organized in divisions. They were numbered and registered by Je·iʹel the secretary and Ma·a·seiʹah the officer, under the command of Han·a·niʹah, one of the king’s princes.
The entire number of the heads of the paternal houses who were over these mighty warriors was 2,600.
The armed forces under their command numbered 307,500 men ready for war, a powerful military force to support the king against the enemy.
Uz·ziʹah equipped the entire army with shields, lances, helmets, coats of mail, bows, and slingstones.
Further, in Jerusalem he made engines of war designed by engineers; they were set on the towers and on the corners of the walls and could shoot arrows and large stones. So his fame spread far and wide, for he received tremendous help and he became strong.
However, as soon as he was strong, his heart became haughty to his own ruin, and he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah his God by entering the temple of Jehovah to burn incense on the altar of incense.
Immediately Az·a·riʹah the priest and 80 other courageous priests of Jehovah went in after him.
They confronted King Uz·ziʹah and said to him: “It is not proper for you, Uz·ziʹah, to burn incense to Jehovah! It is only the priests who should burn incense, for they are the descendants of Aaron, those who have been sanctified. Go out from the sanctuary, for you have acted unfaithfully and you will receive no glory from Jehovah God for this.”
But Uz·ziʹah, who had a censer in his hand to burn incense, became enraged; and during his rage against the priests, leprosy broke out on his forehead in the presence of the priests in the house of Jehovah next to the altar of incense.
When Az·a·riʹah the chief priest and all the priests turned toward him, they saw that he had been stricken with leprosy in his forehead! So they rushed him out of there, and he himself hurried out, because Jehovah had struck him.
King Uz·ziʹah remained a leper until the day of his death, and he kept staying in a separate house as a leper, for he had been excluded from the house of Jehovah. His son Joʹtham was in charge of the king’s house, judging the people of the land.
And the rest of the history of Uz·ziʹah, from beginning to end, was recorded by the prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz.
Then Uz·ziʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him with his forefathers, but in the burial field that belonged to the kings, for they said: “He is a leper.” And his son Joʹtham became king in his place.
Solʹo·mon the son of David grew ever stronger in his kingship, and Jehovah his God was with him and made him exceedingly great.
Solʹo·mon sent for all Israel, the chiefs of the thousands and of the hundreds, the judges, and all the chieftains of all Israel, the heads of the paternal houses.
Then Solʹo·mon and all the congregation went to the high place at Gibʹe·on, for that was where the tent of meeting of the true God was, which tent Moses the servant of Jehovah had made in the wilderness.
However, David had brought the Ark of the true God up from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim to the place that David had prepared for it; he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem.
And the copper altar that Bezʹal·el the son of Uʹri the son of Hur had made had been put before the tabernacle of Jehovah; and Solʹo·mon and the congregation would pray before it.
Solʹo·mon now made offerings there before Jehovah, and he offered up 1,000 burnt offerings on the copper altar of the tent of meeting.
That night God appeared to Solʹo·mon and said to him: “Ask what you would like me to give you.”
At this Solʹo·mon said to God: “You have shown great loyal love toward my father David, and you have made me king in his place.
Now, O Jehovah God, let your promise to David my father prove faithful, for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust particles of the earth.
Give me now wisdom and knowledge to lead this people, for who can possibly judge this great people of yours?”
Then God said to Solʹo·mon: “Because this is your heart’s desire and you have not asked for wealth, riches, and honor or for the death of those hating you, nor have you asked for a long life, but you have asked for wisdom and knowledge to judge my people over whom I have made you king,
wisdom and knowledge will be given you; but I will also give you wealth and riches and honor such as no kings before you have had and none after you will have.”
So Solʹo·mon came from the high place at Gibʹe·on, from before the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel.
Solʹo·mon kept accumulating chariots and horses; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem.
The king made the silver and the gold in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah.
The horses of Solʹo·mon had been imported from Egypt, and the company of the king’s merchants would obtain the horses in droves for one price.
Each chariot imported from Egypt cost 600 silver pieces, and a horse cost 150; in turn, they would export them to all the kings of the Hitʹtites and the kings of Syria.
Then the people of the land took Jo·siʹah’s son Je·hoʹa·haz and made him king in Jerusalem in place of his father.
Je·hoʹa·haz was 23 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months in Jerusalem.
However, the king of Egypt deposed him in Jerusalem and fined the land 100 silver talents and a gold talent.
Furthermore, the king of Egypt made Je·hoʹa·haz’ brother E·liʹa·kim king over Judah and Jerusalem and changed his name to Je·hoiʹa·kim; but Neʹcho took his brother Je·hoʹa·haz and brought him to Egypt.
Je·hoiʹa·kim was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. He continued to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah his God.
King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against him in order to bind him with two copper fetters to take him off to Babylon.
And Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took some of the utensils of the house of Jehovah to Babylon and put them in his palace in Babylon.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the detestable things that he did and what was found against him, it is written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah; and his son Je·hoiʹa·chin became king in his place.
Je·hoiʹa·chin was 18 years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and he continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.
At the start of the year, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar sent to have him brought to Babylon, along with valuable articles of the house of Jehovah. And he made his father’s brother Zed·e·kiʹah king over Judah and Jerusalem.
Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah his God. He did not humble himself before the prophet Jeremiah, who spoke at the order of Jehovah.
He also rebelled against King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, who had made him take an oath by God, and he remained stubborn and hardhearted and refused to turn to Jehovah the God of Israel.
All the chiefs of the priests as well as the people were exceedingly unfaithful, practicing all the detestable things of the nations, and they defiled the house of Jehovah that he had sanctified in Jerusalem.
Jehovah the God of their forefathers kept warning them by means of his messengers, warning them again and again, because he felt compassion for his people and for his dwelling place.
But they kept ridiculing the messengers of the true God, and they despised his words and mocked his prophets, until the rage of Jehovah came up against his people, until they were beyond healing.
So he brought against them the king of the Chal·deʹans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary; he felt no compassion for young man or virgin, old or infirm. God gave everything into his hand.
All the utensils of the house of the true God, great and small, as well as the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king and his princes, everything he brought to Babylon.
He burned down the house of the true God, tore down the wall of Jerusalem, burned all its fortified towers with fire, and destroyed everything of value.
He carried off captive to Babylon those who escaped the sword, and they became servants to him and his sons until the kingdom of Persia began to reign,
to fulfill Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah, until the land had paid off its sabbaths. All the days it lay desolate it kept sabbath, to fulfill 70 years.
In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia to make a proclamation throughout his kingdom, which he also put in writing, saying:
“This is what King Cyrus of Persia says, ‘Jehovah the God of the heavens has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, may Jehovah his God be with him, and let him go up.’”
Now as soon as Solʹo·mon had finished praying, fire came down from the heavens and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and Jehovah’s glory filled the house.
The priests were unable to enter the house of Jehovah because Jehovah’s glory had filled the house of Jehovah.
And all the people of Israel were looking on when the fire came down and the glory of Jehovah was upon the house, and they bowed low with their faces to the ground on the pavement and prostrated themselves and thanked Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.”
Now the king and all the people offered sacrifices before Jehovah.
King Solʹo·mon offered the sacrifice of 22,000 cattle and 120,000 sheep. Thus the king and all the people inaugurated the house of the true God.
The priests were standing at their posts of duty, as were the Levites who had the instruments used to accompany the song to Jehovah. (King David had made these instruments for giving thanks to Jehovah—“for his loyal love endures forever”—when David would offer praise with them.) And the priests were loudly sounding the trumpets in front of them, while all the Israelites were standing.
Then Solʹo·mon sanctified the middle of the courtyard that was before the house of Jehovah, for there he had to offer up the burnt offerings and the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices, because the copper altar that Solʹo·mon had made could not contain the burnt sacrifices, the grain offerings, and the fat pieces.
At that time Solʹo·mon held the festival for seven days together with all Israel, a very great congregation from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of Egypt.
But on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly, because they had held the inauguration of the altar for seven days and the festival for seven days.
Then on the 23rd day of the seventh month, he sent the people away to their homes rejoicing and feeling glad of heart over the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David and Solʹo·mon and Israel his people.
Thus Solʹo·mon finished the house of Jehovah and the house of the king; and everything that came into Solʹo·mon’s heart to do regarding the house of Jehovah and his own house he accomplished successfully.
Jehovah then appeared to Solʹo·mon during the night and said to him: “I have heard your prayer, and I have chosen this place for myself as a house of sacrifice.
When I shut up the heavens and there is no rain and when I command the grasshoppers to devour the land and if I send a pestilence among my people,
if my people on whom my name has been called humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn away from their evil ways, then I will hear from the heavens and forgive their sin and heal their land.
Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to prayer at this place.
And now I have chosen and sanctified this house so that my name may be there permanently, and my eyes and my heart will always be there.
“And you, if you walk before me as your father David walked by doing everything I have commanded you, and you obey my regulations and my judgments,
then I will establish the throne of your kingship, just as I made a covenant with your father David, saying, ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line ruling over Israel.’
But if you turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments that I have put before you and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them,
I will uproot Israel from my land that I have given them, and this house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it an object of scorn and a cause for ridicule among all the peoples.
And this house will become heaps of ruins. Everyone passing by it will stare in amazement and will say, ‘Why did Jehovah do that to this land and this house?’
Then they will say, ‘It was because they abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt, and they embraced other gods and bowed down to them and served them. That is why he brought all this calamity on them.’”
Am·a·ziʹah was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ho·adʹdan of Jerusalem.
He continued to do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, but not with a complete heart.
As soon as he had the kingdom firmly in his control, he killed his servants who had killed his father the king.
But he did not put their sons to death, for he acted in harmony with what is written in the Law, in the book of Moses, where Jehovah commanded: “Fathers should not die for their sons, and sons should not die for their fathers; but each one should die for his own sin.”
And Am·a·ziʹah gathered Judah together and had them stand according to the paternal houses, by the chiefs of thousands and by the chiefs of hundreds for all Judah and Benjamin. He registered them from 20 years old and up, and he found them to be 300,000 trained warriors to serve in the army, able to handle the lance and the large shield.
Further, he hired from Israel 100,000 mighty warriors for 100 silver talents.
But a man of the true God came to him, saying: “O king, do not let the army of Israel go with you, for Jehovah is not with Israel, not with any of the Eʹphra·im·ites.
But go by yourself, act, and be courageous in battle. Otherwise, the true God could cause you to stumble before an enemy, for God has the power to help and to cause stumbling.”
At this Am·a·ziʹah said to the man of the true God: “But what about the 100 talents that I have given to the troops of Israel?” The man of the true God replied: “Jehovah has the means to give you much more than that.”
So Am·a·ziʹah dismissed the troops that had come to him from Eʹphra·im, sending them to their own place. However, they were very angry with Judah, so they returned to their own place in the heat of anger.
Then Am·a·ziʹah took courage and led his own troops to the Valley of Salt, and he struck down 10,000 men of Seʹir.
And the men of Judah captured 10,000 alive. So they brought them to the top of the crag and threw them down from the top of the crag, and they were all dashed to pieces.
But the members of the troop whom Am·a·ziʹah had sent back from accompanying him to the war were making raids on the cities of Judah, from Sa·marʹi·a clear to Beth-hoʹron; they struck down 3,000 of them and took much spoil.
But after Am·a·ziʹah returned from striking down the Eʹdom·ites, he brought the gods of the men of Seʹir and set them up for himself as gods, and he began to bow down before them and to make sacrificial smoke to them.
So Jehovah grew very angry with Am·a·ziʹah, and he sent a prophet who said to him: “Why are you following the people’s gods that did not rescue their own people out of your hand?”
As he spoke to him, the king said: “Did we appoint you as an adviser to the king? Stop! Why should they strike you down?” Then the prophet quit, but he added: “I know that God has decided to bring you to ruin, because you have done this and you have not listened to my advice.”
After consulting with his advisers, King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah sent a message to Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz son of Jeʹhu the king of Israel, saying: “Come! Let us confront each other in battle.”
King Je·hoʹash of Israel sent this message to King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah: “The thorny weed in Lebʹa·non sent a message to the cedar in Lebʹa·non, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ However, a wild beast of Lebʹa·non passed by and trampled down the thorny weed.
You have said, ‘Look! I have struck down Eʹdom.’ So your heart has become arrogant, wanting to be glorified. But now stay in your own house. Why should you provoke disaster and fall, bringing Judah down with you?”
But Am·a·ziʹah did not listen, for this was from the true God to give them into the hand of the enemy, because they had followed the gods of Eʹdom.
So King Je·hoʹash of Israel went up, and he and King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah confronted each other in battle at Beth-sheʹmesh, which belongs to Judah.
Judah was defeated by Israel, so each one fled to his home.
King Je·hoʹash of Israel captured King Am·a·ziʹah of Judah, son of Je·hoʹash son of Je·hoʹa·haz, at Beth-sheʹmesh. Then he brought him to Jerusalem and made a breach in the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Eʹphra·im to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits.
He took all the gold and the silver and all the articles that were found in the house of the true God with Oʹbed-eʹdom and in the treasuries of the king’s house, as well as hostages. Then he returned to Sa·marʹi·a.
Am·a·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹash the king of Judah lived for 15 years after the death of Je·hoʹash the son of Je·hoʹa·haz the king of Israel.
As for the rest of the history of Am·a·ziʹah, from beginning to end, look! is it not written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel?
From the time that Am·a·ziʹah turned away from following Jehovah, they formed a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Laʹchish, but they sent men after him to Laʹchish and put him to death there.
So they carried him back on horses and buried him with his forefathers in the city of Judah.
In the 18th year of King Jer·o·boʹam, A·biʹjah became king over Judah.
He reigned for three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Mi·caiʹah the daughter of U·riʹel of Gibʹe·ah. And there was war between A·biʹjah and Jer·o·boʹam.
So A·biʹjah went to war with an army of 400,000 mighty, trained warriors. And Jer·o·boʹam drew up in battle formation against him with 800,000 trained men, mighty warriors.
A·biʹjah now stood on Mount Zem·a·raʹim, which is in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and said: “Hear me, O Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel.
Do you not know that Jehovah the God of Israel gave to David a kingdom over Israel forever, to him and to his sons, by a covenant of salt?
But Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat, the servant of David’s son Solʹo·mon, rose up and rebelled against his lord.
And idle, worthless men kept gathering to him. And they proved superior to Re·ho·boʹam the son of Solʹo·mon when Re·ho·boʹam was young and fainthearted, and he could not hold his own against them.
“And now you think you can hold your own against the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David because you are a large crowd and you have the golden calves that Jer·o·boʹam made as gods for you.
Have you not driven out Jehovah’s priests, the descendants of Aaron, and the Levites, and have you not appointed your own priests just like the peoples of the other lands? Anyone who came along with a young bull and seven rams could become a priest of what are not gods.
As for us, Jehovah is our God, and we have not abandoned him; our priests, the descendants of Aaron, are ministering to Jehovah, and the Levites assist in the work.
They are making burnt offerings smoke to Jehovah each morning and each evening along with perfumed incense, and the layer bread is on the table of pure gold, and they light up the golden lampstand and its lamps each evening, because we are caring for our responsibility to Jehovah our God; but you have abandoned him.
Now look! the true God is with us, leading us, with his priests and the signal trumpets for sounding the battle alarm against you. O men of Israel, do not fight against Jehovah the God of your forefathers, for you will not be successful.”
But Jer·o·boʹam dispatched an ambush to come from behind them, so that they were in front of Judah and the ambush was behind them.
When the men of Judah turned around, they saw that they had to fight the battle both in front and from behind. So they began to cry out to Jehovah, while the priests were loudly sounding the trumpets.
The men of Judah broke out in a war cry, and when the men of Judah shouted the war cry, the true God defeated Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel before A·biʹjah and Judah.
The Israelites fled before Judah, and God gave them into their hand.
A·biʹjah and his people inflicted a great slaughter on them, and the slain of Israel kept falling, 500,000 trained men.
Thus the men of Israel were humbled at that time, but the men of Judah proved superior because they relied on Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
A·biʹjah kept chasing after Jer·o·boʹam and captured cities from him, Bethʹel and its dependent towns, Jeshʹa·nah and its dependent towns, and Eʹphra·in and its dependent towns.
And Jer·o·boʹam never regained his power during the time of A·biʹjah; then Jehovah struck him down and he died.
But A·biʹjah grew in strength. In time he took 14 wives, and he became father to 22 sons and 16 daughters.
And the rest of A·biʹjah’s history, his deeds and his words, is recorded in the writings of the prophet Idʹdo.
Then Je·hoshʹa·phat was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried with his forefathers in the City of David; and his son Je·hoʹram became king in his place.
His brothers, Je·hoshʹa·phat’s sons, were Az·a·riʹah, Je·hiʹel, Zekariah, Az·a·riʹah, Miʹcha·el, and Sheph·a·tiʹah; all of these were the sons of King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Israel.
And their father had given them many gifts in silver and gold, and valuable things, along with fortified cities in Judah; but he gave the kingdom to Je·hoʹram, for he was the firstborn.
When Je·hoʹram had taken control of the kingdom of his father, he strengthened his position by killing all his brothers with the sword, as well as some of the princes of Israel.
Je·hoʹram was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem.
He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as those of the house of Aʹhab had done, for Aʹhab’s daughter had become his wife; and he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes.
But Jehovah did not want to bring the house of David to ruin for the sake of the covenant that he had made with David, since he had promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.
In his days Eʹdom revolted against Judah and then set up its own king.
So Je·hoʹram and his commanders crossed over with all his chariots, and he rose up by night and defeated the Eʹdom·ites who were surrounding him and the chariot commanders.
But Eʹdom has kept up its revolt against Judah to this day. Libʹnah also revolted against him at that time, because he had abandoned Jehovah the God of his forefathers.
He had also made high places on the mountains of Judah to cause the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit spiritual prostitution, and he led Judah astray.
Eventually a written message came to him from E·liʹjah the prophet, saying: “This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says, ‘You have not walked in the ways of your father Je·hoshʹa·phat or in the ways of King Aʹsa of Judah.
But you walk in the way of the kings of Israel and cause Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit spiritual prostitution like the prostitution of the house of Aʹhab, and you even killed your own brothers, the household of your father, who were better than you.
Therefore, Jehovah is dealing a great blow to your people, to your sons, to your wives, and to all your possessions.
And you will suffer with many sicknesses, including a disease of your intestines, until your intestines come out because of the disease, day after day.’”
Then Jehovah stirred up against Je·hoʹram the Phi·lisʹtines and the Arabs who were near the E·thi·oʹpi·ans.
So they invaded Judah, forcing their way in, and carried off all the possessions that were found in the king’s house, as well as his sons and his wives; and the only son left to him was Je·hoʹa·haz, his youngest son.
And after all of this, Jehovah afflicted him with an incurable disease in his intestines.
Some time later, when two full years had passed, his intestines came out because of his disease, and he died while suffering severely from his disease; and his people did not make a burning for him like the burning that was made for his forefathers.
He was 32 years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. No one regretted it when he died. So they buried him in the City of David, but not in the burial places of the kings.
Then Solʹo·mon started to build the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem on Mount Mo·riʹah, where Jehovah had appeared to his father David, in the place that David had prepared on the threshing floor of Orʹnan the Jebʹu·site.
He started to build on the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
And the foundation that Solʹo·mon laid for building the house of the true God was 60 cubits long and 20 cubits wide, according to the former measurement.
The porch in front was 20 cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house, and its height was 120; and he overlaid it inside with pure gold.
He paneled the great house with juniper wood, after which he covered it with fine gold, and then he decorated it with palm-tree figures and chains.
Further, he overlaid the house with beautiful precious stones; and the gold he used was gold from Par·vaʹim.
He covered the house, the rafters, the thresholds, its walls, and its doors with gold; and he engraved cherubs on the walls.
He now made the Most Holy compartment; its length matched the width of the house, 20 cubits, and its width was 20 cubits. He covered it with 600 talents of fine gold.
The weight of the gold for the nails was 50 shekels; and he covered the roof chambers with gold.
Then he made in the Most Holy compartment two cherub sculptures, and he overlaid them with gold.
The overall length of the wings of the cherubs was 20 cubits; one wing of the first cherub was five cubits long and touched the wall of the house, and its other wing was five cubits long and touched one of the other cherub’s wings.
And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits long and touched the other wall of the house, and its other wing was five cubits long and touched one of the first cherub’s wings.
The wings of these cherubs were spread out 20 cubits; and they stood on their feet, and they faced inward.
He also made the curtain of blue thread, purple wool, crimson, and fine fabric, and incorporated cherub designs into it.
Then he made two pillars at the front of the house, 35 cubits in length, and the capital on top of each pillar was five cubits.
And he made chains, like necklaces, and put them on the tops of the pillars, and he made 100 pomegranates and put them on the chains.
He set up the pillars in front of the temple, one to the right and one to the left; he named the one on the right Jaʹchin and the one on the left Boʹaz.
Hez·e·kiʹah sent word to all Israel and Judah, and even wrote letters to Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, to come to the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem to observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel.
However, the king, his princes, and the whole congregation in Jerusalem decided to observe the Passover in the second month,
for they had not been able to observe it at the regular time, because not enough priests had sanctified themselves nor had the people gathered in Jerusalem.
This arrangement seemed right in the eyes of the king and the entire congregation.
So they decided to make an announcement throughout Israel, from Beʹer-sheʹba to Dan, that the people should come and observe the Passover to Jehovah the God of Israel at Jerusalem, for as a group they had not observed it according to what is written.
Then the couriers went throughout all Israel and Judah with the letters from the king and his princes, as the king had commanded, saying: “People of Israel, return to Jehovah the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that he may return to the remnant who escaped out of the hand of the kings of As·syrʹi·a.
Do not be like your forefathers and your brothers who acted unfaithfully toward Jehovah the God of their forefathers, so that he made them an object of horror, just as you are seeing.
Now do not be obstinate like your forefathers. Submit to Jehovah and come to his sanctuary that he has sanctified forever and serve Jehovah your God, so that his burning anger may turn away from you.
For when you return to Jehovah, your brothers and your sons will be shown mercy by their captors and will be allowed to return to this land, for Jehovah your God is compassionate and merciful, and he will not turn his face away from you if you return to him.”
So the couriers went from city to city throughout the land of Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh, even to Zebʹu·lun, but the people were making fun of them and mocking them.
However, some individuals from Ashʹer, Ma·nasʹseh, and Zebʹu·lun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
The hand of the true God was also in Judah to unite them to carry out what the king and the princes had commanded by the word of Jehovah.
A multitude of people gathered together at Jerusalem to observe the Festival of Unleavened Bread in the second month; it was a very large congregation.
They rose up and removed the altars that were in Jerusalem, and they removed all the incense altars and threw them into the Kidʹron Valley.
Then they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice on the 14th day of the second month. The priests and the Levites felt ashamed, so they sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings to the house of Jehovah.
They took their customary places, according to the Law of Moses the man of the true God; then the priests sprinkled the blood received from the hand of the Levites.
There were many in the congregation who had not sanctified themselves, and the Levites were in charge of slaughtering the Passover sacrifices for all who were not clean, to sanctify them to Jehovah.
For a great number of the people, especially those from Eʹphra·im, Ma·nasʹseh, Isʹsa·char, and Zebʹu·lun, had not cleansed themselves, but they still ate the Passover, contrary to what is written. But Hez·e·kiʹah prayed for them, saying: “May Jehovah, who is good, make allowance for
everyone who has prepared his heart to search for the true God, Jehovah, the God of his forefathers, although he has not been purified according to the standard of holiness.”
And Jehovah listened to Hez·e·kiʹah and pardoned the people.
So the Israelites who were in Jerusalem observed the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great rejoicing, and the Levites and the priests were praising Jehovah day by day, loudly playing their instruments to Jehovah.
Moreover, Hez·e·kiʹah spoke to and encouraged all the Levites who served Jehovah with discretion. And they ate throughout the festival for seven days, sacrificing communion sacrifices and giving thanks to Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
Then all the congregation decided to observe it for seven more days, so they observed it for seven more days with rejoicing.
And King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 7,000 sheep, and the princes contributed for the congregation 1,000 bulls and 10,000 sheep; and priests were sanctifying themselves in great number.
And all the congregation of Judah, the priests, the Levites, all the congregation that came from Israel, and the foreign residents who came from the land of Israel and those living in Judah continued rejoicing.
And there was great rejoicing in Jerusalem, for from the days of Solʹo·mon the son of David the king of Israel, nothing like this had happened in Jerusalem.
Finally the Levite priests stood up and blessed the people; and God heard their voice, and their prayer reached his holy dwelling, the heavens.
Now the queen of Sheʹba heard the report about Solʹo·mon, so she came to Jerusalem to test Solʹo·mon with perplexing questions. She was accompanied by a very impressive entourage, with camels carrying balsam oil and great quantities of gold and precious stones. She went in to Solʹo·mon and spoke to him about everything that was close to her heart.
Solʹo·mon then answered all her questions. There was nothing too difficult for Solʹo·mon to explain to her.
When the queen of Sheʹba had seen Solʹo·mon’s wisdom, the house that he built,
the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the table service of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers and their attire, and his burnt sacrifices that he regularly offered up at the house of Jehovah, she was left completely breathless.
So she said to the king: “The report that I heard in my own land about your achievements and about your wisdom was true.
But I did not put faith in the reports until I had come and had seen it with my own eyes. And look! I had not been told the half of your great wisdom. You have far surpassed the report that I heard.
Happy are your men, and happy are your servants who stand before you constantly, listening to your wisdom!
May Jehovah your God be praised, who has taken pleasure in you by putting you on his throne as king for Jehovah your God. Because your God loves Israel, in order to make it continue forever, he appointed you over it as king to administer justice and righteousness.”
Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold and a great quantity of balsam oil and precious stones. Never again was such balsam oil brought in as what the queen of Sheʹba gave to King Solʹo·mon.
Moreover, the servants of Hiʹram and the servants of Solʹo·mon who brought gold from Oʹphir also brought algum timbers and precious stones.
The king made from the algum timbers stairs for the house of Jehovah and for the king’s house, as well as harps and stringed instruments for the singers. Nothing like them had ever been seen before in the land of Judah.
King Solʹo·mon also gave the queen of Sheʹba whatever she desired and asked for, more than what she had brought to the king. Then she left and returned to her own land, together with her servants.
And the weight of the gold that came to Solʹo·mon in one year amounted to 666 talents of gold,
besides that brought in by the merchants and the traders and all the kings of the Arabs and the governors of the land who were bringing gold and silver in to Solʹo·mon.
King Solʹo·mon made 200 large shields of alloyed gold (600 shekels of alloyed gold went on each shield)
and 300 bucklers of alloyed gold (three miʹnas of gold went on each buckler). Then the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non.
The king also made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with pure gold.
There were six steps to the throne, and there was a gold footstool attached to the throne, and there were armrests on both sides of the seat, and two lions were standing beside the armrests.
And there were 12 lions standing on the six steps, one at each end of the six steps. No other kingdom had made anything like it.
All the drinking vessels of King Solʹo·mon were of gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebʹa·non were of pure gold. There was nothing made of silver, for silver was considered as nothing in the days of Solʹo·mon.
For the king’s ships would go to Tarʹshish with the servants of Hiʹram. Once every three years, the ships of Tarʹshish would come loaded with gold and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
So King Solʹo·mon was greater than all the other kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
And the kings of all the earth sought an audience with Solʹo·mon to hear his wisdom that the true God had put in his heart.
They would each bring a gift—articles of silver, articles of gold, garments, armor, balsam oil, horses, and mules—and this continued year after year.
And Solʹo·mon had 4,000 stalls for his horses and chariots and 12,000 horses, and he kept them stationed in the chariot cities and close by the king in Jerusalem.
And he ruled over all the kings from the River to the land of the Phi·lisʹtines and to the boundary of Egypt.
The king made the silver in Jerusalem as plentiful as the stones, and cedarwood as plentiful as the sycamore trees in the She·pheʹlah.
And they would bring horses to Solʹo·mon from Egypt and from all the other lands.
As for the rest of the history of Solʹo·mon, from beginning to end, is it not written among the words of Nathan the prophet, in the prophecy of A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite, and in the record of visions of Idʹdo the visionary concerning Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat?
Solʹo·mon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel for 40 years.
Then Solʹo·mon was laid to rest with his forefathers. So they buried him in the City of David his father; and his son Re·ho·boʹam became king in his place.
Je·hoʹash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned for 40 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibʹi·ah from Beʹer-sheʹba.
Je·hoʹash continued doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes all the days of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest.
Je·hoiʹa·da chose two wives for him, and he became father to sons and daughters.
Afterward it was the heart’s desire of Je·hoʹash to renovate the house of Jehovah.
So he gathered the priests and the Levites together and said to them: “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect money from all Israel to repair the house of your God from year to year; and you should act quickly in the matter.” But the Levites did not act quickly.
So the king called Je·hoiʹa·da the chief and said to him: “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the sacred tax ordered by Moses the servant of Jehovah, the sacred tax of the congregation of Israel, for the tent of the Testimony?
For the sons of Ath·a·liʹah, that wicked woman, had broken into the house of the true God, and they had used all the holy things of the house of Jehovah for the Baʹals.”
Then, at the king’s order, a chest was made and placed outside at the gate of the house of Jehovah.
After that a proclamation was issued throughout Judah and Jerusalem to bring to Jehovah the sacred tax that Moses the servant of the true God had imposed on Israel in the wilderness.
All the princes and all the people rejoiced, and they kept bringing contributions and dropping them into the chest until it was full.
Whenever the Levites brought the chest in to be turned over to the king and they saw that there was a great deal of money in it, the secretary of the king and the commissioner of the chief priest would come and empty the chest, and then they would take it back to its place. That was what they did from day to day, and they gathered money in abundance.
Then the king and Je·hoiʹa·da would give it to those supervising the work of the service of Jehovah’s house, and they would hire the stonecutters and the craftsmen for renovating Jehovah’s house, and also workers in iron and copper to repair Jehovah’s house.
And those supervising the work got it started, and the repair work progressed under their supervision, and they restored the house of the true God to its proper condition and reinforced it.
And as soon as they finished, they brought the money that was left over to the king and Je·hoiʹa·da, and they used it to make utensils for the house of Jehovah, utensils for the ministry and for making offerings and cups and utensils of gold and of silver. And they would offer up burnt sacrifices at the house of Jehovah regularly all the days of Je·hoiʹa·da.
When Je·hoiʹa·da was old and satisfied with years, he died; he was 130 years old at his death.
So they buried him in the City of David along with the kings, because he had done good in Israel with respect to the true God and His house.
After Je·hoiʹa·da’s death the princes of Judah came and bowed down to the king, and the king listened to them.
They abandoned the house of Jehovah the God of their forefathers and began serving the sacred poles and the idols, so that God’s anger came against Judah and Jerusalem because of their guilt.
He kept sending prophets among them to bring them back to Jehovah, and they kept warning them, but they refused to listen.
God’s spirit came upon Zekariah the son of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest, and he stood above the people and said to them: “This is what the true God says, ‘Why are you violating the commandments of Jehovah? You will not be successful! Because you have abandoned Jehovah, he will, in turn, abandon you.’”
But they conspired against him and stoned him at the king’s order in the courtyard of Jehovah’s house.
Thus King Je·hoʹash did not remember the loyal love that his father Je·hoiʹa·da had shown toward him, and he killed his son, who said as he was dying: “May Jehovah see to it and call you to account.”
At the beginning of the year the Syrian army came up against Je·hoʹash, and they invaded Judah and Jerusalem. Then they did away with all the princes of the people, and they sent all their spoil to the king of Damascus.
For although the invading Syrian army had a small number of men, Jehovah handed over to them a very large army, because they had abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers; so they executed judgment on Je·hoʹash.
And when they withdrew from him (for they left him severely wounded), his own servants conspired against him because he had shed the blood of the sons of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest. They killed him on his own bed. So he died and they buried him in the City of David, but they did not bury him in the burial places of the kings.
These were the conspirators against him: Zaʹbad the son of Shimʹe·ath the Amʹmon·it·ess and Je·hozʹa·bad the son of Shimʹrith the Moʹab·i·tess.
Regarding his sons and the many pronouncements against him and the renovation of the house of the true God, all these things are recorded in the writings of the Book of the Kings. And his son Am·a·ziʹah became king in his place.
Joʹtham was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Je·ruʹshah the daughter of Zaʹdok.
He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as his father Uz·ziʹah had done, except that he did not invade the temple of Jehovah. But the people were still acting ruinously.
He built the upper gate of Jehovah’s house, and he did much building on the wall of Oʹphel.
He also built cities in the mountainous region of Judah, and he built fortified places and towers in the wooded areas.
He waged war against the king of the Amʹmon·ites and eventually prevailed against them, so that the Amʹmon·ites gave him in that year 100 silver talents, 10,000 cor measures of wheat, and 10,000 of barley. The Amʹmon·ites also paid this to him in the second and third years.
So Joʹtham kept growing strong, for he established his ways before Jehovah his God.
As for the rest of the history of Joʹtham, all his wars and his ways, it is written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah.
He was 25 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem.
Then Joʹtham was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David. And his son Aʹhaz became king in his place.
Solʹo·mon now gave the order to build a house for Jehovah’s name and a house for his kingdom.
Solʹo·mon enlisted 70,000 men as common laborers, 80,000 men as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers over them.
Further, Solʹo·mon sent word to Hiʹram the king of Tyre: “Do for me as you did for David my father when you sent him cedarwood to build a house to live in.
Now I am building a house for the name of Jehovah my God, to sanctify it to him, to burn perfumed incense before him, and also for the constant layer bread and the burnt offerings, morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and at the festival seasons of Jehovah our God. This is a lasting obligation for Israel.
The house that I am building will be great, for our God is greater than all the other gods.
And who is up to the task of building him a house? For the heavens and the heaven of the heavens cannot contain him, so who am I that I should build him a house except as a place for making sacrifices smoke before him?
Now send me a craftsman who is skilled in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, purple wool, crimson, and blue thread and who knows how to cut engravings. He will work in Judah and in Jerusalem with my skilled craftsmen, whom David my father has provided.
And send me timbers of cedar, juniper, and algum from Lebʹa·non, for I well know that your servants are experienced at cutting down the trees of Lebʹa·non. My servants will work along with your servants
to prepare for me great quantities of timber, for the house that I am to build will be extraordinarily great.
Now look! I will supply the food for your servants, the woodcutters who cut down the trees: 20,000 cors of wheat, 20,000 cors of barley, 20,000 baths of wine, and 20,000 baths of oil.”
At that Hiʹram the king of Tyre sent this written message to Solʹo·mon: “Because Jehovah loves his people, he has made you their king.”
Hiʹram then said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, who made the heavens and the earth, because he has given to King David a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, who will build a house for Jehovah and a house for his kingdom.
Now I am sending a skilled craftsman, endowed with understanding, Hiʹram-aʹbi,
who is the son of a Danʹite woman but whose father was a man of Tyre; he has experience in working in gold, silver, copper, iron, stones, timbers, purple wool, blue thread, fine fabric, and crimson. He can do every sort of engraving and make any design he is given. He will work with your own skilled craftsmen and the skilled craftsmen of my lord David your father.
Now let my lord send the wheat, barley, oil, and wine he has promised to his servants.
And we will cut down trees from Lebʹa·non, as many as you need, and we will bring them to you as rafts by sea to Jopʹpa; and you will take them up to Jerusalem.”
Solʹo·mon then took a count of all the men who were foreign residents in the land of Israel, after the census taken by David his father, and there were found 153,600.
So he assigned 70,000 of them as common laborers, 80,000 as stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 as overseers for putting the people to work.
Re·ho·boʹam went to Sheʹchem, for all Israel had come to Sheʹchem to make him king.
As soon as Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat heard of it (he was still in Egypt because he had fled on account of King Solʹo·mon), Jer·o·boʹam came back from Egypt.
Then they sent for him, and Jer·o·boʹam and all Israel came to Re·ho·boʹam and said:
“Your father made our yoke harsh. But if you make the harsh service of your father easier and you lighten the heavy yoke he put on us, we will serve you.”
At this he said to them: “Return to me after three days.” So the people went away.
King Re·ho·boʹam then consulted with the older men who had served his father Solʹo·mon while he was alive, saying: “What advice would you give on how to reply to this people?”
They answered him: “If you are good to this people and please them and give them a favorable answer, they will always be your servants.”
However, he rejected the advice that the older men gave him, and he consulted with the young men who had grown up with him and who were now his attendants.
He asked them: “What advice do you offer on how we should reply to this people who have said to me, ‘Make the yoke your father put on us lighter’?”
The young men who had grown up with him said to him: “This is what you should say to the people who have said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter for us’; this is what you should tell them, ‘My little finger will be thicker than my father’s hips.
My father imposed a heavy yoke on you, but I will add to your yoke. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.’”
Jer·o·boʹam and all the people came to Re·ho·boʹam on the third day, just as the king had said: “Return to me on the third day.”
But the king answered them harshly. Thus King Re·ho·boʹam rejected the advice of the older men.
He spoke to them according to the advice of the young men, saying: “I will make your yoke heavier, and I will add to it. My father punished you with whips, but I will do so with scourges.”
So the king did not listen to the people, for this turn of events was caused by the true God, in order to carry out the word that Jehovah had spoken through A·hiʹjah the Shiʹlo·nite to Jer·o·boʹam the son of Neʹbat.
As for all Israel, because the king refused to listen to them, the people replied to the king: “What share do we have in David? We have no inheritance in the son of Jesʹse. Each one to your gods, O Israel! Now look after your own house, O David.” With that all Israel returned to their homes.
But Re·ho·boʹam continued to reign over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
Then King Re·ho·boʹam sent Ha·doʹram, who was in charge of those conscripted for forced labor, but the Israelites stoned him to death. King Re·ho·boʹam managed to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem.
And the Israelites have been in revolt against the house of David down to this day.
In the 36th year of the reign of Aʹsa, King Baʹa·sha of Israel came up against Judah and began to build up Raʹmah to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to King Aʹsa of Judah.
At that Aʹsa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of Jehovah’s house and the king’s house and sent them to King Ben-haʹdad of Syria, who was dwelling in Damascus, saying:
“There is a treaty between me and you and between my father and your father. I am sending you silver and gold. Come, break your treaty with King Baʹa·sha of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”
Ben-haʹdad listened to King Aʹsa and sent the chiefs of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they struck down Iʹjon, Dan, Aʹbel-maʹim, and all the storage places of the cities of Naphʹta·li.
When Baʹa·sha heard of it, he immediately quit building Raʹmah and abandoned his work on it.
King Aʹsa then took all Judah, and they carried off the stones and timbers of Raʹmah that Baʹa·sha had been building with, and with them he built up Geʹba and Mizʹpah.
At that time Ha·naʹni the seer came to King Aʹsa of Judah and said to him: “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on Jehovah your God, the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of your hand.
Were not the E·thi·oʹpi·ans and the Libʹy·ans a very great army with many chariots and horsemen? But because you relied on Jehovah, he gave them into your hand.
For the eyes of Jehovah are roving about through all the earth to show his strength in behalf of those whose heart is complete toward him. You have acted foolishly in this matter; from now on there will be wars against you.”
However, Aʹsa became offended at the seer and put him in prison because he was enraged at him over this. And Aʹsa began to mistreat others among the people at that same time.
Now the history of Aʹsa, from beginning to end, is written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.
In the 39th year of his reign, Aʹsa developed an ailment in his feet until he became very sick; and even in his sickness, he turned, not to Jehovah, but to the healers.
Then Aʹsa was laid to rest with his forefathers; he died in the 41st year of his reign.
So they buried him in the grand burial place that he had excavated for himself in the City of David, and they laid him on a bier that had been filled with balsam oil and different sorts of ingredients mixed into a specially made ointment. Further, they made an extraordinarily great funeral burning for him.
So Solʹo·mon completed all the work he had to do for the house of Jehovah. Solʹo·mon then brought in the things that David his father had made holy, and he put the silver, the gold, and all the articles into the treasuries of the house of the true God.
At that time Solʹo·mon congregated the elders of Israel, all the heads of the tribes, the chieftains of the paternal houses of Israel. They came to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah from the City of David, that is, Zion.
All the men of Israel assembled before the king at the festival that is held in the seventh month.
So all the elders of Israel came, and the Levites lifted up the Ark.
They brought up the Ark, the tent of meeting, and all the holy utensils that were in the tent. The priests and the Levites brought them up.
King Solʹo·mon and the entire assembly of Israel who had been summoned to meet with him were before the Ark. So many sheep and cattle were being sacrificed that they could not be counted or numbered.
Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the innermost room of the house, the Most Holy, underneath the wings of the cherubs.
Thus the wings of the cherubs were spread out over the place of the Ark, so that the cherubs covered over the Ark and its poles from above.
The poles were so long that the tips of the poles were visible from the Holy in front of the innermost room, but they were not visible from outside. And they are there to this day.
There was nothing in the Ark but the two tablets that Moses placed in it at Hoʹreb, when Jehovah made a covenant with the people of Israel while they were coming out of Egypt.
When the priests came out from the holy place (for all the priests who were present had sanctified themselves, regardless of their divisions),
all the Levite singers who belonged to Aʹsaph, to Heʹman, to Je·duʹthun, and to their sons and their brothers were clothed in fine fabric, holding cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps; they were standing east of the altar, and along with them 120 priests were sounding the trumpets.
At the moment when the trumpeters and the singers were praising and thanking Jehovah in unison, and as the sound ascended from the trumpets, the cymbals, and the other musical instruments as they were praising Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love endures forever,” then the house, the house of Jehovah, was filled with a cloud.
The priests were not able to stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of the true God.
Then A·biʹjah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the City of David; and his son Aʹsa became king in his place. In his days the land had rest for ten years.
Aʹsa did what was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God.
He removed the foreign altars and the high places, smashed the sacred pillars, and cut down the sacred poles.
Further, he told Judah to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers and to observe the Law and the commandment.
So he removed from all the cities of Judah the high places and the incense stands, and under him, the kingdom continued without disturbance.
He built fortified cities in Judah, since the land had no disturbance and there was no war against him during these years, for Jehovah gave him rest.
He said to Judah: “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls and towers, gates and bars. For the land is still at our disposal, because we have searched for Jehovah our God. We have searched, and he has given us rest all around.” So their building was successful.
Aʹsa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah, equipped with large shields and lances. And out of Benjamin were 280,000 mighty warriors who carried bucklers and were armed with bows.
Later Zeʹrah the E·thi·oʹpi·an came against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots. When he reached Ma·reʹshah,
Aʹsa went out against him and they drew up in battle formation in the Valley of Zephʹa·thah at Ma·reʹshah.
Aʹsa then called to Jehovah his God and said: “O Jehovah, it does not matter to you whether those you help are many or have no power. Help us, O Jehovah our God, for we are relying on you, and in your name we have come against this crowd. O Jehovah, you are our God. Do not let mortal man prevail against you.”
So Jehovah defeated the E·thi·oʹpi·ans before Aʹsa and before Judah, and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans fled.
Aʹsa and the people with him pursued them as far as Geʹrar, and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans continued falling until not one of them was alive, for they were crushed by Jehovah and by his army. Afterward they carried off a very great deal of spoil.
Further, they struck all the cities around Geʹrar, for the dread of Jehovah had come upon them; and they plundered all the cities, for there was much to plunder in them.
They also attacked the tents of those with livestock, and they captured a great number of flocks and camels, after which they returned to Jerusalem.
Aʹhaz was 20 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 16 years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in Jehovah’s eyes as David his forefather had done.
Instead, he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and he even made metal statues of the Baʹals.
Moreover, he made sacrificial smoke in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom and burned up his sons in the fire, following the detestable practices of the nations that Jehovah had driven out from before the Israelites.
He also kept sacrificing and making sacrificial smoke on the high places, on the hills, and under every luxuriant tree.
So Jehovah his God gave him into the hand of the king of Syria, so that they defeated him and carried off a great number of captives and brought them to Damascus. He was also given into the hand of the king of Israel, who inflicted on him a great slaughter.
For Peʹkah the son of Rem·a·liʹah killed in Judah 120,000 in one day, all brave men, because they had abandoned Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
And Zichʹri, an Eʹphra·im·ite warrior, killed the king’s son Ma·a·seiʹah and Az·riʹkam, who was in charge of the palace, and El·kaʹnah, who was second to the king.
Moreover, the Israelites took 200,000 of their brothers captive—women, sons, and daughters; they also seized a great deal of spoil, and they took the spoil to Sa·marʹi·a.
But a prophet of Jehovah named Oʹded was there. He went out before the army that was coming to Sa·marʹi·a and said to them: “Look! It was because Jehovah the God of your forefathers was angry with Judah that he gave them into your hand, and you slaughtered them with a fury that has reached clear to the heavens.
And now you intend to make the people of Judah and Jerusalem your male and female servants. Nevertheless, are you not also guilty before Jehovah your God?
Now listen to me and return the captives whom you took from your brothers, for Jehovah’s burning anger is against you.”
At that some of the chiefs of the Eʹphra·im·ites, Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·ho·haʹnan, Ber·e·chiʹah the son of Me·shilʹle·moth, Je·hiz·kiʹah the son of Shalʹlum, and A·maʹsa the son of Hadʹlai, confronted those coming in from the military campaign,
and they said to them: “Do not bring the captives in here, for it will make us guilty before Jehovah. What you intend to do will add to our sins and to our guilt, for our guilt is already great and there is burning anger against Israel.”
So the armed soldiers handed over the captives and the plunder to the princes and the entire congregation.
Then the men who had been designated by name rose up and took hold of the captives, and they provided clothes from the spoil for all those among them who were naked. So they clothed them and gave them sandals, food and drink, and oil for their skin. Furthermore, they transported the feeble on donkeys and brought them to their brothers in Jerʹi·cho, the city of palm trees. After that they returned to Sa·marʹi·a.
At that time King Aʹhaz asked the kings of As·syrʹi·a for help.
And once again the Eʹdom·ites invaded and attacked Judah and carried off captives.
The Phi·lisʹtines also made a raid on the cities of the She·pheʹlah and the Negʹeb of Judah and captured Beth-sheʹmesh, Aiʹja·lon, Ge·deʹroth, Soʹco and its dependent towns, Timʹnah and its dependent towns, and Gimʹzo and its dependent towns; and they settled there.
Jehovah humbled Judah because of King Aʹhaz of Israel, for he had let Judah go unrestrained, resulting in great unfaithfulness toward Jehovah.
King Tilʹgath-pil·neʹser of As·syrʹi·a eventually came against him and caused him distress rather than strengthening him.
For Aʹhaz had stripped the house of Jehovah and the house of the king and the houses of the princes and made a gift to the king of As·syrʹi·a; but it was of no help to him.
And during his time of distress, King Aʹhaz acted even more unfaithfully toward Jehovah.
He began to sacrifice to the gods of Damascus that had defeated him, and he went on to say: “Because the gods of the kings of Syria are helping them, I will sacrifice to them so that they may help me.” But they caused him and all Israel to stumble.
Furthermore, Aʹhaz collected the utensils of the house of the true God; he then cut to pieces the utensils of the house of the true God, closed the doors of the house of Jehovah, and made altars for himself in every corner of Jerusalem.
And in all the cities of Judah, he made high places for making sacrificial smoke to other gods, and he offended Jehovah the God of his forefathers.
As for the rest of his history, all his dealings from beginning to end, there it is written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.
Then Aʹhaz was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the city, in Jerusalem, for they did not bring him into the burial places of the kings of Israel. And his son Hez·e·kiʹah became king in his place.
Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem made his youngest son A·ha·ziʹah king in his place, for the marauder band that came with the Arabs to the camp had killed all the older ones. So A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram began to reign as king of Judah.
A·ha·ziʹah was 22 years old when he became king, and he reigned for one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ath·a·liʹah the granddaughter of Omʹri.
He too walked in the ways of the house of Aʹhab, for his mother became his adviser in acting wickedly.
And he kept doing what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, like the house of Aʹhab, for they became his advisers after the death of his father, to his destruction.
He followed their advice and went with Je·hoʹram the son of King Aʹhab of Israel to wage war against King Hazʹa·el of Syria at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, where the archers wounded Je·hoʹram.
He returned to Jezʹre·el to recover from the wounds that they had inflicted on him at Raʹmah when he fought against King Hazʹa·el of Syria. A·ha·ziʹah the son of Je·hoʹram the king of Judah went down to Jezʹre·el to see Je·hoʹram the son of Aʹhab, because he had been wounded.
But God brought about the downfall of A·ha·ziʹah by his coming to Je·hoʹram; and when he came, he went out with Je·hoʹram to meet Jeʹhu the grandson of Nimʹshi, whom Jehovah had anointed to do away with the house of Aʹhab.
When Jeʹhu began to execute judgment on the house of Aʹhab, he found the princes of Judah and the sons of A·ha·ziʹah’s brothers, ministers of A·ha·ziʹah, and he killed them.
Then he looked for A·ha·ziʹah; they captured him where he was hiding in Sa·marʹi·a, and they brought him to Jeʹhu. Then they put him to death and buried him, for they said: “He is the grandson of Je·hoshʹa·phat, who searched for Jehovah with all his heart.” There was no one of the house of A·ha·ziʹah who had the power to rule the kingdom.
When Ath·a·liʹah, A·ha·ziʹah’s mother, saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed the entire royal line of the house of Judah.
However, Je·ho·shabʹe·ath the daughter of the king took Je·hoʹash the son of A·ha·ziʹah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were to be put to death, and she put him and his nurse in an inner bedroom. Je·ho·shabʹe·ath the daughter of King Je·hoʹram (she was the wife of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest and a sister of A·ha·ziʹah) managed to keep him concealed from Ath·a·liʹah, so that she did not put him to death.
He remained with them for six years, hidden at the house of the true God, while Ath·a·liʹah was ruling over the land.
Now the spirit of God came upon Az·a·riʹah the son of Oʹded.
So he went out to meet Aʹsa and said to him: “Hear me, O Aʹsa and all Judah and Benjamin! Jehovah is with you as long as you remain with him; and if you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you abandon him, he will abandon you.
For a long time Israel had been without the true God, without a priest teaching, and without law.
But when in their distress they returned to Jehovah the God of Israel and searched for him, he let himself be found by them.
In those times no one could travel safely, for there was much unrest among all the inhabitants of the lands.
Nation was being crushed by nation and one city by another city, because God kept them in disorder with every sort of distress.
But you, be strong and do not become discouraged, for your activity will be rewarded.”
As soon as Aʹsa heard these words and the prophecy of Oʹded the prophet, he took courage and removed the disgusting idols from all the land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities that he had captured from the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, and he restored Jehovah’s altar that was before the porch of Jehovah.
And he gathered together all Judah and Benjamin and the foreign residents with them from Eʹphra·im and Ma·nasʹseh and Simʹe·on, for they had deserted to him from Israel in great number when they saw that Jehovah his God was with him.
So they were gathered together at Jerusalem in the third month of the 15th year of Aʹsa’s reign.
On that day they sacrificed to Jehovah from the spoil they had brought, 700 cattle and 7,000 sheep.
Furthermore, they entered into a covenant to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers with all their heart and with all their soul.
Whoever would not search for Jehovah the God of Israel was to be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman.
So they took an oath to Jehovah with a loud voice, with joyful shouting, and with the trumpets and horns.
And all Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had taken the oath with all their heart and they eagerly sought him and he let himself be found by them, and Jehovah continued to give them rest on every side.
Aʹsa the king even removed Maʹa·cah his grandmother from her position as queen mother, because she had made an obscene idol for the worship of the sacred pole. Aʹsa cut down her obscene idol and pulverized it and burned it in the Kidʹron Valley.
But the high places were not removed from Israel. Nevertheless, Aʹsa’s heart was complete all his life.
And he brought the things that he and his father had made holy into the house of the true God—silver, gold, and various utensils.
There was no war until the 35th year of Aʹsa’s reign.
After these things and these acts of faithfulness, King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a came and invaded Judah. He besieged the fortified cities, intent on breaking through and capturing them.
When Hez·e·kiʹah saw that Sen·nachʹer·ib had come and intended to wage war against Jerusalem,
he decided, after consulting with his princes and his warriors, to stop up the waters of the springs outside the city, and they gave him their support.
Many people were gathered together, and they stopped up all the springs and the stream that flowed through the land, saying: “Why should the kings of As·syrʹi·a come and find plenty of water?”
Furthermore, with determination he rebuilt the entire broken-down wall and raised towers on it, and outside he made another wall. He also repaired the Mound of the City of David, and he made a large number of weapons and shields.
He then appointed military chiefs over the people and assembled them at the public square of the city gate and encouraged them, saying:
“Be courageous and strong. Do not be afraid or be terrified because of the king of As·syrʹi·a and all the multitude with him, for there are more with us than there are with him.
With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is Jehovah our God to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people were strengthened by the words of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah.
After this, while King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a was at Laʹchish with all his imperial might, he sent his servants to Jerusalem, to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and to all the Ju·deʹans in Jerusalem, saying:
“This is what King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a says, ‘In what are you trusting that you remain in Jerusalem while it is besieged?
Is not Hez·e·kiʹah misleading you and handing you over to die by famine and thirst, saying: “Jehovah our God will rescue us from the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a”?
Is this not the same Hez·e·kiʹah who removed your God’s high places and His altars and then said to Judah and Jerusalem: “You should bow down before one altar and on it you should make your sacrifices smoke”?
Do you not know what I and my forefathers did to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands able to rescue their land from my hand?
Who among all the gods of these nations that my forefathers devoted to destruction was able to rescue his people from my hand, so that your God should be able to rescue you from my hand?
Now do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you or mislead you like this! Do not put faith in him, for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to rescue his people from my hand and from the hand of my forefathers. How much less, then, will your own God rescue you from my hand!’”
His servants said even more against Jehovah the true God and against Hez·e·kiʹah his servant.
He also wrote letters to insult Jehovah the God of Israel and to speak against him, saying: “Like the gods of the nations of the lands who could not rescue their people from my hand, so the God of Hez·e·kiʹah will not rescue his people from my hand.”
They kept calling loudly in the language of the Jews to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to make them afraid and to terrify them, in order to capture the city.
They spoke against the God of Jerusalem the same way as against the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of man’s hands.
But King Hez·e·kiʹah and the prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz kept praying about this and crying out to the heavens for help.
Then Jehovah sent an angel and wiped out every mighty warrior, leader, and chief in the camp of the king of As·syrʹi·a, so that he went back to his own land in disgrace. He later entered the house of his god, and there some of his own sons struck him down with the sword.
So Jehovah saved Hez·e·kiʹah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a and from the hand of all others and gave them rest on every side.
And many brought gifts to Jehovah at Jerusalem and choice things to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he was greatly respected by all the nations after that.
In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death, and he prayed to Jehovah, who answered him and gave him a sign.
But Hez·e·kiʹah did not respond appreciatively to the good done to him, for his heart became haughty, bringing indignation against him and against Judah and Jerusalem.
However, Hez·e·kiʹah humbled himself for the haughtiness of his heart, he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Jehovah’s indignation did not come upon them in the days of Hez·e·kiʹah.
And Hez·e·kiʹah came to have vast riches and glory; and he made storehouses for himself for silver, gold, precious stones, balsam oil, shields, and for all the desirable articles.
He also made storage places for the produce of grain and new wine and oil, as well as stalls for all the different kinds of livestock and stalls for the flocks.
He also acquired cities for himself, and an abundance of livestock, flocks, and herds, for God gave him very many possessions.
It was Hez·e·kiʹah who stopped up the upper source of the waters of Giʹhon and directed them straight down to the west to the City of David, and Hez·e·kiʹah was successful in every work of his.
However, when the spokesmen of the princes of Babylon were sent to ask him about the sign that had occurred in the land, the true God left him alone to put him to the test, to get to know all that was in his heart.
As for the rest of the history of Hez·e·kiʹah and his acts of loyal love, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Aʹmoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and of Israel.
Then Hez·e·kiʹah was laid to rest with his forefathers, and they buried him in the ascent to the burial places of the sons of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And his son Ma·nasʹseh became king in his place.
Then he made the copper altar, 20 cubits long, 20 cubits wide, and 10 cubits high.
He made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, 10 cubits from brim to brim and 5 cubits high, and it took a measuring line 30 cubits long to encircle it.
And there were ornamental gourds under it, completely encircling it, ten to a cubit all around the Sea. The gourds were in two rows and were cast in one piece with it.
It stood on 12 bulls, 3 facing north, 3 facing west, 3 facing south, and 3 facing east; and the Sea rested on them, and all their hindquarters were toward the center.
And its thickness was a handbreadth; and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. The reservoir could hold 3,000 bath measures.
Further, he made ten basins for washing and put five to the right and five to the left. They would rinse in them the things used for the burnt offering. But the Sea was for the priests for washing.
He then made ten lampstands of gold, as specified, and put them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left.
He also made ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the right and five on the left; and he made 100 golden bowls.
Then he made the courtyard of the priests and the great court and the doors for the court, and he overlaid their doors with copper.
And he placed the Sea on the right side, toward the southeast.
Hiʹram also made the cans, the shovels, and the bowls. So Hiʹram finished the work that he did for King Solʹo·mon on the house of the true God:
the two pillars and the bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the two pillars; the two networks to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on top of the pillars;
the 400 pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowl-shaped capitals that were on the pillars;
the ten carriages and the ten basins on the carriages;
the Sea and the 12 bulls beneath it;
and the cans, the shovels, the forks, and all their utensils Hiʹram-aʹbiv made of polished copper for King Solʹo·mon for the house of Jehovah.
The king cast them in the district of the Jordan in the thick clay between Sucʹcoth and Zerʹe·dah.
Solʹo·mon made all these utensils in great quantities; the weight of the copper was not ascertained.
Solʹo·mon made all the utensils for the house of the true God: the altar of gold; the tables with the showbread on them;
the lampstands and their lamps of pure gold, to burn before the innermost room according to the requirements;
and the blossoms, the lamps, and the snuffers, of gold, the purest gold;
the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and the fire holders, of pure gold; and the entrance of the house, its inner doors for the Most Holy, and the doors of the house of the temple, of gold.
Afterward the Moʹab·ites and the Amʹmon·ites, together with some of the Amʹmon·im, came to wage war against Je·hoshʹa·phat.
So Je·hoshʹa·phat was told: “A large crowd has come against you from the region of the sea, from Eʹdom, and there they are in Hazʹa·zon-taʹmar, that is, En-gedʹi.”
At that Je·hoshʹa·phat became afraid, and he resolved to search for Jehovah. So he proclaimed a fast for all Judah.
The people of Judah then gathered together to inquire of Jehovah; they came from all the cities of Judah to consult Jehovah.
Then Je·hoshʹa·phat stood up in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of Jehovah before the new courtyard,
and he said: “O Jehovah the God of our forefathers, are you not God in the heavens; do you not have dominion over all the kingdoms of the nations? In your hand are power and might, and no one can stand against you.
O our God, did you not drive away the inhabitants of this land from before your people Israel and then give it as a lasting possession to the offspring of your friend Abraham?
And they settled in it, and they built for you there a sanctuary for your name, saying,
‘If disaster should come on us, whether by sword, adverse judgment, pestilence, or famine, let us stand before this house and before you (for your name is in this house) and call to you for help out of our distress, and may you hear and save us.’
Now here are the men of Amʹmon, Moʹab, and the mountainous region of Seʹir, whom you did not allow Israel to invade when they came out of the land of Egypt. They turned away from them and did not annihilate them.
Now they are repaying us by coming in to drive us out from your possession that you gave us as an inheritance.
O our God, will you not execute judgment on them? For we are powerless before this large crowd that is coming against us; and we do not know what we should do, but our eyes are toward you.”
Meanwhile, all those of Judah were standing before Jehovah, along with their little ones, their wives, and their children.
Then in the middle of the congregation, the spirit of Jehovah came upon Ja·ha·ziʹel son of Zekariah son of Be·naiʹah son of Je·iʹel son of Mat·ta·niʹah the Levite of the sons of Aʹsaph.
He said: “Pay attention, all Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem and King Je·hoshʹa·phat! Here is what Jehovah says to you, ‘Do not be afraid or be terrified because of this large crowd, for the battle is not yours but God’s.
Tomorrow go down against them. They will be coming up by the pass of Ziz, and you will find them at the end of the valley before the wilderness of Je·ruʹel.
You will not need to fight this battle. Take your position, stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah in your behalf. O Judah and Jerusalem, do not be afraid or be terrified. Tomorrow go out against them, and Jehovah will be with you.’”
At once Je·hoshʹa·phat bowed low with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before Jehovah to worship Jehovah.
Then the Levites who were descendants of the Koʹhath·ites and the Korʹah·ites rose up to praise Jehovah the God of Israel with a very loud voice.
They rose up early the next morning and went out to the wilderness of Te·koʹa. As they went out, Je·hoshʹa·phat stood up and said: “Listen to me, O Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem! Put faith in Jehovah your God so that you may be able to stand firm. Put faith in his prophets, and you will be successful.”
After he consulted with the people, he appointed men to sing to Jehovah and to offer praise in holy adornment as they went out ahead of the armed men, saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for his loyal love endures forever.”
When they began joyfully singing praises, Jehovah set an ambush against the men of Amʹmon, Moʹab, and the mountainous region of Seʹir who were invading Judah, and they struck each other down.
And the Amʹmon·ites and the Moʹab·ites turned against the inhabitants of the mountainous region of Seʹir to destroy and annihilate them; and when they finished with the inhabitants of Seʹir, they helped to destroy one another.
But when Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness and looked toward the crowd, there they saw their carcasses fallen to the ground; there were no survivors.
So Je·hoshʹa·phat and his people came to carry off the spoil from them, and they found among them an abundance of goods, clothing, and desirable articles, which they stripped off for themselves until they could carry no more. It took three days to carry off the spoil, for it was abundant.
On the fourth day they congregated together at the Valley of Berʹa·cah, for there they praised Jehovah. That is why they named that place Valley of Berʹa·cah—until today.
Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem, with Je·hoshʹa·phat at their head, returned to Jerusalem with rejoicing, for Jehovah had made them rejoice over their enemies.
So they came into Jerusalem with stringed instruments, harps, and trumpets and went to the house of Jehovah.
And the dread of God came upon all the kingdoms of the lands when they heard that Jehovah had fought against the enemies of Israel.
Thus the kingdom of Je·hoshʹa·phat had no disturbance, and his God continued to give him rest on every side.
And Je·hoshʹa·phat continued reigning over Judah. He was 35 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 25 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·zuʹbah the daughter of Shilʹhi.
He kept walking in the way of his father Aʹsa. He did not deviate from it, and he did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes.
However, the high places were not removed, and the people had not yet prepared their heart for the God of their forefathers.
As for the rest of the history of Je·hoshʹa·phat, from beginning to end, there it is written among the words of Jeʹhu the son of Ha·naʹni, which were included in the Book of the Kings of Israel.
After this King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah made an alliance with King A·ha·ziʹah of Israel, who acted wickedly.
So he made him his partner in making ships to go to Tarʹshish, and they built the ships in Eʹzi·on-geʹber.
However, E·li·eʹzer the son of Dod·avʹa·hu of Ma·reʹsha spoke prophetically against Je·hoshʹa·phat, saying: “Because you have made an alliance with A·ha·ziʹah, Jehovah will destroy your works.” So the ships were wrecked, and they were unable to go to Tarʹshish.
Soon after the kingship of Re·ho·boʹam was firmly established and he had become strong, he abandoned the Law of Jehovah, and also all Israel with him.
In the fifth year of King Re·ho·boʹam, King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, for they had behaved unfaithfully toward Jehovah.
He had 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and countless troops who came with him from Egypt—Libʹy·ans, Sukʹki·im, and E·thi·oʹpi·ans.
He captured the fortified cities of Judah and finally reached Jerusalem.
She·maiʹah the prophet came to Re·ho·boʹam and the princes of Judah who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shiʹshak, and he said to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘You have abandoned me, so I have also abandoned you to the hand of Shiʹshak.’”
At that the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said: “Jehovah is righteous.”
When Jehovah saw that they had humbled themselves, the word of Jehovah came to She·maiʹah, saying: “They have humbled themselves. I will not destroy them, and in a little while I will rescue them. I will not pour out my wrath on Jerusalem through Shiʹshak.
But they will become his servants, so that they will know the difference between serving me and serving the kings of other lands.”
So King Shiʹshak of Egypt came up against Jerusalem. He took the treasures of the house of Jehovah and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything, including the gold shields that Solʹo·mon had made.
So King Re·ho·boʹam made copper shields to replace them, and he entrusted them to the chiefs of the guard, who guarded the entrance of the king’s house.
Whenever the king came to the house of Jehovah, the guards would come in and carry them, and then they would return them to the guard chamber.
Because the king humbled himself, Jehovah’s anger turned away from him, and he did not destroy them completely. Moreover, there were some good things found in Judah.
King Re·ho·boʹam strengthened his position in Jerusalem and continued to reign; Re·ho·boʹam was 41 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 17 years in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel as the place to put his name. The name of the king’s mother was Naʹa·mah the Amʹmon·it·ess.
But he did what was bad, for he had not resolved in his heart to search for Jehovah.
As for Re·ho·boʹam’s history, from beginning to end, is it not written among the words of She·maiʹah the prophet and of Idʹdo the visionary in the genealogical record? And there were constant wars between Re·ho·boʹam and Jer·o·boʹam.
Then Re·ho·boʹam was laid to rest with his forefathers and was buried in the City of David; and his son A·biʹjah became king in his place.
Je·hoshʹa·phat had riches and glory in abundance, but he made a marriage alliance with Aʹhab.
So years later he went down to Aʹhab at Sa·marʹi·a, and Aʹhab sacrificed sheep and cattle in abundance for him and for the people with him. And he urged him to go up against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
Then King Aʹhab of Israel said to King Je·hoshʹa·phat of Judah: “Will you go with me to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?” He replied to him: “I am the same as you, and my people are the same as your people and will support you in the war.”
But Je·hoshʹa·phat said to the king of Israel: “First inquire, please, for the word of Jehovah.”
So the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, 400 men, and said to them: “Should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” They said: “Go up, and the true God will give it into the king’s hand.”
Je·hoshʹa·phat then said: “Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah? Let us also inquire through him.”
At that the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “There is still one more man through whom we can inquire of Jehovah; but I hate him, for he never prophesies good things concerning me, but always bad. He is Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah.” However, Je·hoshʹa·phat said: “The king should not say such a thing.”
So the king of Israel called a court official and said: “Bring Mi·caiʹah the son of Imʹlah quickly.”
Now the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah were each sitting on his throne, dressed in royal attire; they were sitting at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Sa·marʹi·a, and all the prophets were prophesying before them.
Then Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah made for himself iron horns and said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘With these you will gore the Syrians until you exterminate them.’”
All the other prophets were prophesying the same way, saying: “Go up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad and you will be successful; Jehovah will give it into the king’s hand.”
So the messenger who went to call Mi·caiʹah said to him: “Look! The words of the prophets are unanimously favorable to the king. Let your word, please, become like theirs, and speak favorably.”
But Mi·caiʹah said: “As surely as Jehovah is living, whatever my God says is what I will speak.”
Then he came in to the king, and the king asked him: “Mi·caiʹah, should we go to war against Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad, or should I refrain?” At once he replied: “Go up and you will be successful; they will be given into your hand.”
At that the king said to him: “How many times must I put you under oath not to speak to me anything but the truth in the name of Jehovah?”
So he said: “I see all the Israelites scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. Jehovah said: ‘These have no master. Let each one go back to his house in peace.’”
Then the king of Israel said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “Did I not tell you, ‘He will not prophesy good things concerning me, only bad’?”
Mi·caiʹah then said: “Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne and all the army of the heavens standing at his right and at his left.
Jehovah then said, ‘Who will fool King Aʹhab of Israel, so that he will go up and fall at Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad?’ And one was saying one thing while another said something else.
Then a spirit came forward and stood before Jehovah and said, ‘I will fool him.’ Jehovah asked him, ‘How will you do it?’
He replied, ‘I will go out and become a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ So he said, ‘You will fool him, and what is more, you will be successful. Go out and do that.’
And now Jehovah has put a deceptive spirit in the mouth of these prophets of yours, but Jehovah has declared calamity for you.”
Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Che·naʹa·nah now approached and struck Mi·caiʹah on the cheek and said: “Which way did the spirit of Jehovah pass from me to speak with you?”
Mi·caiʹah replied: “Look! You will see which way on the day when you will enter the innermost room to hide.”
Then the king of Israel said: “Take Mi·caiʹah and turn him over to Aʹmon the chief of the city and to Joʹash the king’s son.
Tell them, ‘This is what the king says: “Put this fellow in the prison and feed him with a reduced allowance of bread and water until I return in peace.”’”
But Mi·caiʹah said: “If you do return in peace, Jehovah has not spoken with me.” Then he added: “Take note, all you peoples.”
So the king of Israel and Je·hoshʹa·phat the king of Judah went up to Raʹmoth-gilʹe·ad.
The king of Israel now said to Je·hoshʹa·phat: “I will disguise myself and will go into the battle, but you should put on your royal attire.” So the king of Israel disguised himself, and they entered the battle.
Now the king of Syria had ordered his chariot commanders: “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.”
And as soon as the chariot commanders saw Je·hoshʹa·phat, they said to themselves: “It is the king of Israel.” So they turned to fight against him; and Je·hoshʹa·phat began to cry for help, and Jehovah helped him, and God at once diverted them from him.
When the chariot commanders saw that it was not the king of Israel, they immediately turned back from following him.
But one man shot his bow at random, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his coat of mail. So the king said to his charioteer: “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I have been badly wounded.”
The fighting raged throughout that day, and the king of Israel had to be propped up in the chariot, facing the Syrians until the evening; and he died at sunset.
In the seventh year, Je·hoiʹa·da acted courageously and made a pact with the chiefs of hundreds, namely, Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·roʹham, Ishʹma·el the son of Je·ho·haʹnan, Az·a·riʹah the son of Oʹbed, Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·daiʹah, and E·li·shaʹphat the son of Zichʹri.
Then they went throughout Judah and gathered together the Levites from all the cities of Judah and the heads of the paternal houses of Israel. When they came to Jerusalem,
the entire congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of the true God, after which he said to them: “Look! The king’s son will reign, just as Jehovah promised concerning the sons of David.
This is what you are to do: One third of the priests and of the Levites who will be on duty on the Sabbath will be doorkeepers;
another third will be at the house of the king, and the other third will be at the Gate of the Foundation, and all the people will be in the courtyards of the house of Jehovah.
Do not let anyone enter the house of Jehovah except the priests and the Levites who are ministering. These may enter because they are a holy group, and all the people will keep the obligation to Jehovah.
The Levites must surround the king on every side, each with his weapons in hand. Anyone entering the house will be put to death. Stay with the king wherever he goes.”
The Levites and all Judah did exactly what Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had commanded. So each one took his men who were on duty on the Sabbath, together with those who were off duty on the Sabbath, for Je·hoiʹa·da the priest had not dismissed the divisions from their duty.
Je·hoiʹa·da the priest then gave the chiefs of hundreds the spears and the bucklers and the circular shields that had belonged to King David, which were in the house of the true God.
He then stationed all the people, each with his weapon in hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, all around the king.
Then they brought the king’s son out and put on him the crown and the Testimony and made him king, and Je·hoiʹa·da and his sons anointed him. Then they said: “Long live the king!”
When Ath·a·liʹah heard the sound of the people running and praising the king, she immediately came to the people at the house of Jehovah.
Then she saw the king standing there by his pillar at the entrance. The princes and the trumpeters were with the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing the trumpets, and the singers with musical instruments were leading the praises. At this Ath·a·liʹah ripped her garments apart and cried out: “Conspiracy! Conspiracy!”
But Je·hoiʹa·da the priest brought out the chiefs of hundreds, those appointed over the army, and said to them: “Take her out from among the ranks, and if anyone follows her, put him to death with the sword!” For the priest had said: “Do not put her to death in the house of Jehovah.”
So they seized her, and when she reached the entrance of the Horse Gate of the king’s house, they immediately put her to death there.
Then Je·hoiʹa·da made a covenant between himself and all the people and the king, that they would continue as the people of Jehovah.
After that all the people came to the house of Baʹal and tore it down, and they smashed his altars and his images, and they killed Matʹtan the priest of Baʹal in front of the altars.
Then Je·hoiʹa·da put the oversight of the house of Jehovah in the hands of the priests and the Levites, whom David had assigned in divisions over the house of Jehovah to offer up the burnt sacrifices of Jehovah according to what is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and with song, as directed by David.
He also stationed the gatekeepers by the gates of the house of Jehovah, so that no one unclean in any respect could enter.
He now took the chiefs of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land and escorted the king down from the house of Jehovah. Then they came through the upper gate to the king’s house and seated the king on the throne of the kingdom.
So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city was quiet, for they had put Ath·a·liʹah to death with the sword.
Jo·siʹah held a Passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem, and they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice on the 14th day of the first month.
He assigned the priests to their duties and encouraged them to carry out their service of the house of Jehovah.
Then he said to the Levites, the instructors of all Israel, those who were holy to Jehovah: “Put the holy Ark in the house that Solʹo·mon the son of David the king of Israel built; you are no longer to carry it on your shoulders. Now serve Jehovah your God and his people Israel.
And prepare yourselves by your paternal houses according to your divisions, following what was written by King David of Israel and by his son Solʹo·mon.
Stand in the holy place grouped by the paternal houses of your brothers, the rest of the people, with a corresponding group of the paternal house of the Levites.
Slaughter the Passover sacrifice and sanctify yourselves and make preparation for your brothers to carry out the word of Jehovah through Moses.”
Jo·siʹah contributed flocks to the people, male lambs and young male goats, for the Passover sacrifices for all who were present, a total of 30,000, as well as 3,000 cattle. These were from the king’s own property.
His princes also made a contribution as a voluntary offering for the people, the priests, and the Levites. Hil·kiʹah, Zekariah, and Je·hiʹel, the leaders of the house of the true God, gave to the priests 2,600 Passover sacrifices and 300 cattle.
Con·a·niʹah and his brothers She·maiʹah and Ne·thanʹel, along with Hash·a·biʹah, Je·iʹel, and Joʹza·bad, the chiefs of the Levites, contributed to the Levites 5,000 Passover sacrifices and 500 cattle.
The service was prepared, and the priests stood at their places and the Levites by their divisions, as the king had commanded.
They slaughtered the Passover sacrifices, and the priests sprinkled the blood they received from them, while the Levites were skinning the animals.
Next they prepared the burnt offerings so as to distribute them to the rest of the people, who were grouped by paternal house, so that they could be presented to Jehovah as it is written in the book of Moses; and they did the same with the cattle.
They cooked the Passover offering over the fire according to the custom; and they cooked the holy offerings in pots, cauldrons, and pans, after which they brought it quickly to all the rest of the people.
Then they made preparations for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the descendants of Aaron, were offering up the burnt sacrifices and the fat pieces until nightfall, so the Levites made preparations for themselves and for the priests, the descendants of Aaron.
And the singers, the sons of Aʹsaph, were at their positions by the commandment of David, Aʹsaph, Heʹman, and Je·duʹthun the visionary of the king; and the gatekeepers were at the different gates. There was no need for them to leave their service, because their brothers the Levites made preparations for them.
So all the service of Jehovah was prepared on that day to hold the Passover and to offer up the burnt offerings on the altar of Jehovah, according to the order of King Jo·siʹah.
The Israelites who were present held the Passover at that time and the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days.
There had never been held a Passover like it in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet; nor had any of the other kings of Israel held a Passover like that held by Jo·siʹah, the priests, the Levites, all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
This Passover was held in the 18th year of Jo·siʹah’s reign.
After all of this, when Jo·siʹah had prepared the temple, King Neʹcho of Egypt came up to fight at Carʹche·mish by the Eu·phraʹtes. Then Jo·siʹah went out against him.
So he sent messengers to him, saying: “What does this have to do with you, O king of Judah? I am not coming against you today, but my fight is against another house, and God says that I should hurry. For your own sake, refrain from opposing God, who is with me, or he will bring you to ruin.”
However, Jo·siʹah would not turn away from him, but he disguised himself to fight against him and would not listen to the words of Neʹcho, which were from the mouth of God. So he came to fight in the Plain of Me·gidʹdo.
And the archers shot King Jo·siʹah, and the king said to his servants: “Get me out of here, for I am severely wounded.”
So his servants took him out of the chariot and had him ride in his second war chariot and brought him to Jerusalem. Thus he died and was buried in the tomb of his forefathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned Jo·siʹah.
And Jeremiah chanted over Jo·siʹah, and all the male and female singers keep singing about Jo·siʹah in their dirges down to this day; and a decision was made that they should be sung in Israel, and they are written among the dirges.
As for the rest of the history of Jo·siʹah and his deeds of loyal love, in keeping with what is written in the Law of Jehovah,
and what he did, from beginning to end, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and of Judah.
Jo·siʹah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for 31 years in Jerusalem.
He did what was right in Jehovah’s eyes and walked in the ways of David his forefather, and he did not deviate to the right or to the left.
In the 8th year of his reign, while he was still a boy, he started to search for the God of David his forefather; and in the 12th year, he started to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem of the high places and the sacred poles, the graven images, and the metal statues.
Further, they tore down the altars of the Baʹals in his presence, and he cut down the incense stands that were up above them. He also broke into pieces the sacred poles, the graven images, and the metal statues and reduced them to powder and sprinkled it over the graves of those who used to sacrifice to them.
And he burned the bones of priests on their altars. Thus he cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.
And in the cities of Ma·nasʹseh, Eʹphra·im, Simʹe·on, and clear to Naphʹta·li, in their surrounding ruins,
he tore down the altars and he crushed the sacred poles and the graven images, reducing them to powder; and he cut down all the incense stands in all the land of Israel, after which he returned to Jerusalem.
In the 18th year of his reign, when he had cleansed the land and the temple, he sent Shaʹphan the son of Az·a·liʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah the chief of the city, and Joʹah the son of Joʹa·haz the recorder to repair the house of Jehovah his God.
They came to Hil·kiʹah the high priest and gave him the money that had been brought to the house of God, which the Levites serving as doorkeepers had collected from Ma·nasʹseh, Eʹphra·im, and all the rest of Israel, as well as from Judah, Benjamin, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Then they gave it to those who were appointed over the work in the house of Jehovah. In turn the workers in the house of Jehovah used it to mend and repair the house.
They gave it to the craftsmen and the builders to buy hewn stones and timbers for braces and to build with beams the houses that the kings of Judah had allowed to fall into ruin.
And the men did the work faithfully. Over them were appointed the Levites Jaʹhath and O·ba·diʹah of the Me·rarʹites, and Zekariah and Me·shulʹlam of the Koʹhath·ites, to serve as overseers. And the Levites, all of whom were skilled musicians,
were in charge of the common laborers and were overseers of all those who were doing the work in every kind of service; and some of the Levites were secretaries, officers, and gatekeepers.
While they were taking out the money that had been brought to the house of Jehovah, Hil·kiʹah the priest found the book of Jehovah’s Law given through Moses.
So Hil·kiʹah said to Shaʹphan the secretary: “I have found the book of the Law in the house of Jehovah.” With that Hil·kiʹah gave the book to Shaʹphan.
Then Shaʹphan brought the book to the king and told him: “Your servants are doing everything that was assigned to them.
They have poured out the money that was found in the house of Jehovah, and they have handed it over to the appointed men and to those doing the work.”
Shaʹphan the secretary also told the king: “There is a book that Hil·kiʹah the priest has given me.” Then Shaʹphan began to read from it before the king.
As soon as the king heard the words of the Law, he ripped his garments apart.
Then the king gave this order to Hil·kiʹah, A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, Abʹdon the son of Miʹcah, Shaʹphan the secretary, and A·saiʹah the king’s servant:
“Go, inquire of Jehovah in my behalf and in behalf of those who remain in Israel and in Judah concerning the words of the book that has been found; for Jehovah’s rage that will be poured out against us is great because our forefathers did not carry out the word of Jehovah by observing all that is written in this book.”
So Hil·kiʹah, along with those sent by the king, went to Hulʹdah the prophetess. She was the wife of Shalʹlum son of Tikʹvah son of Harʹhas, the caretaker of the wardrobe, and she was dwelling in the Second Quarter of Jerusalem; and they spoke to her there.
She said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Tell the man who sent you to me:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will bring calamity on this place and its inhabitants, all the curses that are written in the book that they read before the king of Judah.
Because they have abandoned me and are making sacrifices smoke to other gods in order to offend me with all the works of their hands, my rage will pour out on this place and it will not be extinguished.’”
But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of Jehovah, this is what you should say to him, “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘Regarding the words that you have heard,
because your heart was responsive and you humbled yourself before God on hearing his words concerning this place and its inhabitants and you humbled yourself before me and ripped your garments apart and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares Jehovah.
That is why I will gather you to your ancestors, and you will be laid in your grave in peace, and your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place and its inhabitants.’”’” Then they brought the reply to the king.
So the king sent word and summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
After that the king went up to the house of Jehovah with all the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, the Levites—all the people, the great as well as the small. He read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in the house of Jehovah.
The king stood in his place and made a covenant before Jehovah that he would follow Jehovah and keep his commandments, his reminders, and his regulations with all his heart and with all his soul by carrying out the words of the covenant that were written in this book.
Furthermore, he had all those who were in Jerusalem and Benjamin to agree to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem acted according to the covenant of God, the God of their forefathers.
Jo·siʹah then removed all the detestable things out of all the lands that belonged to the Israelites, and he made everyone in Israel serve Jehovah their God. Throughout his lifetime they did not deviate from following Jehovah the God of their forefathers.
At that time Solʹo·mon said: “Jehovah said he would reside in the thick gloom.
Now I have built a lofty house for you, an established place for you to dwell in forever.”
Then the king turned around and began to bless all the congregation of Israel while all the congregation of Israel stood.
He said: “May Jehovah the God of Israel be praised, the one who by his own mouth promised my father David and by his own hands has given fulfillment, saying,
‘From the day I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name to remain there, and I have not chosen a man to become leader over my people Israel.
But I have chosen Jerusalem for my name to remain there, and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’
And it was the heart’s desire of my father David to build a house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.
But Jehovah said to my father David, ‘It was your heart’s desire to build a house for my name, and you did well to desire this in your heart.
However, you will not build the house, but your own son who is to be born to you is the one who will build the house for my name.’
Jehovah has carried out the promise that he made, for I have succeeded my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as Jehovah promised. I have also built the house for the name of Jehovah the God of Israel,
and there I have placed the Ark containing the covenant that Jehovah made with the people of Israel.”
Then he stood before the altar of Jehovah in front of all the congregation of Israel, and he spread out his hands.
(For Solʹo·mon had made a platform of copper and put it in the middle of the court. It was five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high; and he stood on it.) And he knelt down in front of all the congregation of Israel and spread his hands out to the heavens,
and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens or on the earth, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart.
You have kept the promise that you made to your servant David my father. You made the promise with your own mouth, and this day you have fulfilled it with your own hand.
And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, keep the promise you made to your servant David my father when you said: ‘There will never fail to be a man of your line before me to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons will pay attention to their way by walking in my law, just as you have walked before me.’
And now, O Jehovah the God of Israel, let the promise that you made to your servant David prove trustworthy.
“But will God really dwell with mankind on the earth? Look! The heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, cannot contain you; how much less, then, this house that I have built!
Now pay attention to the prayer of your servant and to his request for favor, O Jehovah my God, and listen to the cry for help and to the prayer that your servant is praying before you.
May your eyes be open toward this house day and night, toward the place where you said that you would put your name, to listen to the prayer that your servant prays toward this place.
And listen to your servant’s pleas for help and to the pleas of your people Israel when they pray toward this place, and may you hear from your dwelling place, from the heavens; yes, may you hear and forgive.
“If a man sins against his fellow man and is made to take an oath and is brought under liability to the oath, and while under the oath he comes before your altar in this house,
may you then hear from the heavens and act and judge your servants by paying back the wicked one and bringing what he did on his own head and by pronouncing the righteous one innocent and rewarding him according to his own righteousness.
“And if your people Israel are defeated by an enemy because they kept sinning against you, and they return and glorify your name and pray and beg for favor before you in this house,
may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your people Israel and bring them back to the land that you gave to them and their forefathers.
“When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they kept sinning against you, and they pray toward this place and glorify your name and turn back from their sin because you humbled them,
may you then hear from the heavens and forgive the sin of your servants, of your people Israel, for you will instruct them about the good way in which they should walk; and bring rain on your land that you gave to your people as an inheritance.
“If a famine occurs in the land, or a pestilence, a scorching blight, mildew, swarming locusts, or voracious locusts or if their enemies besiege them in any of the cities of the land or if any other sort of plague or disease occurs,
whatever prayer, whatever request for favor may be made by any man or by all your people Israel (for each one knows his own plague and his own pain) when they spread out their hands toward this house,
then may you hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, and may you forgive; and reward each one according to all his ways, for you know his heart (you alone truly know the human heart),
so that they may fear you by walking in your ways all the days they live on the land that you gave to our forefathers.
“Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm, and he comes and prays toward this house,
may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.
“If your people go to war against their enemies in the way that you send them and they pray to you in the direction of this city that you have chosen and toward the house that I have built for your name,
then hear from the heavens their prayer and their request for favor and execute judgment for them.
“If they sin against you (for there is no man who does not sin), and you are furious with them and you abandon them to an enemy, and their captors carry them off captive to a land, far or near,
and they come to their senses in the land where they were carried off captive, and they return to you and beg you for favor in the land where they are captives, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’
and they return to you with all their heart and all their soul in the land of their captivity where they were carried off captive, and they pray in the direction of their land that you gave to their forefathers and the city that you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name,
then hear from the heavens, your dwelling place, their prayer and their request for favor, and execute judgment for them and forgive your people who have sinned against you.
“Now, O my God, please, may your eyes be opened and your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.
And now go up, O Jehovah God, to your resting-place, you and the Ark of your strength. Let your priests, O Jehovah God, be clothed with salvation, and let your loyal ones rejoice in your goodness.
O Jehovah God, do not reject your anointed one. May you remember your loyal love to David your servant.”
Hez·e·kiʹah became king at the age of 25, and he reigned for 29 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was A·biʹjah the daughter of Zekariah.
He kept doing what was right in Jehovah’s eyes, just as David his forefather had done.
In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of Jehovah and repaired them.
Then he brought the priests and the Levites and assembled them in the square to the east.
He said to them: “Listen to me, you Levites. Now sanctify yourselves and sanctify the house of Jehovah the God of your forefathers, and remove what is impure from the holy place.
For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah our God. They abandoned him and turned their faces away from the tabernacle of Jehovah and turned their back on him.
They also closed the doors of the porch and extinguished the lamps. They stopped burning incense and offering up burnt sacrifices in the holy place to the God of Israel.
Therefore, Jehovah’s indignation came against Judah and Jerusalem, so that he made them an object of horror and astonishment and a cause for whistling, as you can see with your own eyes.
Here our forefathers fell by the sword, and our sons, our daughters, and our wives went into captivity for this.
Now it is my heart’s desire to make a covenant with Jehovah the God of Israel, so that his burning anger may turn away from us.
My sons, now is not the time to be negligent, for Jehovah has chosen you to stand before him, to serve as his ministers, and to make his sacrifices smoke.”
At that the Levites rose up: Maʹhath the son of A·maʹsai and Joel the son of Az·a·riʹah of the Koʹhath·ites; from the Me·rarʹites, Kish the son of Abʹdi and Az·a·riʹah the son of Je·halʹle·lel; from the Gerʹshon·ites, Joʹah the son of Zimʹmah and Eʹden the son of Joʹah;
from the sons of E·li·zaʹphan, Shimʹri and Je·uʹel; from the sons of Aʹsaph, Zekariah and Mat·ta·niʹah;
from the sons of Heʹman, Je·hiʹel and Shimʹe·i; from the sons of Je·duʹthun, She·maiʹah and Uzʹzi·el.
Then they gathered their brothers together and sanctified themselves and came, as the king had commanded by the words of Jehovah, to cleanse the house of Jehovah.
The priests then went inside the house of Jehovah to do the cleansing and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of Jehovah and took it to the courtyard of the house of Jehovah. In turn the Levites took it and carried it outside to the Kidʹron Valley.
Thus they began the sanctification on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they reached the porch of Jehovah. They sanctified the house of Jehovah for eight days, and on the 16th day of the first month they finished.
After that they went in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and said: “We have cleansed the whole house of Jehovah, the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the table of the layer bread and all its utensils.
And all the utensils that King Aʹhaz cast aside during his reign when he acted unfaithfully we have made ready and sanctified, and they are before the altar of Jehovah.”
And King Hez·e·kiʹah got up early and gathered the princes of the city together, and they went up to the house of Jehovah.
They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven male lambs, and seven male goats as a sin offering for the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah. So he told the priests, the descendants of Aaron, to offer them up on the altar of Jehovah.
Then they slaughtered the cattle, and the priests took the blood and sprinkled it on the altar; next they slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar, and they slaughtered the male lambs and sprinkled the blood on the altar.
Then they brought the male goats of the sin offering before the king and the congregation and laid their hands on them.
The priests slaughtered them and made a sin offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for all Israel, because the king said that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be for all Israel.
Meanwhile, he had the Levites stationed at the house of Jehovah with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps, by the commandment of David and of Gad the king’s visionary and of Nathan the prophet, for the commandment was from Jehovah through his prophets.
So the Levites were standing with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.
Then Hez·e·kiʹah ordered that the burnt sacrifice be offered on the altar. When the burnt offering started, the song of Jehovah started and also the trumpets, following the direction of the instruments of King David of Israel.
And the whole congregation bowed down while the song was sung and the trumpets were sounding—all this continued until the burnt offering was finished.
And as soon as they finished making the offering, the king and all those with him bowed low and prostrated themselves.
King Hez·e·kiʹah and the princes now told the Levites to praise Jehovah with the words of David and of Aʹsaph the visionary. So they offered praise with great rejoicing, and they bowed down and prostrated themselves.
Then Hez·e·kiʹah said: “Now that you have been set apart for Jehovah, come and bring sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings to the house of Jehovah.” So the congregation began to bring sacrifices and thanksgiving offerings, and everyone with a willing heart brought burnt offerings.
The number of burnt offerings that the congregation brought was 70 cattle, 100 rams, 200 male lambs—all of these as a burnt offering to Jehovah—
and the holy offerings were 600 cattle and 3,000 of the flock.
But there were not enough priests to skin all the burnt offerings, so their brothers the Levites helped them out until the work was finished and until the priests could sanctify themselves, for the Levites were more conscientious about sanctifying themselves than the priests were.
Also, there were many burnt offerings, as well as the fat pieces of the communion sacrifices and the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. Thus the service of the house of Jehovah was restored.
So Hez·e·kiʹah and all the people rejoiced over what the true God had established for the people, for this had all happened so suddenly.
At the end of 20 years, during which Solʹo·mon built the house of Jehovah and his own house,
Solʹo·mon rebuilt the cities that Hiʹram had given Solʹo·mon and settled Israelites there.
Furthermore, Solʹo·mon went to Haʹmath-zoʹbah and captured it.
Then he built up Tadʹmor in the wilderness and all the storage cities that he had built in Haʹmath.
He also built up Upper Beth-hoʹron and Lower Beth-hoʹron, fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars,
and Baʹal·ath as well as all of Solʹo·mon’s storage cities, all the chariot cities, the cities for the horsemen, and whatever Solʹo·mon desired to build in Jerusalem, in Lebʹa·non, and in all the land of his dominion.
As for all the people who were left from the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Hiʹvites, and the Jebʹu·sites, who were not part of Israel,
their descendants who were left in the land—those whom the Israelites had not exterminated—were conscripted by Solʹo·mon for forced labor until this day.
But Solʹo·mon did not make any of the Israelites slaves for his work, for they were his warriors, the chiefs of his adjutants, and the chiefs of his charioteers and horsemen.
There were 250 chiefs of the deputies of King Solʹo·mon, the foremen over the people.
Solʹo·mon also brought Pharʹaoh’s daughter up from the City of David to the house that he had built for her, for he said: “Although she is my wife, she should not dwell in the house of King David of Israel, for the places to which the Ark of Jehovah has come are holy.”
Then Solʹo·mon offered up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on the altar of Jehovah that he had built in front of the porch.
He followed the daily routine and made offerings according to the commandment of Moses for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed festivals three times in the year—the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths.
Further, he appointed the divisions of the priests for their services according to the rule of his father David, and the Levites for their posts of duty, to praise and to minister in the presence of the priests according to the daily routine, and the gatekeepers in their divisions for the different gates, for such was the commandment of David, the man of the true God.
And they did not deviate from the king’s commandment to the priests and the Levites concerning any matter or concerning the storehouses.
So Solʹo·mon’s work was all well-organized, from the day the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid until it was finished. So the house of Jehovah was completed.
It was then that Solʹo·mon went to Eʹzi·on-geʹber and to Eʹloth on the seashore in the land of Eʹdom.
Hiʹram sent him ships and experienced seamen by means of his own servants. They went with Solʹo·mon’s servants to Oʹphir and took from there 450 talents of gold and brought it to King Solʹo·mon.
In the first year of King Cyrus of Persia, in order that Jehovah’s word spoken by Jeremiah would be fulfilled, Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia to make a proclamation throughout his kingdom, which he also put in writing, saying:
“This is what King Cyrus of Persia says, ‘Jehovah the God of the heavens has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Whoever there is among you of all his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and rebuild the house of Jehovah the God of Israel—he is the true God—whose house was in Jerusalem.
Anyone who is residing as a foreigner, wherever he may be, let him be helped by his neighbors by their giving him silver and gold, goods and livestock, along with the voluntary offering for the house of the true God, which was in Jerusalem.’”
Then the heads of the paternal houses of Judah and of Benjamin and the priests and the Levites—everyone whose spirit the true God had stirred—prepared to go up and rebuild the house of Jehovah, which was in Jerusalem.
All those around them supported them by giving them utensils of silver and of gold, goods, livestock, and valuable things, besides all the voluntary offerings.
King Cyrus also brought out the utensils of the house of Jehovah that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from Jerusalem and had put in the house of his god.
King Cyrus of Persia brought them out under the supervision of Mithʹre·dath the treasurer, who made an inventory of them for Shesh·bazʹzar the chieftain of Judah.
Now this was the inventory: 30 basket-shaped vessels of gold, 1,000 basket-shaped vessels of silver, 29 replacement vessels,
30 small gold bowls, 410 small silver bowls, 1,000 other utensils.
All the utensils of gold and of silver were 5,400. Shesh·bazʹzar brought all of these up when the exiles were brought out of Babylon to Jerusalem.
After these things, during the reign of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia, Ezʹra returned. He was the son of Se·raiʹah, son of Az·a·riʹah, son of Hil·kiʹah,
son of Shalʹlum, son of Zaʹdok, son of A·hiʹtub,
son of Am·a·riʹah, son of Az·a·riʹah, son of Me·raʹioth,
son of Zer·a·hiʹah, son of Uzʹzi, son of Bukʹki,
son of Ab·i·shuʹa, son of Phinʹe·has, son of El·e·aʹzar, son of Aaron the chief priest.
This Ezʹra came up from Babylon. He was a copyist who was well-versed in the Law of Moses, which Jehovah the God of Israel had given. The king granted everything he requested, for the hand of Jehovah his God was upon him.
Some of the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants, went up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes.
And Ezʹra came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, in the seventh year of the king.
On the first day of the first month, he began the journey from Babylon, and he arrived in Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month, for the good hand of his God was upon him.
Ezʹra had prepared his heart to consult the Law of Jehovah and to practice it, and to teach its regulations and judgments in Israel.
This is a copy of the letter that King Ar·ta·xerxʹes gave to Ezʹra the priest and copyist, an expert in the study of the commandments of Jehovah and of his regulations to Israel:
“Ar·ta·xerxʹes, the king of kings, to Ezʹra the priest, the copyist of the Law of the God of the heavens: May you have perfect peace. And now
I have issued an order that everyone in my realm of the people of Israel and their priests and Levites who is willing to go with you to Jerusalem should go.
For you are sent by the king and his seven advisers to investigate whether the Law of your God, which is with you, is being applied in Judah and Jerusalem,
and to take the silver and the gold that the king and his advisers have voluntarily given to the God of Israel, whose residence is in Jerusalem,
with all the silver and the gold that you receive in all the province of Babylon, along with the gift that the people and the priests voluntarily give to the house of their God, which is in Jerusalem.
And you are to buy promptly with this money bulls, rams, lambs, along with their grain offerings and their drink offerings, and you are to present them on the altar of the house of your God in Jerusalem.
“And whatever seems good to you and to your brothers to do, you may do with the rest of the silver and the gold, according to the will of your God.
And all the vessels that are given to you for the service of the house of your God, you are to deliver before God at Jerusalem.
And the rest of the necessities of the house of your God that you are required to give, you will give out of the royal treasury.
“I, King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, have issued an order to all the treasurers in the region Beyond the River, that everything that Ezʹra the priest, the copyist of the Law of the God of the heavens, requests of you is to be done promptly,
up to 100 talents of silver, 100 cor measures of wheat, 100 bath measures of wine, 100 bath measures of oil, and salt without limit.
Let everything that is ordered by the God of the heavens be done with zeal for the house of the God of the heavens, so that there may be no wrath against the king’s realm and his sons.
And you are further advised that it is not permitted to impose any tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests and Levites, musicians, doorkeepers, temple servants, and workers of this house of God.
“And you, Ezʹra, according to the wisdom that you possess from your God, appoint magistrates and judges to judge all the people in the region Beyond the River, all those who know the laws of your God; and you should instruct anyone who does not know them.
And everyone who does not observe the Law of your God and the law of the king should have judgment executed on him promptly, whether it is death, banishment, a fine, or imprisonment.”
May Jehovah the God of our forefathers be praised, who put it into the heart of the king to beautify the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem!
And he has shown me loyal love before the king and his advisers and all the mighty princes of the king. So I took courage because the hand of Jehovah my God was upon me, and I gathered out of Israel leading men to go up with me.
When the seventh month arrived and the Israelites were in their cities, they gathered together with one accord in Jerusalem.
Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and his fellow priests and Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el and his brothers rose up and built the altar of the God of Israel, so that they could offer up burnt sacrifices on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of the true God.
So they set the altar up on its former site, despite their fear of the peoples of the surrounding lands, and they began offering up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah on it, the morning and the evening burnt sacrifices.
Then they held the Festival of Booths according to what is written, and day by day they offered up the specified number of burnt sacrifices that were required each day.
Afterward they offered up the regular burnt offering and the offerings for the new moons and those for all the sanctified festival seasons of Jehovah, as well as those from everyone who willingly offered a voluntary offering to Jehovah.
From the first day of the seventh month they started to offer up burnt sacrifices to Jehovah, though the foundation of Jehovah’s temple had not yet been laid.
They gave money to the stonecutters and the craftsmen, and food and drink and oil to the Si·doʹni·ans and the Tyrʹi·ans for bringing cedar timbers by sea from Lebʹa·non to Jopʹpa, according to the authorization granted them by King Cyrus of Persia.
In the second year after they came to the house of the true God at Jerusalem, in the second month, Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and the rest of their brothers, the priests and the Levites, and all those who had come to Jerusalem out of the captivity started the work; they appointed the Levites from 20 years old and up to serve as supervisors over the work of the house of Jehovah.
So Jeshʹu·a, his sons and his brothers, and Kadʹmi·el and his sons, the sons of Judah, joined together to supervise those doing the work in the house of the true God, along with the sons of Henʹa·dad, their sons and their brothers, the Levites.
When the builders laid the foundation of the temple of Jehovah, then the priests in official clothing, with the trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Aʹsaph, with the cymbals, stood up to praise Jehovah according to the direction of King David of Israel.
And they began to sing in response by praising and giving thanks to Jehovah, “for he is good; his loyal love toward Israel endures forever.” Then all the people shouted with a loud shout of praise to Jehovah because the foundation of the house of Jehovah had been laid.
Many of the priests, the Levites, and the heads of the paternal houses—the old men who had seen the former house—wept with a loud voice when they saw the foundation of this house being laid, while many others shouted joyfully at the top of their voice.
So the people could not distinguish the sound of the joyful shouts from the sound of the weeping, for the people were shouting so loudly that the sound was heard from a great distance.
And as soon as these things had been done, the princes approached me and said: “The people of Israel and the priests and the Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands and their detestable practices, those of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites, the Amʹmon·ites, the Moʹab·ites, the Egyptians, and the Amʹor·ites.
They have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons. Now they, the holy offspring, have become mingled with the peoples of the lands. The princes and the deputy rulers have been the foremost offenders in this unfaithfulness.”
Now as soon as I heard of this, I ripped apart my garment and my sleeveless coat and pulled out some of the hair of my head and my beard, and I sat down in shock.
Then everyone who had reverence for the words of the God of Israel gathered around me because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people, while I was sitting in shock until the evening grain offering.
And at the time of the evening grain offering, I stood up from my humiliation, with my garment and my sleeveless coat torn apart, and I got down on my knees and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God.
And I said: “O my God, I feel ashamed and embarrassed to raise my face to you, O my God, for our errors have multiplied over our heads and our guilt has mounted up to the heavens.
From the days of our forefathers until this day our guilt has been great; and because of our errors, we, our kings, and our priests have been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, to plunder, and to disgrace, as is the case today.
But now for a brief moment, favor has come from Jehovah our God by letting a remnant escape and by giving us a secure position in his holy place, to make our eyes shine, O our God, and to revive us a little in our slavery.
For although we are slaves, our God has not abandoned us in our slavery; but he has extended his loyal love toward us before the kings of Persia, to revive us so as to raise up the house of our God and to restore its ruins and to give us a stone wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
“But now what can we say, O our God, after this? For we have left your commandments,
which you gave us through your servants the prophets, saying: ‘The land that you are going in to take possession of is an impure land because of the impurity of the peoples of the lands, because of their detestable practices with which they have filled it from end to end with their uncleanness.
Therefore, do not give your daughters to their sons, neither accept their daughters for your sons; and you must never seek their peace and their prosperity, so that you may grow strong and eat the good of the land and take possession of it for your sons forever.’
And after all that has come upon us for our bad deeds and our great guilt—for you, O our God, have not dealt with us according to our error, and you have allowed those of us here to escape—
are we to break your commandments again and form marriage alliances with the peoples who practice these detestable things? Would you not become so angry with us that you would completely destroy us, leaving no remnant or survivor?
O Jehovah the God of Israel, you are righteous, for we have survived as a remnant to this day. Here we are before you in our guilt, for it is impossible to stand before you because of this.”
And these were the people of the province who came up from the captives of the exile, those whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had exiled to Babylon and who later returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city,
those who came with Ze·rubʹba·bel, Jeshʹu·a, Ne·he·miʹah, Se·raiʹah, Re·el·aiʹah, Morʹde·cai, Bilʹshan, Misʹpar, Bigʹvai, Reʹhum, and Baʹa·nah. The number of the Israelite men included:
the sons of Paʹrosh, 2,172;
the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, 372;
the sons of Aʹrah, 775;
the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, of the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Joʹab, 2,812;
the sons of Eʹlam, 1,254;
the sons of Zatʹtu, 945;
the sons of Zacʹcai, 760;
the sons of Baʹni, 642;
the sons of Beʹbai, 623;
the sons of Azʹgad, 1,222;
the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, 666;
the sons of Bigʹvai, 2,056;
the sons of Aʹdin, 454;
the sons of Aʹter, of Hez·e·kiʹah, 98;
the sons of Beʹzai, 323;
the sons of Joʹrah, 112;
the sons of Haʹshum, 223;
the sons of Gibʹbar, 95;
the sons of Bethʹle·hem, 123;
the men of Ne·toʹphah, 56;
the men of Anʹa·thoth, 128;
the sons of Azʹma·veth, 42;
the sons of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, Che·phiʹrah, and Be·erʹoth, 743;
the sons of Raʹmah and Geʹba, 621;
the men of Michʹmas, 122;
the men of Bethʹel and Aʹi, 223;
the sons of Neʹbo, 52;
the sons of Magʹbish, 156;
the sons of the other Eʹlam, 1,254;
the sons of Haʹrim, 320;
the sons of Lod, Haʹdid, and Oʹno, 725;
the sons of Jerʹi·cho, 345;
the sons of Se·naʹah, 3,630.
The priests: the sons of Je·daʹiah of the house of Jeshʹu·a, 973;
the sons of Imʹmer, 1,052;
the sons of Pashʹhur, 1,247;
the sons of Haʹrim, 1,017.
The Levites: the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Kadʹmi·el, of the sons of Hod·a·viʹah, 74.
The singers: the sons of Aʹsaph, 128.
The sons of the gatekeepers: the sons of Shalʹlum, the sons of Aʹter, the sons of Talʹmon, the sons of Akʹkub, the sons of Ha·tiʹta, the sons of Shoʹbai, altogether 139.
The temple servants: the sons of Ziʹha, the sons of Ha·suʹpha, the sons of Tab·baʹoth,
the sons of Keʹros, the sons of Siʹa·ha, the sons of Paʹdon,
the sons of Le·baʹnah, the sons of Hagʹa·bah, the sons of Akʹkub,
the sons of Haʹgab, the sons of Salʹmai, the sons of Haʹnan,
the sons of Gidʹdel, the sons of Gaʹhar, the sons of Re·aʹiah,
the sons of Reʹzin, the sons of Ne·koʹda, the sons of Gazʹzam,
the sons of Uzʹza, the sons of Pa·seʹah, the sons of Beʹsai,
the sons of Asʹnah, the sons of Me·uʹnim, the sons of Ne·phuʹsim,
the sons of Bakʹbuk, the sons of Ha·kuʹpha, the sons of Harʹhur,
the sons of Bazʹluth, the sons of Me·hiʹda, the sons of Harʹsha,
the sons of Barʹkos, the sons of Sisʹe·ra, the sons of Teʹmah,
the sons of Ne·ziʹah, the sons of Ha·tiʹpha.
The sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon: the sons of Soʹtai, the sons of So·pheʹreth, the sons of Pe·ruʹda,
the sons of Jaʹa·lah, the sons of Darʹkon, the sons of Gidʹdel,
the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, the sons of Hatʹtil, the sons of Poʹche·reth-haz·ze·baʹim, the sons of Aʹmi.
All the temple servants and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon were 392.
And these went up from Tel-meʹlah, Tel-harʹsha, Cheʹrub, Adʹdon, and Imʹmer, but they were unable to verify their paternal house and their origin, as to whether they were Israelites:
the sons of De·laʹiah, the sons of To·biʹah, the sons of Ne·koʹda, 652.
And of the sons of the priests: the sons of Ha·baiʹah, the sons of Hakʹkoz, the sons of Bar·zilʹlai, who took a wife from the daughters of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite and was called by their name.
These looked for their records to establish their genealogy, but they did not find them, so they were disqualified from the priesthood.
The governor told them that they could not eat from the most holy things until there was a priest who could consult the Uʹrim and Thumʹmim.
The total number of the entire congregation was 42,360,
apart from their male and female slaves, who were 7,337; they also had 200 male and female singers.
Their horses were 736, their mules 245,
their camels 435, their donkeys 6,720.
When they arrived at the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, some of the heads of the paternal houses made voluntary offerings for the house of the true God, to rebuild it on its own site.
According to their means, they gave to the project treasury 61,000 gold drachmas, 5,000 silver miʹnas, and 100 robes for the priests.
And the priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants settled in their cities, and all the rest of Israel settled in their cities.
While Ezʹra was praying and making confession, weeping and lying prostrate before the house of the true God, a large crowd of men, women, and children of Israel gathered around him, for the people were weeping profusely.
Then Shec·a·niʹah the son of Je·hiʹel of the sons of Eʹlam said to Ezʹra: “We have acted unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women from the peoples of the land. Despite this, there is still hope for Israel.
Now let us make a covenant with our God to send away all the wives and those born from them, in harmony with the direction of Jehovah and of those who have reverence for the commandment of our God. Let us act according to the Law.
Get up, for this matter is your responsibility, and we are with you. Be strong and take action.”
At that Ezʹra rose and had the chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel take an oath to do what had been said. So they took an oath.
Ezʹra now got up from before the house of the true God and went to the chamber of Je·ho·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib. Although he went there, he ate no food and drank no water, for he was in mourning because of the unfaithfulness of the exiled people.
Then they made a proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the former exiles gather together at Jerusalem;
and according to the decision of the princes and the elders, anyone who did not come within three days’ time would have all his goods confiscated, and he would be banished from the congregation of the exiled people.
So all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered together at Jerusalem within three days, that is, in the ninth month, on the 20th day of the month. All the people were sitting in a courtyard of the house of the true God, shivering because of the matter at hand and because of the heavy rain.
Then Ezʹra the priest rose and said to them: “You have acted unfaithfully by marrying foreign women, and so you have added to the guilt of Israel.
Now make confession to Jehovah the God of your forefathers and do his will. Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from these foreign wives.”
To this the whole congregation answered with a loud voice: “It is our duty to do exactly as you say.
However, there are many people, and it is the rainy season. It is not possible to stand outside, and the matter will not take just one or two days, for we have rebelled extensively in this matter.
So, please, let our princes represent the entire congregation; and let all those in our cities who have married foreign women come at an appointed time, along with the elders and judges of each city, until we turn back the burning anger of our God from us concerning this matter.”
However, Jonʹa·than the son of Asʹa·hel and Jah·zeiʹah the son of Tikʹvah objected to this, and the Levites Me·shulʹlam and Shabʹbe·thai supported them.
But the former exiles did what was agreed on; and Ezʹra the priest and the family heads of their paternal houses, all designated by name, convened separately on the first day of the tenth month to look into the matter;
and by the first day of the first month they finished dealing with all the men who had married foreign women.
And it was discovered that some of the sons of the priests had married foreign women: of the sons of Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak and his brothers, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·li·eʹzer, Jaʹrib, and Ged·a·liʹah.
But they promised to send their wives away, and since they were guilty, they would offer a ram of the flock for their guilt.
Of the sons of Imʹmer, there were Ha·naʹni and Zeb·a·diʹah;
and of the sons of Haʹrim, Ma·a·seiʹah, E·liʹjah, She·maiʹah, Je·hiʹel, and Uz·ziʹah;
and of the sons of Pashʹhur, Eli·o·eʹnai, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ishʹma·el, Ne·thanʹel, Joʹza·bad and El·e·aʹsah.
And of the Levites, there were Joʹza·bad, Shimʹe·i, Ke·laiʹah (that is, Ke·liʹta), Peth·a·hiʹah, Judah, and E·li·eʹzer;
and of the singers, E·liʹa·shib; and of the gatekeepers, Shalʹlum, Teʹlem, and Uʹri.
And of Israel, of the sons of Paʹrosh, there were Ra·miʹah, Iz·ziʹah, Mal·chiʹjah, Mijʹa·min, El·e·aʹzar, Mal·chiʹjah, and Be·naiʹah;
and of the sons of Eʹlam, Mat·ta·niʹah, Zekariah, Je·hiʹel, Abʹdi, Jerʹe·moth, and E·liʹjah;
and of the sons of Zatʹtu, Eli·o·eʹnai, E·liʹa·shib, Mat·ta·niʹah, Jerʹe·moth, Zaʹbad, and A·ziʹza;
and of the sons of Beʹbai, Je·ho·haʹnan, Han·a·niʹah, Zabʹbai, and Athʹlai;
and of the sons of Baʹni, Me·shulʹlam, Malʹluch, A·daiʹah, Jaʹshub, Sheʹal, and Jerʹe·moth;
and of the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, Adʹna, Cheʹlal, Be·naiʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mat·ta·niʹah, Bezʹal·el, Binʹnu·i, and Ma·nasʹseh;
and of the sons of Haʹrim, E·li·eʹzer, Is·shiʹjah, Mal·chiʹjah, She·maiʹah, Shimʹe·on,
Benjamin, Malʹluch, and Shem·a·riʹah;
of the sons of Haʹshum, Mat·teʹnai, Matʹtat·tah, Zaʹbad, E·liphʹe·let, Jerʹe·mai, Ma·nasʹseh, and Shimʹe·i;
of the sons of Baʹni, Ma·a·daʹi, Amʹram, Uʹel,
Be·naiʹah, Be·deiʹah, Chelʹu·hi,
Va·niʹah, Merʹe·moth, E·liʹa·shib,
Mat·ta·niʹah, Mat·teʹnai, and Jaʹa·su;
and of the sons of Binʹnu·i, Shimʹe·i,
Shel·e·miʹah, Nathan, A·daiʹah,
Mach·nadʹe·bai, Shaʹshai, Shaʹrai,
Azʹar·el, Shel·e·miʹah, Shem·a·riʹah,
Shalʹlum, Am·a·riʹah, and Joseph;
and of the sons of Neʹbo, Je·iʹel, Mat·ti·thiʹah, Zaʹbad, Ze·biʹna, Jadʹdai, Joel, and Be·naiʹah.
All of these had taken foreign wives, and they sent their wives away, along with their sons.
Then the prophets Hagʹgai and Zekariah the grandson of Idʹdo prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and in Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel who was over them.
It was then that Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el and Jeshʹu·a the son of Je·hozʹa·dak started to rebuild the house of God, which was in Jerusalem; and the prophets of God were with them and supported them.
At that time Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and their colleagues came to them and asked them: “Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?”
Then they asked them: “What are the names of the men who are working on this building?”
But God was watching over the elders of the Jews, and they did not stop them until the report could be sent to Da·riʹus and an official document could be sent back concerning this.
Here is a copy of the letter that Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River and Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai and his colleagues, the lesser governors of the region Beyond the River, sent to King Da·riʹus;
they sent the report to him, and this is what they wrote: “To King Da·riʹus: “All peace!
Let it be known to the king that we went to the province of Judah to the house of the great God, and it is being built with large stones rolled into place, and timbers are being laid in the walls. The work is being eagerly done by the people and is making progress through their efforts.
Then we questioned their elders, asking them: ‘Who issued an order to you to build this house and to finish this structure?’
We also asked them their names to inform you, so that we could write the names of the men who are taking the lead.
“This is the response they gave us: ‘We are the servants of the God of the heavens and the earth, and we are rebuilding the house that was built many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished.
However, because our fathers angered the God of the heavens, he gave them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, the Chal·deʹan, who demolished this house and took the people into exile to Babylon.
Nevertheless, in the first year of King Cyrus of Babylon, King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild this house of God.
Moreover, King Cyrus took out of the temple of Babylon the gold and silver vessels of the house of God that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought to the temple of Babylon. They were given to a man named Shesh·bazʹzar, whom Cyrus made governor.
Cyrus said to him: “Take these vessels. Go, deposit them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt in its former place.”
Then this Shesh·bazʹzar came, and he laid the foundations of the house of God, which is in Jerusalem; and it has been under construction from then until now, but it has not been completed.’
“Now if it seems good to the king, let an investigation be made in the royal treasury there in Babylon, to determine whether King Cyrus issued an order to rebuild that house of God in Jerusalem; and let the decision of the king concerning this be sent to us.”
When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the returned exiles were building a temple to Jehovah the God of Israel,
they immediately approached Ze·rubʹba·bel and the heads of the paternal houses and said to them: “Let us build along with you; for like you, we worship your God and we have been sacrificing to him since the days of King Eʹsar-hadʹdon of As·syrʹi·a, who brought us here.”
However, Ze·rubʹba·bel and Jeshʹu·a and the rest of the heads of the paternal houses of Israel said to them: “You have no share with us in building a house to our God, for we alone will build it to Jehovah the God of Israel, just as King Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.”
Then the people of the land were continually discouraging the people of Judah and disheartening them from building.
They hired advisers against them to frustrate their plans all the days of King Cyrus of Persia until the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.
At the beginning of the reign of A·has·u·eʹrus, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
And in the days of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia, Bishʹlam, Mithʹre·dath, Tabʹe·el, and the rest of his colleagues wrote to Ar·ta·xerxʹes the king; they translated the letter into Ar·a·maʹic, writing it with Ar·a·maʹic characters.
Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, as follows:
(It was from Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues, the judges and the lesser governors, the secretaries, the people of Eʹrech, the Babylonians, the inhabitants of Suʹsa, that is, the Eʹlam·ites,
and the rest of the nations that the great and honorable Asʹe·nap·par took into exile and settled in the cities of Sa·marʹi·a, and the rest in the region Beyond the River, and now
this is a copy of the letter that they sent him.) “To King Ar·ta·xerxʹes from your servants, the men of the region Beyond the River: And now
let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up here from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city, and they are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations.
Now let it be known to the king that if this city should be rebuilt and its walls finished, they will not give tax, tribute, or toll, and it will result in a loss to the treasuries of the kings.
Since we eat the salt of the palace and it is not proper for us to see the king’s interests harmed, we have therefore sent to make this known to the king,
so that there may be an investigation of the book of records of your ancestors. You will find in the book of records and learn that this city is a rebellious city, injurious to kings and provinces, and within it have been those stirring up sedition from ancient times. That is why this city was destroyed.
We are making known to the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are finished, you will have no control of the region Beyond the River.”
The king sent word to Reʹhum the chief government official and Shimʹshai the scribe and the rest of their colleagues who were dwelling in Sa·marʹi·a and the rest of the region Beyond the River: “Greetings! And now
the official document that you sent us has been clearly read before me.
By my order an investigation was made, and it was found that from long ago the city has had uprisings against kings, and rebellions and revolts have taken place there.
There were powerful kings over Jerusalem who ruled the whole region Beyond the River, and tax, tribute, and toll were paid to them.
Now issue an order for these men to stop work, so that the city may not be rebuilt until I issue an order.
Be careful not to neglect acting in this regard, so that the king’s interests are not harmed any further.”
Now after the copy of the official document of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes had been read before Reʹhum and Shimʹshai the scribe and their colleagues, they quickly went to Jerusalem to the Jews and used force to stop them.
It was then that the work on the house of God, which was in Jerusalem, came to a halt; and it remained at a standstill until the second year of the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.
It was then that King Da·riʹus issued an order, and they made an investigation in the archives where the treasures were deposited in Babylon.
And a scroll was found in the citadel at Ec·batʹa·na, in the province of Meʹdi·a, and the following memorandum was written on it:
“In the first year of King Cyrus, King Cyrus issued an order concerning the house of God in Jerusalem: ‘Let the house be rebuilt as the place where they are to offer sacrifices, and its foundations are to be set in place; its height is to be 60 cubits, its width 60 cubits,
with three layers of large stones rolled into place and one layer of timbers; and let the expense be paid from the king’s house.
Also, let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon be returned, so that they may be put in their place in the temple in Jerusalem and be deposited in the house of God.’
“So now Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River, Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai, and your colleagues, the lesser governors of the region Beyond the River—stay away from there.
Do not interfere with the work on that house of God. The governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews will rebuild that house of God in its former place.
Furthermore, I am issuing an order as to what you are to do for these elders of the Jews for rebuilding that house of God: From the royal treasury, from the tax collected in the region Beyond the River, the expenses are to be promptly given to these men to continue without interruption.
And whatever is needed—young bulls as well as rams and lambs for the burnt offerings to the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, just as the priests who are in Jerusalem say—is to be given them continually day by day without fail,
so that they may continually present offerings that please the God of the heavens and pray for the life of the king and his sons.
I have also issued an order that if anyone violates this decree, a timber will be pulled out of his house and he will be lifted up and fastened to it, and his house will be turned into a public latrine for this offense.
And may the God who has caused his name to reside there overthrow any king and people who lift a hand to violate this order and destroy that house of God, which is in Jerusalem. I, Da·riʹus, issue this order. Let it be done promptly.”
Then Tatʹte·nai the governor of the region Beyond the River, Sheʹthar-bozʹe·nai, and their colleagues promptly carried out everything that King Da·riʹus had ordered.
And the elders of the Jews continued building and making progress, urged on by the prophesying of Hagʹgai the prophet and Zekariah the grandson of Idʹdo; they finished building it by the order of the God of Israel and by the order of Cyrus and Da·riʹus and King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Persia.
They completed the house by the third day of the month of Aʹdar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Da·riʹus.
Then the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the former exiles held the inauguration of this house of God with joy.
And they presented for the inauguration of this house of God 100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and as a sin offering for all Israel 12 male goats, corresponding to the number of the tribes of Israel.
And they appointed the priests in their groups and the Levites in their divisions for the service of God in Jerusalem, according to what is written in the book of Moses.
And the former exiles held the Passover on the 14th day of the first month.
The priests and the Levites, without exception, had cleansed themselves, so they were all clean; they slaughtered the Passover sacrifice for all the former exiles, for their fellow priests, and for themselves.
Then the Israelites who had returned from the exile ate of it, along with everyone who had joined them and had separated himself from the uncleanness of the nations of the land to worship Jehovah the God of Israel.
They also joyfully held the Festival of Unleavened Bread for seven days, for Jehovah caused them to rejoice and he had made the heart of the king of As·syrʹi·a favorable toward them, so that he supported them in the work of the house of the true God, the God of Israel.
Now these were the heads of their paternal houses and the genealogical enrollment of those who went up with me out of Babylon during the reign of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes:
of the sons of Phinʹe·has, Gerʹshom; of the sons of Ithʹa·mar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hatʹtush;
of the sons of Shec·a·niʹah, of the sons of Paʹrosh, Zekariah, and with him there was an enrollment of 150 males;
of the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, Elʹie·ho-eʹnai the son of Zer·a·hiʹah, and with him 200 males;
of the sons of Zatʹtu, Shec·a·niʹah the son of Ja·ha·ziʹel, and with him 300 males;
of the sons of Aʹdin, Eʹbed the son of Jonʹa·than, and with him 50 males;
of the sons of Eʹlam, Je·shaʹiah the son of Ath·a·liʹah, and with him 70 males;
of the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, Zeb·a·diʹah the son of Miʹcha·el, and with him 80 males;
of the sons of Joʹab, O·ba·diʹah the son of Je·hiʹel, and with him 218 males;
of the sons of Baʹni, She·loʹmith the son of Jo·si·phiʹah, and with him 160 males;
of the sons of Beʹbai, Zekariah the son of Beʹbai, and with him 28 males;
of the sons of Azʹgad, Jo·haʹnan the son of Hakʹka·tan, and with him 110 males;
of the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, those who were the last, and these were their names: E·liphʹe·let, Je·iʹel, and She·maiʹah, and with them 60 males;
and of the sons of Bigʹvai, Uʹthai and Zabʹbud, and with them 70 males.
I assembled them at the river that comes to A·haʹva, and we camped there for three days. But when I examined the people and the priests, I did not find any of the Levites there.
So I sent for E·li·eʹzer, Arʹi·el, She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan, Jaʹrib, El·naʹthan, Nathan, Zekariah, and Me·shulʹlam, who were leading men, and for Joiʹa·rib and El·naʹthan, who were instructors.
Then I gave them a command concerning Idʹdo the leader in the place called Ca·si·phiʹa. I told them to tell Idʹdo and his brothers, the temple servants who were in Ca·si·phiʹa, to bring to us ministers for the house of our God.
Since the good hand of our God was upon us, they brought a discreet man from the sons of Mahʹli the grandson of Leʹvi the son of Israel, namely, She·re·biʹah, and his sons and his brothers, 18 men;
and Hash·a·biʹah, and with him Je·shaʹiah from the Me·rarʹites, his brothers and their sons, 20 men.
And there were 220 of the temple servants, whom David and the princes gave to the service of the Levites, all of whom had been designated by name.
Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river A·haʹva, to humble ourselves before our God, to seek guidance from him for our journey, for us and for our children and for all our goods.
I was ashamed to ask the king for soldiers and horsemen to protect us against the enemies along the way, because we had said to the king: “The good hand of our God is over all those seeking him, but his strength and his anger are against all those abandoning him.”
So we fasted and made request of our God concerning this, and he listened to our entreaty.
I now set apart 12 of the chiefs of the priests, namely, She·re·biʹah and Hash·a·biʹah, along with ten of their brothers.
Then I weighed out to them the silver and the gold and the utensils, the contribution that the king and his advisers and his princes and all the Israelites who were present there had made to the house of our God.
Thus I weighed out into their hand 650 talents of silver, 100 silver utensils worth 2 talents, 100 talents of gold,
20 small gold bowls worth 1,000 darics, and 2 utensils of fine copper, gleaming red, as desirable as gold.
Then I said to them: “You are holy to Jehovah, and the utensils are holy, and the silver and the gold are a voluntary offering to Jehovah the God of your forefathers.
Guard them carefully until you weigh them out before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites and the princes of the paternal houses of Israel in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of Jehovah.”
And the priests and the Levites took the silver and the gold and the utensils that had been weighed out to them, in order to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
Finally we pulled away from the river A·haʹva on the 12th day of the first month to go to Jerusalem, and the hand of our God was over us, and he rescued us from the hand of the enemy and from ambush along the way.
So we came to Jerusalem and stayed there for three days.
And on the fourth day, we weighed out the silver and the gold and the utensils in the house of our God and handed them over to Merʹe·moth son of U·riʹjah the priest, and with him was El·e·aʹzar son of Phinʹe·has, and with them were the Levites Joʹza·bad son of Jeshʹu·a and No·a·diʹah son of Binʹnu·i.
Everything was numbered and weighed, and all the weight was recorded.
Those coming out of the captivity, the former exiles, presented burnt sacrifices to the God of Israel, 12 bulls for all Israel, 96 rams, 77 male lambs, and 12 male goats as a sin offering; all of this was a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Then we gave the decrees of the king to the satraps of the king and the governors of the region Beyond the River, and they supported the people and the house of the true God.
Now the princes of the people were living in Jerusalem; but the rest of the people cast lots to bring one out of every ten to live in Jerusalem, the holy city, while the other nine stayed in the other cities.
Moreover, the people blessed all the men who volunteered to live in Jerusalem.
And these are the heads of the province who lived in Jerusalem. (The rest of Israel, the priests, the Levites, the temple servants, and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon, lived in the other cities of Judah, each one in his own possession in his city.
Also, there lived in Jerusalem some of the people of Judah and of Benjamin.) Of the people of Judah were A·thaiʹah son of Uz·ziʹah son of Zekariah son of Am·a·riʹah son of Sheph·a·tiʹah son of Ma·halʹa·lel of the sons of Peʹrez,
and Ma·a·seiʹah son of Barʹuch son of Col·hoʹzeh son of Ha·zaiʹah son of A·daiʹah son of Joiʹa·rib son of Zekariah son of the She·laʹnite.
All the sons of Peʹrez who were dwelling in Jerusalem were 468 capable men.
And these were the people of Benjamin: Salʹlu son of Me·shulʹlam son of Joʹed son of Pe·daiʹah son of Ko·laiʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah son of Ithʹi·el son of Je·shaʹiah,
and after him Gab·baʹi and Sal·laʹi, 928;
and Joel the son of Zichʹri was their overseer, and Judah the son of Has·se·nuʹah was second in charge of the city.
Of the priests: Je·daʹiah son of Joiʹa·rib, Jaʹchin,
Se·raiʹah son of Hil·kiʹah son of Me·shulʹlam son of Zaʹdok son of Me·raʹioth son of A·hiʹtub, a leader of the house of the true God,
and their brothers who did the work of the house, 822; and A·daiʹah son of Je·roʹham son of Pel·a·liʹah son of Amʹzi son of Zekariah son of Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah,
and his brothers, heads of paternal houses, 242; and A·mashʹsai son of Azʹar·el son of Ahʹzai son of Me·shilʹle·moth son of Imʹmer,
and their brothers who were mighty, courageous men, 128; and their overseer was Zabʹdi·el, a member of a prominent family.
And of the Levites: She·maiʹah son of Hasʹshub son of Az·riʹkam son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Bunʹni,
and Shabʹbe·thai and Joʹza·bad, of the heads of the Levites, who were in charge of the outside business of the house of the true God;
and Mat·ta·niʹah, son of Miʹcah son of Zabʹdi son of Aʹsaph, the conductor of the singing, who led the praises during prayer, and Bak·bu·kiʹah, the second of his brothers, and Abʹda son of Sham·muʹa son of Gaʹlal son of Je·duʹthun.
All the Levites in the holy city were 284.
And the gatekeepers were Akʹkub, Talʹmon, and their brothers who kept guard in the gates, 172.
The rest of Israel, the priests, and the Levites were in all the other cities of Judah, each in his own inherited property.
The temple servants were living in Oʹphel, and Ziʹha and Gishʹpa were in charge of the temple servants.
The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzʹzi son of Baʹni son of Hash·a·biʹah son of Mat·ta·niʹah son of Miʹca, of the sons of Aʹsaph, the singers; he was in charge of the work of the house of the true God.
For there was a royal order in their behalf, and there was a fixed provision for the singers as each day required.
And Peth·a·hiʹah son of Me·shezʹa·bel of the sons of Zeʹrah son of Judah was the king’s adviser for every matter of the people.
Regarding the settlements with their fields, some of the people of Judah lived in Kirʹi·ath-arʹba and its dependent towns, in Diʹbon and its dependent towns, in Je·kabʹze·el and its settlements,
in Jeshʹu·a, in Mo·laʹdah, in Beth-pelʹet,
in Haʹzar-shuʹal, in Beʹer-sheʹba and its dependent towns,
in Zikʹlag, in Me·coʹnah and its dependent towns,
in En-rimʹmon, in Zoʹrah, and in Jarʹmuth,
in Za·noʹah, in A·dulʹlam and their settlements, in Laʹchish and its fields, and in A·zeʹkah and its dependent towns. They settled from Beʹer-sheʹba clear to the Valley of Hinʹnom.
And the people of Benjamin were in Geʹba, Michʹmash, Aiʹja, Bethʹel and its dependent towns,
Anʹa·thoth, Nob, A·na·niʹah,
Haʹzor, Raʹmah, Gitʹta·im,
Haʹdid, Ze·boʹim, Ne·balʹlat,
Lod, and Oʹno, the valley of the craftsmen.
And some divisions of the Levites from Judah were assigned to Benjamin.
The words of Ne·he·miʹah the son of Hac·a·liʹah: Now in the month of Chisʹlev, in the 20th year, I was in Shuʹshan the citadel.
At that time Ha·naʹni, one of my brothers, arrived with other men from Judah, and I asked them about the remaining Jews who had escaped the captivity, and also about Jerusalem.
They replied: “Those remaining there in the province who have survived the captivity are in a terrible situation and in disgrace. The walls of Jerusalem are broken down, and its gates have been burned with fire.”
As soon as I heard these words, I sat down and began to weep and mourn for days, and I kept fasting and praying before the God of the heavens.
I said: “O Jehovah, the God of the heavens, the great and awe-inspiring God who keeps his covenant and shows loyal love to those who love him and keep his commandments,
please, let your ear be attentive and your eyes open to listen to the prayer of your servant that I am praying to you today, day and night, concerning your servants the Israelites, all the while confessing the sins that the people of Israel have committed against you. We have sinned, both I and the house of my father.
We have certainly acted corruptly against you by not keeping the commandments, regulations, and judicial decisions that you gave to your servant Moses.
“Remember, please, the word that you commanded your servant Moses: ‘If you act unfaithfully, I will scatter you among the peoples.
But if you return to me and observe my commandments and obey them, though your dispersed people should be at the end of the heavens, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place that I have chosen to have my name reside.’
They are your servants and your people, whom you redeemed by your great power and by your mighty hand.
O Jehovah, please, let your ear be attentive to the prayer of your servant and to the prayer of your servants who take delight in fearing your name, and please, grant success to your servant today, and may this man show me compassion.” Now I was cupbearer to the king.
As soon as the wall had been rebuilt I set up the doors; then the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites were appointed.
I then put my brother Ha·naʹni in charge of Jerusalem, along with Han·a·niʹah the chief of the Fortress, for he was a most trustworthy man and feared the true God more than many others.
So I said to them: “The gates of Jerusalem should not be opened until the heat of the day, and while they are standing guard, they should shut the doors and bolt them. And assign the inhabitants of Jerusalem as guards, each to his assigned guardpost and each in front of his own house.”
Now the city was spacious and large, and there were few people inside it, and the houses had not been rebuilt.
But my God put it into my heart to gather together the nobles and the deputy rulers and the people to be enrolled genealogically. Then I found the book of genealogical enrollment of those who first came up, and I found written in it:
And these were the people of the province who came up out of the captivity of the exiles, those whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had exiled and who later returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city,
those who came with Ze·rubʹba·bel, Jeshʹu·a, Ne·he·miʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Ra·a·miʹah, Na·hamʹa·ni, Morʹde·cai, Bilʹshan, Misʹpe·reth, Bigʹvai, Neʹhum, and Baʹa·nah. The number of the Israelite men included:
the sons of Paʹrosh, 2,172;
the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, 372;
the sons of Aʹrah, 652;
the sons of Paʹhath-moʹab, of the sons of Jeshʹu·a and Joʹab, 2,818;
the sons of Eʹlam, 1,254;
the sons of Zatʹtu, 845;
the sons of Zacʹcai, 760;
the sons of Binʹnu·i, 648;
the sons of Beʹbai, 628;
the sons of Azʹgad, 2,322;
the sons of Ad·o·niʹkam, 667;
the sons of Bigʹvai, 2,067;
the sons of Aʹdin, 655;
the sons of Aʹter, of Hez·e·kiʹah, 98;
the sons of Haʹshum, 328;
the sons of Beʹzai, 324;
the sons of Haʹriph, 112;
the sons of Gibʹe·on, 95;
the men of Bethʹle·hem and Ne·toʹphah, 188;
the men of Anʹa·thoth, 128;
the men of Beth-azʹma·veth, 42;
the men of Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, Che·phiʹrah, and Be·erʹoth, 743;
the men of Raʹmah and Geʹba, 621;
the men of Michʹmas, 122;
the men of Bethʹel and Aʹi, 123;
the men of the other Neʹbo, 52;
the sons of the other Eʹlam, 1,254;
the sons of Haʹrim, 320;
the sons of Jerʹi·cho, 345;
the sons of Lod, Haʹdid, and Oʹno, 721;
the sons of Se·naʹah, 3,930.
The priests: the sons of Je·daʹiah of the house of Jeshʹu·a, 973;
the sons of Imʹmer, 1,052;
the sons of Pashʹhur, 1,247;
the sons of Haʹrim, 1,017.
The Levites: the sons of Jeshʹu·a, of Kadʹmi·el, of the sons of Hoʹde·vah, 74.
The singers: the sons of Aʹsaph, 148.
The gatekeepers: the sons of Shalʹlum, the sons of Aʹter, the sons of Talʹmon, the sons of Akʹkub, the sons of Ha·tiʹta, the sons of Shoʹbai, 138.
The temple servants: the sons of Ziʹha, the sons of Ha·suʹpha, the sons of Tab·baʹoth,
the sons of Keʹros, the sons of Siʹa, the sons of Paʹdon,
the sons of Le·baʹnah, the sons of Hagʹa·bah, the sons of Salʹmai,
the sons of Haʹnan, the sons of Gidʹdel, the sons of Gaʹhar,
the sons of Re·aʹiah, the sons of Reʹzin, the sons of Ne·koʹda,
the sons of Gazʹzam, the sons of Uzʹza, the sons of Pa·seʹah,
the sons of Beʹsai, the sons of Me·uʹnim, the sons of Ne·phushʹe·sim,
the sons of Bakʹbuk, the sons of Ha·kuʹpha, the sons of Harʹhur,
the sons of Bazʹlith, the sons of Me·hiʹda, the sons of Harʹsha,
the sons of Barʹkos, the sons of Sisʹe·ra, the sons of Teʹmah,
the sons of Ne·ziʹah, the sons of Ha·tiʹpha.
The sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon: the sons of Soʹtai, the sons of So·pheʹreth, the sons of Pe·riʹda,
the sons of Jaʹa·la, the sons of Darʹkon, the sons of Gidʹdel,
the sons of Sheph·a·tiʹah, the sons of Hatʹtil, the sons of Poʹche·reth-haz·ze·baʹim, the sons of Aʹmon.
All the temple servants and the sons of the servants of Solʹo·mon were 392.
And these went up from Tel-meʹlah, Tel-harʹsha, Cheʹrub, Adʹdon, and Imʹmer, but they were unable to verify their paternal house and their origin, as to whether they were Israelites:
the sons of De·laʹiah, the sons of To·biʹah, the sons of Ne·koʹda, 642.
And of the priests: the sons of Ha·baiʹah, the sons of Hakʹkoz, the sons of Bar·zilʹlai, who took a wife from the daughters of Bar·zilʹlai the Gilʹe·ad·ite and was called by their name.
These looked for their records to establish their genealogy, but they could not be found, so they were disqualified from the priesthood.
The governor told them that they should not eat from the most holy things until there was a priest who could consult the Uʹrim and Thumʹmim.
The total number of the entire congregation was 42,360,
apart from their male and female slaves, who were 7,337; they also had 245 male and female singers.
Their horses were 736, their mules 245,
their camels 435, their donkeys 6,720.
Some of the heads of the paternal houses contributed to the work. The governor gave to the treasury 1,000 gold drachmas, 50 bowls, and 530 priests’ robes.
And some of the heads of the paternal houses gave to the project treasury 20,000 gold drachmas and 2,200 silver miʹnas.
And the rest of the people gave 20,000 gold drachmas, 2,000 silver miʹnas, and 67 priests’ robes.
And the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, and all the rest of Israel settled in their cities. When the seventh month arrived, the Israelites had settled in their cities.
On that day the book of Moses was read in the hearing of the people, and it was found written that no Amʹmon·ite or Moʹab·ite should ever enter the congregation of the true God,
for they had not met the Israelites with bread and water, but instead they had hired Baʹlaam against them to curse them. However, our God had changed the curse into a blessing.
As soon as they heard the Law, they began to separate from Israel all those of foreign descent.
Now before this, the priest in charge of the storerooms of the house of our God was E·liʹa·shib, a relative of To·biʹah.
He had made available for him a large storeroom, where previously they used to put the grain offering, the frankincense, and the utensils and the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, to which the Levites, the singers, and the gatekeepers are entitled, along with the contribution for the priests.
And during all this time I was not in Jerusalem, for I went to the king in the 32nd year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes of Babylon; and sometime later I asked the king for a leave of absence.
Then I came to Jerusalem and noticed the terrible thing that E·liʹa·shib had done in behalf of To·biʹah, making a storeroom available for him in the courtyard of the house of the true God.
This was very displeasing to me, so I threw all of To·biʹah’s household furniture out of the storeroom.
After that I gave orders, and they cleansed the storerooms; and I put back there the utensils of the house of the true God, with the grain offering and the frankincense.
I also found out that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that the Levites and the singers who did the work had gone off, each to his own field.
So I reprimanded the deputy rulers and said: “Why has the house of the true God been neglected?” Then I gathered them together and assigned them back to their posts.
And all Judah brought in the tenth of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the storerooms.
Then I put Shel·e·miʹah the priest, Zaʹdok the copyist, and Pe·daiʹah of the Levites in charge of the storerooms, and Haʹnan the son of Zacʹcur the son of Mat·ta·niʹah was their assistant, for these men were considered reliable. It was their responsibility to make the distribution to their brothers.
Do remember me, O my God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my acts of loyal love that I have done for the house of my God and its services.
In those days I saw people in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath, bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys, and bringing wine, grapes, figs, and every sort of load into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them against selling provisions on that day.
And the Tyrʹi·ans who lived in the city were bringing in fish and all kinds of merchandise, selling them to the people of Judah and in Jerusalem on the Sabbath.
So I reprimanded the nobles of Judah and said to them: “What is this evil thing that you are doing, even profaning the Sabbath day?
Was not this what your forefathers did, so that our God brought all this disaster on us and also on this city? Now you are adding to the burning anger against Israel by profaning the Sabbath.”
So as soon as the shadows began to fall on the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I ordered that the doors be closed. I also said that they should not open them until after the Sabbath, and I stationed some of my own attendants at the gates so that no loads would be brought in on the Sabbath day.
So the traders and the sellers of all kinds of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice.
Then I warned them and said to them: “Why are you spending the night in front of the wall? If you do it again, I will use force against you.” From that time on they did not come on the Sabbath.
And I told the Levites that they should regularly purify themselves and come and guard the gates to keep the Sabbath day holy. This, also, do remember to my credit, O my God, and show me pity according to your abundant loyal love.
In those days I also saw Jews who had married Ashʹdod·ite, Amʹmon·ite, and Moʹab·ite women.
Half of their sons were speaking Ashʹdod·ite and the language of the different peoples, but none of them knew how to speak the language of the Jews.
So I reprimanded them and called down a curse on them and struck some of the men and pulled out their hair and made them swear by God: “You should not give your daughters to their sons, and you should not accept any of their daughters for your sons or yourselves.
Was it not because of these that King Solʹo·mon of Israel sinned? Among the many nations there was no king like him; and he was loved by his God, so that God made him king over all Israel. But the foreign wives caused even him to sin.
Is it not something unheard of for you to commit this great evil in acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women?”
One of the sons of Joiʹa·da the son of E·liʹa·shib the high priest had become a son-in-law of San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite. So I drove him away from me.
Do remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.
And I purified them from every foreign defilement, and I assigned duties to the priests and to the Levites, each to his own service,
and arranged for the supply of the wood at appointed times and for the first ripe fruits. Do remember me favorably, O my God.
E·liʹa·shib the high priest and his brothers the priests got up to build the Sheep Gate. They sanctified it and set up its doors; they sanctified it as far as the Tower of Meʹah, as far as the Tower of Ha·nanʹel.
And next to them the men of Jerʹi·cho were building; and next to them Zacʹcur the son of Imʹri was building.
The sons of Has·se·naʹah built the Fish Gate; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
And next to them Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz did repair work, and next to them Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah the son of Me·shezʹa·bel did repair work, and next to them Zaʹdok the son of Baʹa·na did repair work.
And next to them the Te·koʹites did repair work, but their prominent men would not lower themselves to share in the service of their masters.
Joiʹa·da the son of Pa·seʹah and Me·shulʹlam the son of Bes·o·deiʹah repaired the Gate of the Old City; they timbered it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
Next to them Mel·a·tiʹah the Gibʹe·on·ite and Jaʹdon the Me·ronʹo·thite did repair work, men of Gibʹe·on and Mizʹpah who were under the authority of the governor of the region Beyond the River.
Next to them Uzʹzi·el the son of Har·haiʹah, one of the goldsmiths, did repair work, and next to him Han·a·niʹah, one of the ointment mixers, did repair work; and they paved Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
And next to them Re·phaʹiah the son of Hur, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work.
And next to them Je·daʹiah the son of Ha·ruʹmaph did repair work in front of his own house, and next to him Hatʹtush the son of Hash·ab·neiʹah did repair work.
Mal·chiʹjah the son of Haʹrim and Hasʹshub the son of Paʹhath-moʹab repaired another section, as well as the Tower of the Ovens.
And next to them Shalʹlum the son of Hal·loʹhesh, a prince of half the district of Jerusalem, did repair work, along with his daughters.
Haʹnun and the inhabitants of Za·noʹah repaired the Valley Gate; they built it and then set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and they repaired 1,000 cubits of the wall as far as the Gate of the Ash Heaps.
Mal·chiʹjah the son of Reʹchab, a prince of the district of Beth-hac·cheʹrem, repaired the Gate of the Ash Heaps; he built it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
Shalʹlun the son of Col·hoʹzeh, a prince of the district of Mizʹpah, repaired the Fountain Gate; he built it and its roof, set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and also repaired the wall of the Pool of the Canal to the King’s Garden and as far as the Stairway that goes down from the City of David.
After him Ne·he·miʹah the son of Azʹbuk, a prince of half the district of Beth-zur, did repair work from in front of the Burial Places of David as far as the pool that had been built and as far as the House of the Mighty Ones.
After him the Levites did repair work: Reʹhum the son of Baʹni; and next to him Hash·a·biʹah, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah, did repair work for his district.
After him their brothers did repair work: Bavʹvai the son of Henʹa·dad, a prince of half the district of Keiʹlah.
And next to him Eʹzer the son of Jeshʹu·a, a prince of Mizʹpah, was repairing another section in front of the ascent to the Armory at the Buttress.
After him Barʹuch the son of Zabʹbai worked with fervor and repaired another section, from the Buttress as far as the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib the high priest.
After him Merʹe·moth the son of U·riʹjah the son of Hakʹkoz repaired another section, from the entrance of the house of E·liʹa·shib as far as the end of E·liʹa·shib’s house.
And after him the priests, men of the district of the Jordan, did repair work.
After them Benjamin and Hasʹshub did repair work in front of their own house. After them Az·a·riʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of A·na·niʹah did repair work near his own house.
After him Binʹnu·i the son of Henʹa·dad repaired another section, from the house of Az·a·riʹah as far as the Buttress and as far as the corner.
After him Paʹlal the son of Uʹzai did repair work in front of the Buttress and the tower that goes out from the King’s House, the upper one that belongs to the Courtyard of the Guard. After him there was Pe·daiʹah the son of Paʹrosh.
And the temple servants who lived in Oʹphel did repair work as far as in front of the Water Gate on the east and the protruding tower.
After them the Te·koʹites repaired another section, from in front of the great protruding tower as far as the wall of Oʹphel.
The priests did repair work above the Horse Gate, each in front of his own house.
After them Zaʹdok the son of Imʹmer did repair work in front of his own house. And after him She·maiʹah the son of Shec·a·niʹah, the keeper of the East Gate, did repair work.
After him Han·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Haʹnun the sixth son of Zaʹlaph repaired another section. After him Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah did repair work in front of his own hall.
After him Mal·chiʹjah, a member of the goldsmith guild, did repair work as far as the house of the temple servants and the traders, in front of the Inspection Gate and as far as the roof chamber of the corner.
And between the roof chamber of the corner and the Sheep Gate, the goldsmiths and the traders did repair work.
On the 24th day of this month the Israelites assembled; they were fasting with sackcloth and dust on themselves.
Those of Israelite descent then separated themselves from all the foreigners, and they stood and confessed their own sins and the errors of their fathers.
Then they stood up at their place and read aloud from the book of the Law of Jehovah their God for a fourth of the day; and for another fourth of it they were confessing and bowing down to Jehovah their God.
Jeshʹu·a, Baʹni, Kadʹmi·el, Sheb·a·niʹah, Bunʹni, She·re·biʹah, Baʹni, and Che·naʹni stood on the raised platform of the Levites, and they cried out with a loud voice to Jehovah their God.
And the Levites Jeshʹu·a, Kadʹmi·el, Baʹni, Hash·ab·neiʹah, She·re·biʹah, Ho·diʹah, Sheb·a·niʹah, and Peth·a·hiʹah said: “Stand up and praise Jehovah your God throughout all eternity. And let them praise your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
“You alone are Jehovah; you made the heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens and all their army, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them. And you preserve all of them alive, and the army of the heavens are bowing down to you.
You are Jehovah the true God, who chose Aʹbram and brought him out of Ur of the Chal·deʹans and gave him the name Abraham.
You found his heart faithful before you, so you made a covenant with him to give him the land of the Caʹnaan·ites, the Hitʹtites, the Amʹor·ites, the Perʹiz·zites, the Jebʹu·sites, and the Girʹga·shites, to give it to his offspring; and you kept your promises, because you are righteous.
“So you saw the affliction of our forefathers in Egypt, and you heard their outcry at the Red Sea.
Then you performed signs and miracles against Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land, for you knew that they acted presumptuously against them. You made a name for yourself that remains to this day.
And you split the sea before them, so that they crossed through the sea on the dry land, and you hurled their pursuers into the depths like a stone thrown into the turbulent waters.
You led them by day with a pillar of cloud, and by night with a pillar of fire, to light up for them the way they should go.
And you came down on Mount Siʹnai and spoke with them from heaven and gave them righteous judgments, laws of truth, good regulations and commandments.
You made known to them your holy Sabbath, and you gave them commandments, regulations, and a law through your servant Moses.
You gave them bread from heaven when they were hungry, and you brought water out of the crag when they were thirsty, and you told them to enter and take possession of the land that you had sworn to give to them.
“But they, our forefathers, acted presumptuously and became stubborn, and they would not listen to your commandments.
They refused to listen, and they did not remember your extraordinary acts that you performed among them, but they became stubborn and appointed a head to return to their slavery in Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, compassionate and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, and you did not abandon them.
Even when they made for themselves a metal statue of a calf and were saying, ‘This is your God who led you up out of Egypt,’ and they committed great acts of disrespect,
even then you, in your great mercy, did not abandon them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from over them by day to lead them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night to light up for them the way they should go.
And you gave your good spirit to give them insight, and you did not hold back your manna from their mouth, and you gave them water when they were thirsty.
For 40 years you provided them with food in the wilderness. They lacked nothing. Their garments did not wear out, and their feet did not become swollen.
“You gave them kingdoms and peoples, apportioning them piece by piece, so that they took possession of the land of Siʹhon, that is, the land of the king of Heshʹbon, as well as the land of Og the king of Baʹshan.
And you made their sons as numerous as the stars of the heavens. Then you brought them into the land that you had promised their forefathers that they should enter and possess.
So their sons went in and took possession of the land, and you subdued before them the Caʹnaan·ites, who were the inhabitants of the land, and you gave them into their hand, both their kings and the peoples of the land, to do with them as they pleased.
And they captured fortified cities and a fertile land, and they took possession of houses full of all sorts of good things, cisterns already dug, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate and grew satisfied and fat, and they basked in your great goodness.
“However, they became disobedient and rebelled against you and turned their back on your Law. They killed your prophets who warned them so as to bring them back to you, and they committed acts of great disrespect.
For this you gave them into the hand of their adversaries, who kept causing them distress. But they would cry out to you in the time of their distress, and you would hear from the heavens; and because of your great mercy, you would give them saviors to rescue them out of the hand of their adversaries.
“But as soon as they had relief, they would again do what is bad before you, and you would abandon them to the hand of their enemies, who would dominate them. Then they would return and call to you for help, and you would hear from the heavens and rescue them time and again because of your great mercy.
Although you would warn them so as to bring them back to your Law, they behaved presumptuously and refused to listen to your commandments; and they sinned against your regulations, by which a man will live if he observes them. But they stubbornly turned their back and stiffened their neck, and they refused to listen.
You extended patience to them for many years and kept warning them by your spirit through your prophets, but they refused to listen. Finally you gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands.
And in your great mercy, you did not exterminate them or abandon them, for you are a compassionate and merciful God.
“And now, O our God, the God great, mighty, and awe-inspiring, who has kept his covenant and shown loyal love, do not treat lightly all the hardship that has found us, our kings, our princes, our priests, our prophets, our forefathers, and all your people from the days of the kings of As·syrʹi·a down to this day.
You have been righteous in all that has come upon us, for you have acted faithfully; but we are the ones who have acted wickedly.
As for our kings, our princes, our priests, and our forefathers, they have not observed your Law nor paid attention to your commandments or to your reminders by which you warned them.
Even when they were in their kingdom and enjoying the abundant goodness that you gave them and they were in the broad and fertile land that you bestowed on them, they did not serve you and did not turn away from their bad practices.
So here we are today, slaves—yes, slaves in the land that you gave to our forefathers to eat its fruitage and its good things.
Its abundant produce is for the kings whom you have put over us because of our sins. They rule over our bodies and over our livestock as they see fit, and we are in great distress.
“So in view of all this, we are making a binding agreement in writing, and it is attested by the seal of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.”
In the month of Niʹsan, in the 20th year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, wine was set before him, and as usual I took up the wine and gave it to the king. But I had never been gloomy in his presence.
So the king said to me: “Why do you look so gloomy when you are not sick? This can be nothing but gloominess of heart.” At this I became very frightened.
Then I said to the king: “Long live the king! Why should I not look gloomy when the city, the place where my forefathers are buried, lies in ruins, and its gates have been consumed by fire?”
The king then said to me: “What is it that you are seeking?” At once I prayed to the God of the heavens.
I then said to the king: “If it pleases the king and if your servant has found favor with you, send me to Judah, to the city where my forefathers are buried, so that I may rebuild it.”
Then the king, with his royal consort sitting beside him, said to me: “How long will your journey be, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I gave him a set time.
Then I said to the king: “If it pleases the king, let letters be given me for the governors of the region Beyond the River, granting me safe passage until I reach Judah,
as well as a letter to Aʹsaph the keeper of the Royal Park, so that he may give me timber for beams for the gates of the Fortress of the House and for the walls of the city and for the house where I will go.” So the king gave them to me, for the good hand of my God was upon me.
Eventually I came to the governors of the region Beyond the River and gave them the king’s letters. The king also sent with me army chiefs and horsemen.
When San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite and To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official heard about it, they were very displeased that someone had come to do something good for the people of Israel.
At length I came to Jerusalem, and I stayed there for three days.
I rose up by night, I and a few men with me, and I did not tell anyone what my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there was no animal with me except the one I was riding.
And I went out at night through the Valley Gate, passing in front of the Fountain of the Big Snake to the Gate of the Ash Heaps, and I inspected the walls of Jerusalem that were broken down and its gates that had been consumed by fire.
And I passed along to the Fountain Gate and to the King’s Pool, and there was not enough space for the animal I was riding to pass.
But I continued up the valley by night, and I kept inspecting the wall, after which I came back and entered through the Valley Gate, and then I returned.
The deputy rulers did not know where I had gone and what I was doing, for I had not yet said anything to the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the deputy rulers, and the rest of the workers.
Finally I said to them: “You can see what a terrible situation we are in, how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates have been burned with fire. Come, let us rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, so that this disgrace will not continue.”
Then I told them of how the good hand of my God was upon me and also of the words that the king had spoken to me. At this they said: “Let us get up and build.” So they strengthened themselves for the good work.
Now when San·balʹlat the Horʹo·nite, To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite official, and Geʹshem the Arabian heard of it, they began to mock us and show us their contempt and say: “What are you doing? Are you rebelling against the king?”
However, I replied: “The God of the heavens is the One who will grant us success, and we his servants will get up and build; but you have neither share nor claim nor memorial in Jerusalem.”
Those who attested it by putting their seal to it were: Ne·he·miʹah the governor, the son of Hac·a·liʹah,And Zed·e·kiʹah,
Se·raiʹah, Az·a·riʹah, Jeremiah,
Pashʹhur, Am·a·riʹah, Mal·chiʹjah,
Hatʹtush, Sheb·a·niʹah, Malʹluch,
Haʹrim, Merʹe·moth, O·ba·diʹah,
Daniel, Ginʹne·thon, Barʹuch,
Me·shulʹlam, A·biʹjah, Mijʹa·min,
Ma·a·ziʹah, Bilʹgai, and She·maiʹah; these are the priests.
Also the Levites: Jeshʹu·a the son of Az·a·niʹah, Binʹnu·i of the sons of Henʹa·dad, Kadʹmi·el,
and their brothers Sheb·a·niʹah, Ho·diʹah, Ke·liʹta, Pe·laʹiah, Haʹnan,
Miʹca, Reʹhob, Hash·a·biʹah,
Zacʹcur, She·re·biʹah, Sheb·a·niʹah,
Ho·diʹah, Baʹni, and Be·niʹnu.
The heads of the people: Paʹrosh, Paʹhath-moʹab, Eʹlam, Zatʹtu, Baʹni,
Bunʹni, Azʹgad, Beʹbai,
Ad·o·niʹjah, Bigʹvai, Aʹdin,
Aʹter, Hez·e·kiʹah, Azʹzur,
Ho·diʹah, Haʹshum, Beʹzai,
Haʹriph, Anʹa·thoth, Neʹbai,
Magʹpi·ash, Me·shulʹlam, Heʹzir,
Me·shezʹa·bel, Zaʹdok, Jadʹdu·a,
Pel·a·tiʹah, Haʹnan, A·naiʹah,
Ho·sheʹa, Han·a·niʹah, Hasʹshub,
Hal·loʹhesh, Pilʹha, Shoʹbek,
Reʹhum, Ha·shabʹnah, Ma·a·seiʹah,
A·hiʹjah, Haʹnan, Aʹnan,
Malʹluch, Haʹrim, and Baʹa·nah.
The rest of the people—the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and everyone who separated himself from the peoples of the lands to follow the Law of the true God, along with their wives, their sons, and their daughters, all those with knowledge and understanding—
joined their brothers, their prominent men, and bound themselves with a curse and an oath, to walk in the Law of the true God, which had been given through Moses the servant of the true God, and to observe carefully all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord, his judgments, and his regulations.
We will not give our daughters to the peoples of the land, and we will not take their daughters for our sons.
If the peoples of the land bring in their wares and every kind of grain to sell on the Sabbath day, we will not buy anything from them on the Sabbath or on a holy day. We will also forgo the produce of the seventh year and every outstanding debt.
Also, we imposed the obligation on ourselves for each of us to give a third of a shekel yearly for the service of the house of our God,
for the layer bread, the regular grain offering, the regular burnt offering of the Sabbaths and the new moons, and for the appointed feasts, for the holy things, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.
Also, we cast lots concerning the supply of the wood that the priests, the Levites, and the people should bring to the house of our God by our paternal houses, at the appointed times, year by year, to burn on the altar of Jehovah our God, according to what is written in the Law.
We will also bring the first ripe fruits of our land and the first ripe fruits of every sort of fruit tree, year by year, to the house of Jehovah,
as well as the firstborn of our sons and of our livestock—according to what is written in the Law—and the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks. We will bring them to the house of our God, to the priests who minister at the house of our God.
Also, the firstfruits of our coarse meal, our contributions, the fruitage of every sort of tree, new wine, and oil, we should bring to the priests to the storerooms of the house of our God, along with the tenth from our land to the Levites, for the Levites are the ones who collect the tenths in all our agricultural cities.
And the priest, the son of Aaron, must be with the Levites when the Levites collect the tenth; and the Levites should offer up a tenth of the tenth to the house of our God, to the rooms of the storehouse.
For it is to the storerooms that the Israelites and the sons of the Levites should bring the contribution of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, and that is where the utensils of the sanctuary are, as well as the priests who minister, the gatekeepers, and the singers. We will not neglect the house of our God.
However, there was a great outcry from the people and their wives against their Jewish brothers.
Some were saying: “We are many with our sons and our daughters. We must get grain in order to eat and stay alive.”
Others were saying: “We are giving our fields and our vineyards and our houses as security to get grain during the food shortage.”
Still others were saying: “We have borrowed money on our fields and our vineyards for the king’s tribute.
Now we are of the same flesh and blood as our brothers, and our children are just like their children; yet we have to subject our sons and daughters to slavery, and some of our daughters are already in slavery. But we are powerless to stop this, because our fields and our vineyards belong to others.”
I became very angry when I heard their outcry and these words.
So I considered these things in my heart, and I took issue with the nobles and the deputy rulers and said to them: “Each one of you is demanding interest from your own brother.” Further, I arranged for a great assembly because of them.
And I said to them: “To the extent possible, we have bought back our own Jewish brothers who were sold to the nations; but will you now sell your own brothers, and are they to be sold back to us?” At this they became speechless, and they could find nothing to say.
Then I said: “What you are doing is not good. Should you not walk in the fear of our God so that the nations, our enemies, cannot reproach us?
Moreover, I, my brothers, and my attendants are lending them money and grain. Let us, please, stop this lending on interest.
Please, restore to them on this very day their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their houses, as well as the hundredth of the money, the grain, the new wine, and the oil that you are demanding as interest from them.”
To this they said: “We will restore these things to them and ask nothing back. We will do precisely as you say.” So I called the priests and made those men swear to keep this promise.
Also, I shook out the folds of my garment and said: “In this manner may the true God shake out from his house and from his possessions every man who does not carry out this promise, and in this manner may he be shaken out and emptied.” To this all the congregation said: “Amen!” And they praised Jehovah, and the people did as they promised.
Moreover, from the day that he commissioned me to become their governor in the land of Judah, from the 20th year to the 32nd year of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes, 12 years, neither I nor my brothers ate the food allowance due the governor.
But the former governors who were before me had burdened the people and had been taking from them 40 silver shekels for bread and wine each day. Also, their attendants had oppressed the people. But I did not do that because of the fear of God.
Furthermore, I took a hand in the work on this wall, and not a field did we acquire; all my attendants were gathered there for the work.
There were 150 Jews and deputy rulers dining at my table, as well as those who came to us from the nations.
Every day one bull, six choice sheep, and birds were prepared for me, and once every ten days we had all sorts of wine in abundance. Despite all this I did not demand the food allowance due the governor, because the people were already bearing their burden of service.
Do remember me favorably, O my God, for all that I have done in behalf of this people.
Now as soon as San·balʹlat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he became angry and very upset, and he kept mocking the Jews.
And in the presence of his brothers and the army of Sa·marʹi·a, he said: “What are the feeble Jews doing? Will they do this by themselves? Will they offer sacrifices? Will they finish up in a day? Will they bring the charred stones to life out of the heaps of dusty rubble?”
Now To·biʹah the Amʹmon·ite, who was standing beside him, said: “If even a fox would climb up on what they are building, it would knock down their stone wall.”
Hear, O our God, for we are being treated with contempt, and make their reproach return on their own heads, and give them over as plunder in a land of captivity.
And do not cover over their guilt or let their sin be erased from before you, for they have insulted the builders.
So we kept building the wall, and the entire wall was joined together and rebuilt up to half its height, and the people continued to put their heart into the work.
Now as soon as San·balʹlat, To·biʹah, the Arabians, the Amʹmon·ites, and the Ashʹdod·ites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem was progressing and that the gaps were being filled in, they became very angry.
They conspired together to come and fight against Jerusalem and to create a disturbance in it.
But we prayed to our God and kept a guard posted against them day and night.
However, people of Judah were saying: “The strength of the laborers has failed, and there is so much rubble; we will never be able to build the wall.”
And our enemies kept saying: “Before they know it or see us, we will come right in among them and kill them and stop the work.”
Whenever the Jews living near them came in, they told us again and again: “They will come at us from all directions.”
So I kept men posted at the lowest parts of the space behind the wall at the exposed places, and I posted them by families with their swords, their lances, and their bows.
When I saw their fear, I immediately rose and said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “Do not be afraid of them. Remember Jehovah, who is great and awe-inspiring; and fight for your brothers, your sons and daughters, your wives and homes.”
Now after our enemies heard that what they were doing had become known to us and that the true God had frustrated their plan, we all went back to work on the wall.
From that day forward, half of my men would do the work and half of them would hold the lances, the shields, the bows, and the coats of mail. And the princes stood behind the whole house of Judah
who were building the wall. Those who were carrying the loads did the work with one hand while holding a weapon in the other hand.
And each of the builders had a sword strapped to his hip while building, and the one to blow the horn stood beside me.
I then said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “The work is large and extensive, and we are spread out on the wall far apart from one another.
When you hear the sound of the horn, gather together to where we are. Our God will fight for us.”
So we kept working while the other half were holding the lances, from the break of dawn until the stars came out.
At that time I said to the people: “Let the men, each along with his attendant, spend the night inside Jerusalem, and they will guard us by night and work during the day.”
So neither I nor my brothers, my attendants, and the guards who followed me ever took off our garments, and each of us kept his weapon in his right hand.
These were the priests and the Levites who went up with Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, and Jeshʹu·a: Se·raiʹah, Jeremiah, Ezʹra,
Am·a·riʹah, Malʹluch, Hatʹtush,
Shec·a·niʹah, Reʹhum, Merʹe·moth,
Idʹdo, Ginʹne·thoi, A·biʹjah,
Mijʹa·min, Ma·a·diʹah, Bilʹgah,
She·maiʹah, Joiʹa·rib, Je·daʹiah,
Salʹlu, Aʹmok, Hil·kiʹah, and Je·daʹiah. These were the heads of the priests and their brothers in the days of Jeshʹu·a.
The Levites were Jeshʹu·a, Binʹnu·i, Kadʹmi·el, She·re·biʹah, Judah, and Mat·ta·niʹah, who led the songs of thanksgiving along with his brothers.
And Bak·bu·kiʹah and Unʹni their brothers stood opposite them for guard duties.
Jeshʹu·a became father to Joiʹa·kim, and Joiʹa·kim became father to E·liʹa·shib, and E·liʹa·shib to Joiʹa·da.
And Joiʹa·da became father to Jonʹa·than, and Jonʹa·than became father to Jadʹdu·a.
In the days of Joiʹa·kim, these were the priests, the heads of the paternal houses: for Se·raiʹah, Me·raiʹah; for Jeremiah, Han·a·niʹah;
for Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam; for Am·a·riʹah, Je·ho·haʹnan;
for Malʹlu·chi, Jonʹa·than; for Sheb·a·niʹah, Joseph;
for Haʹrim, Adʹna; for Me·raʹioth, Helʹkai;
for Idʹdo, Zekariah; for Ginʹne·thon, Me·shulʹlam;
for A·biʹjah, Zichʹri; for Mi·niʹa·min, . . .  ; for Mo·a·diʹah, Pilʹtai;
for Bilʹgah, Sham·muʹa; for She·maiʹah, Je·honʹa·than;
for Joiʹa·rib, Mat·teʹnai; for Je·daʹiah, Uzʹzi;
for Sal·laʹi, Kalʹlai; for Aʹmok, Eʹber;
for Hil·kiʹah, Hash·a·biʹah; for Je·daʹiah, Ne·thanʹel.
The heads of the paternal houses of the Levites in the days of E·liʹa·shib, Joiʹa·da, Jo·haʹnan, and Jadʹdu·a were recorded, as were the priests, down to the kingship of Da·riʹus the Persian.
The Levites who were heads of the paternal houses were recorded in the book of the history of the times, down to the days of Jo·haʹnan the son of E·liʹa·shib.
The heads of the Levites were Hash·a·biʹah, She·re·biʹah, and Jeshʹu·a the son of Kadʹmi·el, and their brothers stood opposite them to offer praise and give thanks according to the instructions of David the man of the true God, guard group corresponding to guard group.
Mat·ta·niʹah, Bak·bu·kiʹah, O·ba·diʹah, Me·shulʹlam, Talʹmon, and Akʹkub were standing guard as gatekeepers, guarding the storerooms by the gates.
These served in the days of Joiʹa·kim the son of Jeshʹu·a the son of Joʹza·dak and in the days of Ne·he·miʹah the governor and Ezʹra the priest and copyist.
At the inauguration of the walls of Jerusalem, they sought the Levites and brought them to Jerusalem from all the places they lived to celebrate the inauguration with rejoicing, with songs of thanksgiving, and with cymbals, stringed instruments, and harps.
And the sons of the singers gathered together from the district, from all around Jerusalem, from the settlements of the Ne·tophʹa·thites,
from Beth-gilʹgal, and from the fields of Geʹba and Azʹma·veth, for the singers had built settlements for themselves all around Jerusalem.
And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
Then I brought the princes of Judah up on top of the wall. Further, I appointed two large thanksgiving choirs and processions, and the one walked to the right on the wall toward the Gate of the Ash Heaps.
Ho·shaiʹah and half of the princes of Judah walked behind them,
along with Az·a·riʹah, Ezʹra, Me·shulʹlam,
Judah, Benjamin, She·maiʹah, and Jeremiah.
With them were some of the sons of the priests with the trumpets: Zekariah son of Jonʹa·than son of She·maiʹah son of Mat·ta·niʹah son of Mi·caiʹah son of Zacʹcur son of Aʹsaph,
and his brothers She·maiʹah, Azʹar·el, Milʹa·lai, Gilʹa·lai, Maʹai, Ne·thanʹel, Judah, and Ha·naʹni, with the musical instruments of David the man of the true God; and Ezʹra the copyist went before them.
At the Fountain Gate they went straight ahead up the Stairway of the City of David by the ascent of the wall above the House of David and on to the Water Gate to the east.
The other thanksgiving choir walked in the opposite direction, and I followed it with half of the people, on the wall up over the Tower of the Ovens and on to the Broad Wall
and up over the Gate of Eʹphra·im and on to the Gate of the Old City and on to the Fish Gate, the Tower of Ha·nanʹel, the Tower of Meʹah, and on to the Sheep Gate; and they came to a halt at the Gate of the Guard.
At length the two thanksgiving choirs stood before the house of the true God; so did I and half of the deputy rulers with me,
and the priests E·liʹa·kim, Ma·a·seiʹah, Mi·niʹa·min, Mi·caiʹah, Eli·o·eʹnai, Zekariah, and Han·a·niʹah, with the trumpets,
and Ma·a·seiʹah, She·maiʹah, El·e·aʹzar, Uzʹzi, Je·ho·haʹnan, Mal·chiʹjah, Eʹlam, and Eʹzer. And the singers sang loudly under the oversight of Iz·ra·hiʹah.
On that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced, for the true God made them rejoice with great joy. The women and the children also rejoiced, so that the rejoicing of Jerusalem could be heard far away.
On that day men were appointed over the storehouses for the contributions, the firstfruits, and the tenths. Into them they were to gather from the fields of the cities the portions required by the Law for the priests and the Levites, for there was rejoicing in Judah because of the priests and the Levites who were ministering.
And they began taking care of the duties of their God and the obligation of the purification, as did the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the instructions of David and his son Solʹo·mon.
For long ago in the days of David and Aʹsaph, there were directors for the singers and for the songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
And during the days of Ze·rubʹba·bel and during the days of Ne·he·miʹah, all Israel gave portions to the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the daily need. They also set aside the portion for the Levites, and the Levites set aside the portion for the descendants of Aaron.
Now as soon as San·balʹlat, To·biʹah, Geʹshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies were told that I had rebuilt the wall and that there were no gaps left in it (although up to that time I had not set up the doors in the gates),
San·balʹlat and Geʹshem immediately sent this message to me: “Come, and let us set a time to meet together in the villages of the Valley Plain of Oʹno.” But they were scheming to harm me.
So I sent messengers to them, saying: “I am engaged in a great work, and I am not able to go down. Why should the work stop while I leave it to come to you?”
They sent me the same message four times, and I gave them the same reply each time.
Then San·balʹlat sent his attendant to me with the same message a fifth time, with an open letter in his hand.
There it was written: “Among the nations it has been heard, and Geʹshem is also saying it, that you and the Jews are scheming to rebel. That is why you are building the wall; and according to these reports you are to become their king.
Also, you have appointed prophets to proclaim about you throughout Jerusalem, ‘There is a king in Judah!’ And now these things will be told to the king. So come, and let us discuss this together.”
However, I sent him this reply: “None of the things you are saying have taken place; you are making them up out of your own imagination.”
For they were all trying to frighten us, saying: “Their hands will slacken in the work, and it will not be done.” Now, I pray, strengthen my hands.
Then I went to the house of She·maiʹah the son of De·laʹiah the son of Me·hetʹa·bel while he was confined there. He said: “Let us set a time to meet at the house of the true God, within the temple, and let us close the doors of the temple, for they are coming to kill you. They are coming to kill you by night.”
But I said: “Should a man like me run away? Can a man like me go into the temple and live? I will not go in!”
Then I realized that God had not sent him, but that To·biʹah and San·balʹlat had hired him to speak this prophecy against me.
He had been hired to frighten me and to cause me to sin, so that they would have grounds to damage my reputation in order to reproach me.
Do remember, O my God, To·biʹah and San·balʹlat and these deeds, and also No·a·diʹah the prophetess and the rest of the prophets who were constantly trying to frighten me.
So the wall was completed on the 25th day of Eʹlul, in 52 days.
As soon as all our enemies heard of it and all the surrounding nations saw it, they became greatly ashamed, and they realized that it was with our God’s help that this work had been done.
In those days the nobles of Judah were sending many letters to To·biʹah, and To·biʹah would reply to them.
Many in Judah swore allegiance to him, for he was a son-in-law of Shec·a·niʹah the son of Aʹrah, and his son Je·ho·haʹnan had married the daughter of Me·shulʹlam the son of Ber·e·chiʹah.
Also, they would constantly tell me good things about him and then report to him what I said. Then To·biʹah would send letters to frighten me.
All the people then gathered with one accord at the public square in front of the Water Gate, and they told Ezʹra the copyist to bring the book of the Law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded Israel.
So Ezʹra the priest brought the Law before the congregation of men, women, and all who could listen with understanding, on the first day of the seventh month.
And he read aloud from it before the public square in front of the Water Gate, from daybreak until midday, to the men, the women, and all who could understand; and the people listened attentively to the book of the Law.
And Ezʹra the copyist was standing on a wooden podium made for the occasion; and standing alongside him on his right were Mat·ti·thiʹah, Sheʹma, A·naiʹah, U·riʹah, Hil·kiʹah, and Ma·a·seiʹah; and on his left were Pe·daiʹah, Mishʹa·el, Mal·chiʹjah, Haʹshum, Hash-badʹda·nah, Zekariah, and Me·shulʹlam.
Ezʹra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was above all the people. As he opened it, all the people stood up.
Then Ezʹra praised Jehovah the true God, the great One, at which all the people answered, “Amen! Amen!” and lifted up their hands. They then bowed low and prostrated themselves to Jehovah with their faces to the ground.
And Jeshʹu·a, Baʹni, She·re·biʹah, Jaʹmin, Akʹkub, Shabʹbe·thai, Ho·diʹah, Ma·a·seiʹah, Ke·liʹta, Az·a·riʹah, Joʹza·bad, Haʹnan, and Pe·laʹiah, who were Levites, were explaining the Law to the people, while the people remained standing.
And they continued reading aloud from the book, from the Law of the true God, clearly explaining it and putting meaning into it; so they helped the people to understand what was being read.
And Ne·he·miʹah, who was then the governor, Ezʹra the priest and copyist, and the Levites who were instructing the people said to all the people: “This day is holy to Jehovah your God. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the Law.
He said to them: “Go, eat the choice things and drink what is sweet, and send portions of food to those who have nothing prepared; for this day is holy to our Lord, and do not feel sad, for the joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.”
And the Levites were calming all the people, saying: “Be quiet! for this day is holy, and do not feel sad.”
So all the people went away to eat and to drink and to send out portions of food and to carry on a great rejoicing, for they understood the words that had been made known to them.
And on the second day, the heads of the paternal houses of all the people, the priests, and the Levites gathered around Ezʹra the copyist to gain further insight into the words of the Law.
Then they found written in the Law that Jehovah had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should dwell in booths during the festival in the seventh month,
and that they should make proclamation and announce throughout all their cities and throughout Jerusalem, saying: “Go out to the mountainous region and bring in leafy branches from olive trees, pine trees, myrtle and palm trees, and the leafy branches of other trees to make booths, according to what is written.”
So the people went out and brought them in to make booths for themselves, each one on his roof, as well as in their courtyards, in the courtyards of the house of the true God, in the public square of the Water Gate, and in the public square of the Gate of Eʹphra·im.
Thus all those of the congregation who had come back from the captivity made booths and were dwelling in the booths, for the Israelites had not done it this way from the days of Joshua the son of Nun until that day, so that there was very great rejoicing.
And day by day there was a reading from the book of the Law of the true God, from the first day until the last day. And they held the festival for seven days, and there was a solemn assembly on the eighth day, as was required.
Now in the days of A·has·u·eʹrus, that is, the A·has·u·eʹrus who ruled over 127 provinces from Inʹdi·a to E·thi·oʹpi·a,
in those days when King A·has·u·eʹrus was sitting on his royal throne in Shuʹshan the citadel,
in the third year of his reign, he held a banquet for all his princes and his servants. The army of Persia and Meʹdi·a, the nobles, and the princes of the provinces were before him,
and he showed them the wealth of his glorious kingdom and the grandeur and the splendor of his magnificence for many days, 180 days.
And when these days were completed, the king held a banquet for seven days for all the people present in Shuʹshan the citadel, from the greatest to the least, in the courtyard of the garden of the king’s palace.
There were linen, fine cotton, and blue material held fast in ropes of fine fabric, purple wool in silver rings, pillars of marble, and couches of gold and silver on a pavement of porphyry, marble, pearl, and black marble.
Wine was served in gold cups; each cup was different from the other, and the royal wine was plentiful, according to the means of the king.
The drinking was according to the rule that no one was under compulsion, for the king had arranged with the officials of his palace that each should do as he pleased.
Queen Vashʹti also held a banquet for the women at the royal house of King A·has·u·eʹrus.
On the seventh day, when the king’s heart was in a cheerful mood because of the wine, he told Me·huʹman, Bizʹtha, Har·boʹna, Bigʹtha, A·bagʹtha, Zeʹthar, and Carʹkas, the seven court officials who were personal attendants to King A·has·u·eʹrus,
to bring before the king Queen Vashʹti, wearing the royal headdress, to show the peoples and the princes her beauty, for she was very beautiful.
But Queen Vashʹti kept refusing to come at the king’s order that was conveyed through the court officials. At this the king became very angry, and his rage flared up within him.
The king then spoke to the wise men who had insight with regard to precedents (for in this way the king’s matter came before all those versed in law and legal cases,
and those closest to him were Car·sheʹna, Sheʹthar, Ad·maʹtha, Tarʹshish, Meʹres, Mar·seʹna, and Me·muʹcan, seven princes of Persia and Meʹdi·a, who had access to the king and who occupied the highest positions in the kingdom).
The king asked: “According to law, what is to be done with Queen Vashʹti because she has not obeyed the order of King A·has·u·eʹrus conveyed through the court officials?”
To this Me·muʹcan said in the presence of the king and the princes: “It is not against the king alone that Queen Vashʹti has done wrong, but against all the princes and against all the peoples in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus.
For what the queen did will become known by all the wives, and they will despise their husbands and say, ‘King A·has·u·eʹrus said to bring in Queen Vashʹti before him, but she refused to come.’
This very day the princesses of Persia and Meʹdi·a who know about what the queen did will talk to all the princes of the king, resulting in much contempt and indignation.
If it seems good to the king, let a royal decree be issued from him, and let it be written among the laws of Persia and Meʹdi·a, which cannot be repealed, that Vashʹti may never again come in before King A·has·u·eʹrus; and let the king confer her royal position on a woman who is better than she is.
And when the decree of the king is heard in all his vast realm, all the wives will give honor to their husbands, from the greatest to the least.”
This proposal pleased the king and the princes, and the king did what Me·muʹcan said.
So he sent letters to all the royal provinces, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language, for every husband to be master in his own house and to speak in the language of his own people.
So the king and Haʹman came in to Queen Esther’s banquet.
The king said to Esther again on the second day during the banquet of wine: “What is your petition, Queen Esther? It will be granted you. And what is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be done!”
Queen Esther answered: “If I have found favor with you, O king, and if it pleases the king, let my life be granted as my petition, and my people as my request.
For we have been sold, I and my people, to be annihilated, killed, and destroyed. If we had simply been sold as male and female slaves, I would have kept silent. But the distress is not proper, for it will be damaging to the king.”
King A·has·u·eʹrus then said to Queen Esther: “Who is this, and where is the man who has dared to do such a thing?”
Esther said: “The adversary and enemy is this evil Haʹman.” Haʹman became terrified because of the king and the queen.
The king rose up in a rage from the banquet of wine and went into the palace garden, but Haʹman stood up to plead with Queen Esther for his life, for he realized that the king was determined to punish him.
The king returned from the palace garden to the house of the wine banquet and saw that Haʹman had thrown himself on the couch where Esther was. The king exclaimed: “Is he also going to rape the queen in my own house?” As soon as these words left the king’s mouth, they covered Haʹman’s face.
Har·boʹna, one of the king’s court officials, now said: “Haʹman also prepared a stake for Morʹde·cai, whose report saved the king. It is standing at Haʹman’s house, 50 cubits high.” At that the king said: “Hang him on it.”
So they hanged Haʹman on the stake that he had prepared for Morʹde·cai, and the king’s rage subsided.
After this King A·has·u·eʹrus promoted Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite and exalted him by putting his throne above all the other princes who were with him.
And all the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate would bow low and prostrate themselves to Haʹman, for this is what the king had commanded respecting him. But Morʹde·cai refused to bow low or prostrate himself.
So the king’s servants who were in the king’s gate said to Morʹde·cai: “Why are you ignoring the king’s commandment?”
Day after day they would ask him, but he would not listen to them. Then they told Haʹman to see whether Morʹde·cai’s conduct would be tolerated; for he had told them that he was a Jew.
Now when Haʹman saw that Morʹde·cai refused to bow low and prostrate himself to him, Haʹman became filled with rage.
But he despised the thought of doing away with Morʹde·cai alone, for they had told him about Morʹde·cai’s people. So Haʹman began seeking to annihilate all the Jews who were in the entire realm of A·has·u·eʹrus, all of Morʹde·cai’s people.
In the first month, that is, the month of Niʹsan, in the 12th year of King A·has·u·eʹrus, they cast Pur (that is, the Lot) before Haʹman to determine the day and the month, and it fell on the 12th month, that is, Aʹdar.
Haʹman then said to King A·has·u·eʹrus: “There is a certain people scattered and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of your realm, whose laws are different from those of all other peoples; and they do not obey the king’s laws, and it is not in the king’s interests to let them be.
If it pleases the king, let a decree be written that they be destroyed. I will pay 10,000 silver talents to the officials to put into the royal treasury.”
At that the king removed his signet ring from his own hand and gave it to Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, who was the enemy of the Jews.
The king said to Haʹman: “The silver and the people are given to you, to do with them as you see fit.”
The king’s secretaries were then called on the 13th day of the first month. They put in writing all of Haʹman’s orders to the king’s satraps, the governors who were over the provinces, and the princes of the different peoples, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language. It was written in the name of King A·has·u·eʹrus and sealed with the king’s signet ring.
The letters were sent by means of couriers to all the king’s provinces, giving the order to annihilate, to kill, and to destroy all the Jews, young and old alike, children and women, on a single day, on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar, and to seize their possessions.
A copy of the document was to be issued as a law in every province and proclaimed to all the peoples, so that they would be prepared for that day.
The couriers went out quickly by order of the king; the law was issued in Shuʹshan the citadel. The king and Haʹman then sat down to drink, but the city of Shuʹshan was in confusion.
On the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar, when the king’s word and his law were to be carried out, on the day when the enemies of the Jews hoped to overpower them, the opposite happened, and the Jews defeated those who hated them.
The Jews gathered together in their cities in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus to lay hands on those seeking to harm them, and not a man could stand against them, for the dread of them had fallen upon all the peoples.
And all the princes of the provinces, the satraps, the governors, and those handling the business of the king were supporting the Jews, for they were in fear of Morʹde·cai.
Morʹde·cai had become powerful in the king’s house, and his fame was spreading throughout all the provinces, because Morʹde·cai was steadily growing more powerful.
The Jews struck down all their enemies with the sword, killing and destroying them; they did whatever they wanted to those hating them.
In Shuʹshan the citadel the Jews killed and destroyed 500 men.
Also, they killed Par·shan·daʹtha, Dalʹphon, As·paʹtha,
Po·raʹtha, A·daʹli·a, A·ri·daʹtha,
Par·mashʹta, Arʹi·sai, Arʹi·dai, and Vai·zaʹtha,
the ten sons of Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha, the enemy of the Jews. But after they killed them, they did not seize any plunder.
On that day the number of those killed in Shuʹshan the citadel was reported to the king.
The king said to Queen Esther: “In Shuʹshan the citadel the Jews have killed and destroyed 500 men and the ten sons of Haʹman. What, then, have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? What is your petition now? It will be granted you. And what is your further request? It will be done.”
Esther replied: “If it pleases the king, let the Jews who are in Shuʹshan be permitted to act tomorrow also according to today’s law; and let the ten sons of Haʹman be hanged on the stake.”
So the king gave orders for that to be done. A law was issued in Shuʹshan, and the ten sons of Haʹman were hanged.
The Jews in Shuʹshan gathered together again on the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar and killed 300 men in Shuʹshan, but they did not seize any plunder.
The rest of the Jews in the provinces of the king also gathered together and defended their lives. They got rid of their enemies, killing 75,000 of those who hated them; but they did not seize any plunder.
That was on the 13th day of the month of Aʹdar, and they rested on the 14th day and made it a day of feasting and of rejoicing.
The Jews in Shuʹshan gathered together on the 13th day and on the 14th day, and they rested on the 15th day and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.
That is why the rural Jews inhabiting the cities of the outlying districts made the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar a day of rejoicing and feasting, a day of celebration, and a time to send portions of food to one another.
Morʹde·cai recorded these events and sent official letters to all the Jews in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus, both near and far.
He instructed them to observe the 14th day of the month of Aʹdar, as well as the 15th day, each and every year,
because on those days the Jews rested from their enemies and in that month their grief was changed to rejoicing and their mourning to a day of celebration. They were to observe them as days of feasting and rejoicing and as a time to send portions of food to one another and gifts to the poor.
And the Jews agreed to continue the celebration that they had started and to do what Morʹde·cai wrote to them.
For Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, the enemy of all the Jews, had schemed against the Jews to destroy them, and he had cast Pur, that is, the Lot, to throw them into a panic and to destroy them.
But when Esther came in before the king, he gave orders in writing: “Let his evil scheme against the Jews come back on his own head”; and they hanged him and his sons on the stake.
That is why they called these days Puʹrim, after the name of the Pur. Therefore, because of all that was written in this letter and what they saw concerning this matter and what had come upon them,
the Jews obligated themselves and their descendants and all those joining them to celebrate these two days without fail and to carry out what was written concerning them at the appointed time each and every year.
These days were to be remembered and observed in every generation, by each family, each province, and each city; and these days of Puʹrim should not cease among the Jews, and their commemoration should not come to an end among their descendants.
Then Queen Esther, the daughter of Abʹi·ha·il, and Morʹde·cai the Jew wrote with full authority to confirm a second letter about Puʹrim.
He sent official letters to all the Jews in the 127 provinces, the realm of A·has·u·eʹrus, in words of peace and truth
to confirm the observance of the days of Puʹrim at their appointed times, just as Morʹde·cai the Jew and Queen Esther had instructed them to do and just as they had obligated themselves and their descendants to carry out, including the fasting and supplication.
And the command of Esther confirmed these matters concerning Puʹrim, and it was recorded in a book.
After these things, when the rage of King A·has·u·eʹrus had subsided, he remembered what Vashʹti had done and what had been decided against her.
Then the king’s personal attendants said: “A search should be made for young, beautiful virgins for the king.
And let the king appoint commissioners in all the provinces of his realm to bring together all the beautiful young virgins to Shuʹshan the citadel, to the house of the women. Let them be put in the care of Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch and guardian of the women, and let them be given beauty treatments.
And the young woman who is most pleasing to the king will be queen instead of Vashʹti.” The suggestion was pleasing to the king, and that is what he did.
There was a certain Jewish man in Shuʹshan the citadel whose name was Morʹde·cai son of Jaʹir son of Shimʹe·i son of Kish, a Benʹja·min·ite,
who had been taken into exile from Jerusalem with the people who were deported with King Jec·o·niʹah of Judah, whom King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took into exile.
He was the guardian of Ha·dasʹsah, that is, Esther, the daughter of his father’s brother, for she had neither father nor mother. The young woman was beautifully formed and attractive in appearance, and at the death of her father and her mother, Morʹde·cai took her as his daughter.
When the king’s word and his law were proclaimed and when many young women were brought together at Shuʹshan the citadel under the care of Hegʹa·i, Esther was also taken to the king’s house under the care of Hegʹa·i the guardian of the women.
Now the young woman was pleasing to him and won his favor, so he promptly arranged for her beauty treatments and her diet, and he assigned to her seven selected young women from the king’s house. He also transferred her and her young attendants to the best place in the house of the women.
Esther did not say anything about her people or her relatives, for Morʹde·cai had instructed her not to tell anyone.
Day after day Morʹde·cai would walk in front of the courtyard of the house of the women to learn about Esther’s welfare and about what was happening to her.
Each young woman had her turn to go in to King A·has·u·eʹrus after completing the 12-month treatment that was prescribed for the women, for this was the way they had to fulfill their beauty treatment—six months with oil of myrrh and six months with balsam oil and various ointments for beauty treatment.
Then the young woman was ready to go in to the king, and whatever she asked for would be given her when she went from the house of the women to the king’s house.
In the evening she would go in, and in the morning she would return to the second house of the women, under the care of Sha·ashʹgaz the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the concubines. She would not go to the king again unless the king had been especially pleased with her and she was requested by name.
And when the turn came for Esther the daughter of Abʹi·ha·il the uncle of Morʹde·cai, who had taken her as his daughter, to go in to the king, she did not request anything except what Hegʹa·i the king’s eunuch, the guardian of the women, recommended. (All the while Esther was winning the favor of everyone who saw her.)
Esther was taken to King A·has·u·eʹrus at his royal house in the tenth month, that is, the month of Teʹbeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
And the king came to love Esther more than all the other women, and she won his favor and approval more than any of the other virgins. So he put the royal headdress on her head and made her queen instead of Vashʹti.
And the king held a great banquet for all his princes and his servants, the banquet of Esther. He then proclaimed an amnesty for the provinces, and he kept giving gifts according to the means of the king.
Now when virgins were brought together a second time, Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate.
Esther did not say anything about her relatives and her people, just as Morʹde·cai had instructed her; Esther continued to do what Morʹde·cai said, just as when she was under his care.
In those days while Morʹde·cai was sitting in the king’s gate, Bigʹthan and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, got angry and plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus.
But Morʹde·cai learned about it, and he immediately told Queen Esther. Esther then spoke to the king in Morʹde·cai’s name.
So the matter was investigated and eventually confirmed, and both men were hanged on a stake; and this was all recorded in the book of the history of the times in the presence of the king.
King A·has·u·eʹrus imposed forced labor on the land and the islands of the sea.
And all his powerful and mighty accomplishments, as well as the detailed account of Morʹde·cai’s greatness to which the king exalted him, are they not written in the book of the history of the times of the kings of Meʹdi·a and Persia?
For Morʹde·cai the Jew was second only to King A·has·u·eʹrus. He was great among the Jews and respected by the multitude of his brothers, working for the good of his people and advocating the welfare of all their descendants.
On the third day Esther put on her royal robes and stood in the inner courtyard of the king’s house, opposite the king’s house, while the king was sitting on his royal throne in the royal house opposite the entrance.
As soon as the king saw Queen Esther standing in the courtyard, she gained his favor, and the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. Esther then approached and touched the top of the scepter.
The king asked her: “What is the matter, Queen Esther? What is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be granted you!”
Esther replied: “If it pleases the king, let the king along with Haʹman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him.”
So the king said to his men: “Tell Haʹman to come quickly, as Esther requests.” So the king and Haʹman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
During the banquet of wine, the king said to Esther: “What is your petition? It will be granted you! And what is your request? Even to the half of my kingdom, it will be done!”
Esther answered: “My petition and my request is,
If I have found favor with the king and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and to act on my request, let the king and Haʹman come to the banquet that I will hold for them tomorrow; and tomorrow I will do as the king says.”
On that day Haʹman went out joyful and with a cheerful heart. But when Haʹman saw Morʹde·cai in the king’s gate and noticed that he did not rise and tremble in his presence, Haʹman was filled with rage against Morʹde·cai.
However, Haʹman restrained himself and went to his house. Then he sent for his friends and Zeʹresh his wife.
Haʹman boasted about his glorious wealth, his many sons, and how the king had promoted him and had exalted him over the princes and the servants of the king.
Haʹman added: “What is more, Queen Esther invited no one else but me to accompany the king to the banquet she prepared. I am also invited tomorrow to be with her and the king.
But all of this fails to satisfy me as long as I see Morʹde·cai the Jew sitting in the king’s gate.”
So Zeʹresh his wife and all his friends said to him: “Have a stake put up, 50 cubits high. And in the morning tell the king that Morʹde·cai should be hanged on it. Then go with the king to enjoy yourself at the banquet.” This suggestion seemed good to Haʹman, so he had the stake put up.
When Morʹde·cai learned of everything that had been done, he ripped his garments apart and put on sackcloth and ashes. Then he went out into the middle of the city, crying out loudly and bitterly.
He went only as far as the king’s gate, for no one was to enter the king’s gate wearing sackcloth.
And in every province where the king’s word and his decree reached, there was great mourning among the Jews, along with fasting and weeping and wailing. Many were lying down in sackcloth and ashes.
When Esther’s female attendants and her eunuchs came in and told her, the queen was deeply distressed. Then she sent garments for Morʹde·cai to wear instead of his sackcloth, but he refused them.
At this Esther summoned Haʹthach, one of the king’s eunuchs, whom he had appointed to serve her, and she ordered him to find out from Morʹde·cai what this meant and what was happening.
So Haʹthach went out to Morʹde·cai in the public square of the city in front of the king’s gate.
Morʹde·cai told him about everything that had happened to him and the exact amount of money that Haʹman had promised to pay to the king’s treasury for the Jews to be destroyed.
He also gave him a copy of the written decree that had been issued in Shuʹshan for their annihilation. He was to show it to Esther and explain it to her and instruct her to go in to the king to beg for his favor and to plead directly with him in behalf of her people.
Haʹthach came back and told Esther what Morʹde·cai had said.
Esther replied to Haʹthach with instructions to tell Morʹde·cai:
“All the king’s servants and the people of the king’s provinces are aware that if any man or woman goes into the king’s inner courtyard without being summoned, there is only one law that applies: He is to be put to death; he may live only if the king holds out to him the golden scepter. And I have not been summoned to the king now for 30 days.”
When Morʹde·cai was told what Esther had said,
he replied to Esther: “Do not imagine that because you are in the king’s household you are any more likely to escape than all the other Jews.
For if you remain silent at this time, relief and deliverance will come to the Jews from another source, but you and your father’s house will perish. And who knows whether it is for a time like this that you have attained to your royal status?”
Then Esther replied to Morʹde·cai:
“Go, gather all the Jews who are found in Shuʹshan and fast in my behalf. Do not eat or drink for three days, night and day. I along with my female attendants will also fast. I will go in to the king, which is against the law, and if I am to perish, I will perish.”
So Morʹde·cai went his way and did all that Esther had instructed him to do.
That night the king could not sleep. So he said to bring the book of the historical records of the times, and it was read to the king.
There it was found written what Morʹde·cai had reported concerning Big·thaʹna and Teʹresh, two court officials of the king, doorkeepers, who had plotted to do away with King A·has·u·eʹrus.
The king asked: “What honor and recognition has been given to Morʹde·cai for this?” To this the king’s personal attendants said: “Nothing has been done for him.”
Later the king said: “Who is in the courtyard?” Now Haʹman had come into the outer courtyard of the king’s house to speak to the king about having Morʹde·cai hanged on the stake that he had prepared for him.
The king’s attendants said to him: “It is Haʹman standing in the courtyard.” So the king said: “Have him come in.”
When Haʹman came in, the king said to him: “What should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor?” Haʹman said in his heart: “Whom would the king wish to honor more than me?”
So Haʹman said to the king: “For the man whom the king wishes to honor,
let them bring royal attire that the king wears and a horse on which the king rides, with the royal headdress on its head.
Then let the attire and the horse be put into the charge of one of the king’s noble princes, and they should clothe the man whom the king wishes to honor and have him ride on the horse in the public square of the city. They should call out before him: ‘This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!’”
At once the king said to Haʹman: “Quick! Take the attire and the horse, and do what you just said for Morʹde·cai the Jew who is sitting in the king’s gate. Do not leave out anything that you have said.”
So Haʹman took the attire and the horse, and he clothed Morʹde·cai and made him ride in the public square of the city and called out before him: “This is what is done for the man whom the king wishes to honor!”
Afterward Morʹde·cai returned to the king’s gate, but Haʹman hurried to his house, mourning with his head covered.
When Haʹman related to his wife Zeʹresh and to all his friends everything that had happened to him, his wise men and his wife Zeʹresh said to him: “If Morʹde·cai, before whom you have started to fall, is of Jewish descent, you will not prevail against him; you will surely fall before him.”
While they were still speaking with him, the king’s court officials arrived and quickly took Haʹman to the banquet that Esther had made.
On that day King A·has·u·eʹrus gave the house of Haʹman, the enemy of the Jews, to Queen Esther; and Morʹde·cai came in before the king, because Esther had revealed how he was related to her.
Then the king removed his signet ring that he had taken away from Haʹman and gave it to Morʹde·cai. And Esther put Morʹde·cai in charge of the house of Haʹman.
Moreover, Esther spoke again to the king. She fell down at his feet and wept and pleaded with him to undo the harm done by Haʹman the Agʹag·ite and his scheme against the Jews.
The king held the golden scepter out to Esther, at which Esther rose and stood before the king.
She said: “If it pleases the king and if I have his favor, and if it seems proper to the king and I am pleasing in his eyes, let an order be written to annul the documents of that schemer Haʹman the son of Ham·me·daʹtha the Agʹag·ite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews in all the king’s provinces.
For how can I bear to look upon the disaster that will come upon my people, and how can I bear to see the destruction of my relatives?”
So King A·has·u·eʹrus said to Queen Esther and to Morʹde·cai the Jew: “Look! I have given the house of Haʹman to Esther and have had him hanged on the stake, because of his plot to attack the Jews.
You may now write in the king’s name whatever you see fit in behalf of the Jews and seal it with the king’s signet ring, for a decree that is written in the king’s name and sealed with the king’s signet ring cannot be revoked.”
So the secretaries of the king were summoned at that time in the third month, that is, the month of Siʹvan, on the 23rd day, and they wrote all that Morʹde·cai commanded to the Jews, as well as to the satraps, the governors, and the princes of the provinces from Inʹdi·a to E·thi·oʹpi·a, 127 provinces, to each province in its own script and to each people in its own language and to the Jews in their own script and language.
He wrote it in the name of King A·has·u·eʹrus and sealed it with the king’s signet ring and sent the written documents by the hand of couriers on horses; they rode on swift post-horses, bred for royal service.
In these documents the king granted permission to the Jews in all the different cities to gather together and defend their lives and to annihilate, kill, and destroy any forces of any people or province that might attack them, including women and children, and to seize their possessions.
This was to occur on the same day in all the provinces of King A·has·u·eʹrus, on the 13th day of the 12th month, that is, the month of Aʹdar.
The text of the document was to be issued as law throughout all the provinces. It was to be proclaimed to all the peoples, so that the Jews would be ready on that day to take vengeance on their enemies.
The couriers riding the post-horses used in the royal service went out urgently and speedily at the king’s order. The law was also issued in Shuʹshan the citadel.
Now Morʹde·cai left the king’s presence in royal apparel of blue and white, wearing a great golden crown and a fine-fabric cloak of purple wool. And the city of Shuʹshan shouted for joy.
For the Jews there was relief and rejoicing and exultation and honor.
And in all the provinces and all the cities, wherever the decree of the king and his law reached, the Jews were rejoicing and exulting, holding banquets and celebrations. Many of the peoples of the land were declaring themselves Jews, for the dread of the Jews had fallen upon them.
Then Job said in reply to Jehovah:
“Now I know that you are able to do all thingsAnd that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you.
You said, ‘Who is this who is obscuring my counsel without knowledge?’ Therefore I spoke, but without understandingAbout things too wonderful for me, which I do not know.
You said, ‘Please listen, and I will speak. I will question you, and you inform me.’
My ears have heard about you,But now I do see you with my eyes.
That is why I take back what I said,And I repent in dust and ashes.”
After Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, Jehovah said to Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite: “My anger burns against you and your two companions, for you have not spoken the truth about me as my servant Job has.
Now take seven bulls and seven rams and go to my servant Job, and offer up a burnt sacrifice for yourselves. And my servant Job will pray for you. I will surely accept his request not to deal with you according to your foolishness, for you have not spoken the truth about me as my servant Job has.”
So Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite, Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite, and Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite went and did what Jehovah had told them to do. And Jehovah accepted Job’s prayer.
After Job had prayed for his companions, Jehovah removed Job’s tribulation and restored his prosperity. Jehovah gave him double what he had before.
All his brothers and sisters and all his former friends came to him and ate a meal with him in his house. They sympathized with him and comforted him over all the calamity that Jehovah had allowed to come upon him. Each of them gave him a piece of money and a gold ring.
So Jehovah blessed the last part of Job’s life more than the beginning, and Job came to have 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 pairs of cattle, and 1,000 female donkeys.
He also came to have seven more sons and three more daughters.
He named the first daughter Je·miʹmah, the second Ke·ziʹah, and the third Kerʹen-hapʹpuch.
No women in all the land were as beautiful as Job’s daughters, and their father gave them an inheritance along with their brothers.
After this Job lived for 140 years, and he saw his children and his grandchildren—four generations.
Finally Job died, after a long and satisfying life.
“Can you catch Le·viʹa·than with a fishhookOr hold down its tongue with a rope?
Can you put a rope through its nostrilsOr pierce its jaws with a hook?
Will it make many pleas to you,Or will it speak gently to you?
Will it make a covenant with you,So that you may make it your slave for life?
Will you play with it as with a birdOr tie it on a leash for your little girls?
Will traders barter for it? Will they divide it up among merchants?
Will you fill its hide with harpoonsOr its head with fishing spears?
Lay your hand on it;You will remember the battle and never do it again!
Any hope of subduing it is futile. The mere sight of it would overwhelm you.
No one dares to stir it up. So who is it who can stand up to me?
Who has given me anything first that I should repay him? Whatever is under the heavens is mine.
I will not be silent about its limbs,About its mightiness and its well-formed body.
Who has removed its outer covering? Who will enter its open jaws?
Who can pry open the doors of its mouth? Its teeth all around are fearsome.
Its back has rows of scalesTightly sealed together.
Each one fits so closely to the otherThat no air can come between them.
They are stuck to one another;They cling together and cannot be separated.
Its snorting flashes out light,And its eyes are like the rays of dawn.
Flashes of lightning go out of its mouth;Fiery sparks escape.
Smoke pours out of its nostrils,Like a furnace fueled with rushes.
Its breath sets coals ablaze,And a flame shoots from its mouth.
There is great strength in its neck,And dismay runs before it.
The folds of its flesh are tightly joined together;They are firm, as though cast upon it and immovable.
Its heart is hard as stone,Yes, hard as a lower millstone.
When it rises up, even the mighty are frightened;Its thrashing causes bewilderment.
No sword that reaches it will prevail;Nor will spear, dart, or arrowhead.
It regards iron as straw,Copper as rotten wood.
An arrow does not make it flee;Slingstones turn into stubble against it.
It regards a club as stubble,And it laughs at the rattling of a javelin.
Underneath, it is like sharp fragments of pottery;It spreads itself in the mud like a threshing sledge.
It makes the deep boil just like a pot;It stirs up the sea like an ointment pot.
It leaves a glistening wake in its path. One would think that the deep had white hair.
There is nothing like it on the earth,A creature made to have no fear.
It glares at everything that is haughty. It is king over all the majestic wild beasts.”
“My spirit has been broken, my days have been extinguished;The graveyard awaits me.
Mockers surround me,And my eye must gaze at their rebellious behavior.
Please accept my security, and keep it with you. Who else will shake hands with me and pledge in my behalf?
For you have concealed discernment from their heart;That is why you do not exalt them.
He may offer to share with his friends,While the eyes of his children fail.
He has made me an object of scorn among the peoples,So that I became one in whose face they spit.
From anguish my eyes grow dim,And all my limbs are but a shadow.
Upright people stare in amazement at this,And the innocent one is disturbed over the godless.
The righteous one keeps holding fast to his way,And the one with clean hands grows stronger.
However, you may all come and resume your arguing,For I have not found anyone wise among you.
My days are finished;My plans, the desires of my heart, have been shattered.
They keep turning night into day,Saying, ‘Light must be near because it is dark.’
If I wait, the Grave will become my home;I will spread out my bed in darkness.
I will call out to the pit, ‘You are my father!’ To the maggot, ‘My mother and my sister!’
Where, then, is my hope? Who can see hope for me?
It will go down to the barred gates of the GraveWhen we all descend together into the dust.”
“I have made a covenant with my eyes. So how could I show improper attention to a virgin?
What, then, would be my share from God above,What inheritance from the Almighty on high?
Does not disaster await the wrongdoerAnd calamity those doing what is harmful?
Does he not see my waysAnd count all my steps?
Have I ever walked in untruth? Has my foot hurried to deceive?
Let God weigh me with accurate scales;Then he will recognize my integrity.
If my footsteps deviate from the wayOr my heart has followed after my eyesOr my hands have been defiled,
Then let me sow seed and someone else eat,And let what I plant be uprooted.
If my heart has been enticed by a womanAnd I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door,
Then let my wife grind grain for another man,And let other men have sexual relations with her.
For that would be shameful conduct,An error deserving punishment by the judges.
It would be a fire that would devour and destroy,Consuming even the roots of all my produce.
If I denied justice to my male or female servantsWhen they had a complaint against me,
What can I do when God confronts me? What can I answer him when he calls for an accounting?
Did not the One who made me in the womb also make them? Was it not the same One who formed us before our birth?
If I refused to give the poor what they desiredOr saddened the eyes of the widow;
If I ate my portion of food aloneWithout sharing it with the orphans;
(For from my youth the orphan grew up with me as though I were his father,And I have been a guide for the widow from childhood.)
If I saw anyone perishing for lack of clothingOr a poor man with nothing to cover himself;
If he did not bless meAs he warmed himself with the wool of my sheep;
If I shook my fist against the orphanWhen he needed my assistance in the city gate;
Then let my arm fall from my shoulder,And let my arm be broken at the elbow.
For I dreaded disaster from God,And I could not stand before his dignity.
If I put my confidence in goldOr said to fine gold, ‘You are my security!’
If I found my joy in my great wealthBecause of the many possessions I acquired;
If I saw the sun shiningOr the moon moving in its splendor;
And my heart was secretly enticed,And my mouth kissed my hand in worship of them;
Then that would be an error deserving punishment by the judges,For I would have denied the true God above.
Have I ever rejoiced over the destruction of my enemyOr gloated because evil befell him?
I never allowed my mouth to sinBy asking for his life in an oath.
Have the men of my tent not said,‘Who can find anyone who has not been satisfied with his food?’
No stranger had to spend the night outside;I opened my doors to the traveler.
Have I ever tried to cover over my transgressions, like other men,By hiding my error in the pocket of my garment?
Have I been in fear of the reaction of the multitude,Or have I been terrified by the contempt of other families,Making me silent and afraid to go outside?
If only someone would listen to me! I would sign my name to what I have said. Let the Almighty answer me! If only my accuser had written out the charges in a document!
I would carry it on my shoulder,And I would bind it around my head like a crown.
I would give him an accounting for every step I took;I would approach him confidently, like a prince.
If my own ground would cry out against meAnd its furrows would weep together;
If I have eaten its fruitage without payment,Or if I have caused its owners to despair;
Then let thorns sprout for me instead of wheatAnd foul-smelling weeds instead of barley.” The words of Job end here.
Job said in reply:
“How long will you keep irritating my soul,Crushing me with words?
These ten times you have rebuked me;You are not ashamed to deal harshly with me.
And if indeed I made a mistake,My error remains with me.
If you insist on exalting yourselves over me,Claiming that the reproach against me is justified,
Know, then, that it is God who has misled me,And he has caught me in his hunting net.
Look! I keep crying out, ‘Violence!’ but I get no answer;I keep crying for help, but there is no justice.
My path he has blocked with a stone wall, and I cannot pass by;He has covered my roadways with darkness.
He has stripped me of my gloryAnd removed the crown from my head.
He breaks me down on all sides until I perish;My hope he uproots like a tree.
His anger burns against me,And he views me as his enemy.
His troops come together and besiege me,And they camp around my tent.
My own brothers he has driven far away from me,And those who know me have turned away from me.
My close companions are gone,And those whom I knew well have forgotten me.
Guests in my house and my slave girls consider me a stranger;I am a foreigner in their eyes.
I call for my servant, but he does not respond;With my mouth I beg him for compassion.
My very breath has become loathsome to my wife,And I am a stench to my own brothers.
Even young children despise me;When I rise up, they begin jeering at me.
All my close friends detest me,And those whom I loved have turned against me.
My bones stick to my skin and my flesh,And I escape with the skin of my teeth.
Show me mercy, my companions, show me mercy,For God’s own hand has touched me.
Why do you keep persecuting me as God does,Attacking me without letup?
If only my words were written down,If only they could be inscribed in a book!
O that they were carved forever in the rock,With an iron stylus and lead!
For I well know that my redeemer is alive;He will come later and rise up over the earth.
After my skin has thus been destroyed,While yet in my flesh, I will see God,
Whom I will see for myself,Whom my own eyes will see, not someone else’s. But deep inside I feel overwhelmed!
For you say, ‘In what way are we persecuting him?’ Since the root of the problem is with me.
Be in fear of the sword yourselves,For the sword brings punishment against errors;You should know that there is a judge.”
“But now, Job, please hear my words;Listen to everything I say.
Look, please! I must open my mouth;My tongue must speak.
My words declare the uprightness of my heart,And my lips sincerely tell what I know.
God’s own spirit made me,And the Almighty’s own breath brought me to life.
Reply to me if you are able;Present your arguments before me; take your position.
Look! I am just like you before the true God;From the clay I too was shaped.
So no fear of me should terrify you,And no pressure from me should overwhelm you.
But you said in my hearing,Yes, I kept hearing these words,
‘I am pure, without transgression;I am clean, without error.
But God finds reasons to oppose me;He considers me his enemy.
He puts my feet in stocks;He scrutinizes all my paths.’
But you are not right in saying this, so I will answer you: God is far greater than mortal man.
Why do you complain against Him? Is it because he did not answer all your words?
For God speaks once and a second time,But no one pays attention,
In a dream, a vision of the night,When deep sleep falls upon peopleWhile they sleep in their beds.
Then he uncovers their earsAnd impresses his instruction upon them,
To turn a person away from wrongdoingAnd to protect a man from pride.
God spares his soul from the pit,His life from perishing by the sword.
A person is also reproved by pain on his bedAnd by the constant distress of his bones,
So that his very being loathes bread,And he rejects even fine food.
His flesh wastes away from sight,And his bones that were hidden now protrude.
His soul draws near to the pit;His life to those who bring death.
If there is a messenger for him,One advocate out of a thousand,To tell to man what is upright,
Then God shows him favor and says,‘Spare him from going down into the pit! I have found a ransom!
Let his flesh become fresher than in youth;Let him return to the days of his youthful vigor.’
He will entreat God, who will accept him,And he will see His face with shouts of joy,And He will restore His righteousness to mortal man.
That person will declare to men,‘I have sinned and distorted what is right,But I did not receive what I deserved.
He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit,And my life will see the light.’
Indeed, God does all these thingsTwice, three times, for a man,
To bring him back from the pit,So that he may be enlightened with the light of life.
Pay attention, Job! Listen to me! Keep silent, and I will continue speaking.
If you have something to say, reply to me. Speak, for I want to prove you right.
If you have nothing to say, you should listen to me;Keep silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”
Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply:
“Will all these words go unanswered,Or will a lot of talking make someone right?
Will your empty talk silence people? Will no one rebuke you for your mocking words?
For you say, ‘My teaching is pure,And I am clean in your eyes.’
But if only God would speakAnd open his lips to you!
Then he would reveal to you the secrets of wisdom,For practical wisdom has many sides. Then you would realize that God allows some of your error to be forgotten.
Can you discover the deep things of GodOr discover everything about the Almighty?
It is higher than heaven. What can you accomplish? It is deeper than the Grave. What can you know?
It is longer than the earthAnd broader than the sea.
If he passes by and detains someone and convenes a court,Who can resist him?
For he knows when men are deceitful. When he sees what is evil, will he not take notice?
But an empty-headed man will understandOnly when a wild donkey can give birth to a man.
If only you would prepare your heartAnd stretch out your hands to him.
If your hand is doing wrong, put it far away,And let no unrighteousness dwell in your tents.
For then you could lift up your face with no defect;You could stand firm, free of fear.
For then you will forget your trouble;You will remember it as waters that have flowed past you.
Your life will become brighter than midday;Even its darkness will be like the morning.
You will be confident because there is hope,And you will look around and lie down in security.
You will lie down, with no one to make you afraid,And many people will seek your favor.
But the eyes of the wicked will fail;And they will find no place to escape,And their only hope will be death.”
“At this my heart poundsAnd leaps from its place.
Listen carefully to the rumbling of his voiceAnd the thunder that comes from his mouth.
He unleashes it under the entire heavensAnd sends his lightning to the ends of the earth.
After that is a roaring sound;He thunders with a majestic voice,And he does not hold it back when his voice is heard.
God thunders with his voice in a wonderful way;He does great things that are beyond our understanding.
For he says to the snow, ‘Fall to the earth,’ And to the downpour of rain, ‘Pour down mightily.’
God puts a stop to all human activitySo that every mortal man will know His work.
The wild animals go into their densAnd remain in their lairs.
The storm wind blows from its chamber,And the cold comes from the north winds.
By the breath of God, the ice is produced,And the broad waters are frozen solid.
Yes, he weighs down the clouds with moisture;He scatters his lightning in the clouds;
They swirl around where he directs them;They carry out whatever he commands on the surface of the inhabited earth.
Whether it is for punishment or for the sake of the landOr for loyal love, he causes it to happen.
Listen to this, Job;Stop and consider carefully the wonderful works of God.
Do you know how God controls the cloudsAnd how he causes the lightning to flash from his cloud?
Do you know how the clouds float? These are the wonderful works of the One perfect in knowledge.
Why does your clothing become hotWhen the earth is still because of the south wind?
Can you, with him, spread out the skiesAs solid as a metal mirror?
Tell us what we should say to him;We cannot answer because we are in the dark.
Should he be told that I want to speak? Or has anyone said something that should be communicated to him?
They cannot even see the light,Though it is bright in the sky,Until a wind passes by and clears away the clouds.
Out of the north comes golden splendor;God’s majesty is awe-inspiring.
Understanding the Almighty is beyond our reach;He is great in power,And he never violates his justice and abundant righteousness.
Therefore, people should fear him. For he does not favor any who think that they are wise.”
Job said in reply:
“How you have helped the one with no power! How you have saved the arm that has no strength!
What great advice you have given to the one lacking wisdom! How freely you have revealed your practical wisdom!
To whom are you trying to speak,And who inspired you to say such things?
Those who are powerless in death tremble;They are even lower than the waters and their inhabitants.
The Grave is naked in front of God,And the place of destruction lies uncovered.
He stretches out the northern sky over empty space,Suspending the earth upon nothing;
He wraps up the waters in his clouds,So that the clouds do not burst under their weight;
He shuts off the view of his throne,Spreading out his cloud over it.
He marks out the horizon on the surface of the waters;He makes a boundary between light and darkness.
The very pillars of heaven shake;They are stunned by his rebuke.
He stirs up the sea with his power,And by his understanding he breaks the sea monster to pieces.
With his breath he makes the skies clear;His hand pierces the elusive serpent.
Look! These are just the fringes of his ways;Only a faint whisper has been heard of him! So who can understand his mighty thunder?”
There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. He was an upright man of integrity; he feared God and shunned what was bad.
Seven sons and three daughters were born to him.
His livestock amounted to 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 1,000 cattle, and 500 donkeys, along with a very large number of servants, so that he became the greatest of all the people of the East.
Each of his sons would hold a banquet at his house on his own set day. They would invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them.
After a series of banquet days was complete, Job would send for them in order to sanctify them. Then he would get up early in the morning and offer up burnt sacrifices for each of them. For Job said: “Maybe my sons have sinned and have cursed God in their heart.” That is what Job would always do.
Now the day came when the sons of the true God entered to take their station before Jehovah, and Satan also entered among them.
Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Where have you come from?” Satan answered Jehovah: “From roving about on the earth and from walking about in it.”
And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad.”
At that Satan answered Jehovah: “Is it for nothing that Job has feared God?
Have you not put up a protective hedge around him and his house and everything he has? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his livestock has spread out in the land.
But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”
Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! Everything that he has is in your hand. Only do not lay your hand on the man himself!” So Satan went out from the presence of Jehovah.
Now on the day when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
a messenger came to Job and said: “The cattle were plowing and the donkeys were grazing beside them
when the Sa·beʹans attacked and took them, and they killed the servants with the sword. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”
While he was still speaking, another one came and said: “Fire from God fell from the heavens and blazed among the sheep and the servants and consumed them! I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”
While he was still speaking, another one came and said: “The Chal·deʹans formed three bands and made a raid on the camels and took them, and they killed the servants with the sword. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”
While he was still speaking, yet another one came and said: “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house.
Suddenly a great wind came from the wilderness, and it struck the four corners of the house, so that it fell on the young people and they were killed. I am the only one who escaped to tell you.”
At that Job got up and ripped apart his garment and cut the hair off his head; then he fell to the ground and bowed down
and said: “Naked I came out of my mother’s womb,And naked I will return. Jehovah has given, and Jehovah has taken away. Let the name of Jehovah continue to be praised.”
In all of this, Job did not sin or accuse God of doing anything wrong.
E·liʹhu continued:
“Be patient with me a little longer while I explain,For I still have words to speak on God’s behalf.
I will speak comprehensively about what I know,And I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
Truly my words are not false;The One perfect in knowledge is here before you.
Indeed, God is mighty and rejects no one;He is great in his power of understanding.
He will not preserve the lives of the wicked,But he gives justice to the afflicted.
He does not take his eyes off the righteous;He enthrones them with kings, and they are exalted forever.
But if they are bound in shacklesAnd caught in ropes of affliction,
He reveals to them what they have done,Their transgressions caused by their pride.
He opens their ears to correctionAnd tells them to turn away from wrongdoing.
If they obey and serve him,They will live out their days in prosperity,And their years will be pleasant.
But if they do not obey, they will perish by the swordAnd die without knowledge.
The godless at heart will harbor resentment. They do not cry for help even when he binds them.
They die while still young,Spending their life among male temple prostitutes.
But God rescues the afflicted during their affliction;He opens their ear when they are oppressed.
He draws you away from the brink of distressTo a broad space, free of restriction,With rich food on your table as consolation.
Then you will be satisfied with the judgment on the wicked,When judgment is rendered and justice is upheld.
But take care that rage does not lead you into spitefulness,And do not let a large bribe lead you astray.
Would your cry for helpOr any of your strenuous efforts keep you from distress?
Do not long for the night,When people vanish from their place.
Beware that you do not turn to wrongdoing,Choosing this instead of affliction.
Look! God is exalted in his power;What instructor is like him?
Who has directed his wayOr said to him, ‘What you have done is wrong’?
Remember to magnify his activity,Of which men have sung.
All mankind has seen it,Mortal man looks on from a distance.
Yes, God is greater than we can know;The number of his years is beyond comprehension.
He draws up the drops of water;They condense into rain from his mist;
Then the clouds pour it down;They shower down upon mankind.
Can anyone understand the layers of clouds,The thundering from his tent?
See how he spreads his lightning over itAnd covers the depths of the sea.
By these he sustains the peoples;He gives them food in abundance.
With his hands he covers the lightning,And he directs it against its target.
His thunder tells about him,Even the livestock tell who is coming.
“Is not the life of mortal man on earth like compulsory labor,And are not his days like those of a hired worker?
Like a slave, he longs for the shadow,And like a hired worker, he waits for his wages.
Thus I have been assigned months of futilityAnd nights of misery have been counted out for me.
When I lie down I ask, ‘When will I get up?’ But as the night drags on, I toss restlessly until the dawning of the day.
My flesh is covered with maggots and clods of dirt;My skin is full of scabs and pus.
My days go by more quickly than a weaver’s shuttle,And they come to an end without hope.
Remember that my life is wind,That my eye will never again see happiness.
The eye that sees me now will see me no more;Your eyes will look for me, but I will be gone.
Like a cloud that fades and vanishes,The one who goes down to the Grave does not come back up.
He will not return again to his house,And his place will acknowledge him no more.
Therefore, I will not restrain my mouth. I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;I will complain in my bitter distress!
Am I the sea or a sea monster,That you should set a guard over me?
When I say, ‘My couch will comfort me;My bed will help ease my misery,’
Then you terrify me with dreamsAnd frighten me with visions,
So that I would choose suffocation,Yes, death rather than this body of mine.
I loathe my life; I do not want to go on living. Leave me alone, for my days are like a breath.
What is mortal man that you should concern yourself with himAnd fix your attention on him?
Why do you inspect him every morningAnd test him every moment?
Will you not look away from meAnd leave me alone long enough to swallow my saliva?
If I have sinned, how could I harm you, the Observer of mankind? Why have you made me your target? Have I become a burden to you?
Why do you not pardon my transgressionAnd excuse my error? For soon I will lie down in the dust,And you will look for me, but I will be gone.”
Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply:
“Rulership and fearsome might are his;He establishes peace in heaven.
Can his troops be numbered? Upon whom does his light not rise?
So how can mortal man be righteous before God,Or how can one born of a woman be innocent?
Even the moon is not brightAnd the stars are not pure in his eyes,
How much less so mortal man, who is a maggot,And a son of man, who is a worm!”
“Yes, my eye has seen all of this,My ear has heard and understood it.
What you know, I also know;I am not inferior to you.
For my part, I would rather speak to the Almighty himself;I desire to argue my case with God.
But you are smearing me with lies;All of you are useless physicians.
If only you would keep absolutely silent,That would show wisdom on your part.
Listen, please, to my arguments,And pay attention to the pleadings of my lips.
Will you speak unjustly on God’s behalf,And will you speak deceitfully for him?
Will you take his side,Will you try to plead the case of the true God?
Would it turn out well if he examined you? Will you fool him as you would a mortal man?
He will surely rebuke youIf you secretly try to show favoritism.
Will not his very dignity terrify youAnd the dread of him fall upon you?
Your wise sayings are proverbs of ashes;Your defenses are as fragile as defenses of clay.
Keep silent before me, so that I may speak. Then let whatever may come upon me come!
Why do I put myself in dangerAnd take my life in my hands?
Though he may slay me, I would still wait;I would argue my case before his face.
He would then become my salvation,For no godless person may come in before him.
Listen closely to my word;Pay attention to my declaration.
See, now, I have prepared my legal case;I know I am in the right.
Who will contend with me? I would die if I were to stay silent!
Only grant two things to me, O God,So that I will not conceal myself from before you:
Remove your heavy hand far away from me,And do not let the fear of you terrify me.
Either call and I will answer,Or let me speak, and you answer me.
What are my errors and sins? Reveal to me my transgression and my sin.
Why do you hide your faceAnd consider me your enemy?
Will you try to frighten a windblown leafOr chase after dry stubble?
For you keep recording bitter accusations against me,And you make me answer for the sins of my youth.
You have put my feet in stocks,You scrutinize all my paths,And you trace out each of my footprints.
So man decays like something rotten,Like a garment eaten by moths.
Job said in reply:
“Listen carefully to what I say;Let this be the consolation you give me.
Bear with me while I speak;After I speak, you may then mock me.
Is my complaint directed toward a man? If it were, would I not lose patience?
Look at me and stare in amazement;Put your hand over your mouth.
When I think about it, I am disturbed,And my whole body shudders.
Why do the wicked live on,Grow old, and become wealthy?
Their children are always in their presence,And they get to see their descendants.
Their houses are secure, they are free from fear,And God does not punish them with his rod.
Their bulls breed without failure;Their cows give birth and do not miscarry.
Their boys run outside just like a flock,And their children skip about.
They sing accompanied by tambourine and harpAnd rejoice at the sound of the flute.
They spend their days in contentmentAnd go down peacefully to the Grave.
But they say to the true God, ‘Leave us alone! We have no desire to know your ways.
Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? What would we gain by being acquainted with him?’
But I know that they do not control their own prosperity. The thinking of the wicked is far from me.
How often is the lamp of the wicked extinguished? How often does disaster come upon them? How often does God deal out destruction to them in his anger?
Do they ever become like straw before the windAnd like chaff that a storm wind carries away?
God will store up a man’s punishment for his own sons. But may God repay him so that he will know it.
May his own eyes see his ruin,And may he be the one to drink from the rage of the Almighty.
For what does he care about what happens to his house after himIf the number of his months is cut short?
Can anyone teach knowledge to God,When He is the one who judges even the highest ones?
One man dies in his full vigorWhen he is completely carefree and at ease,
When his thighs are padded with fatAnd his bones are strong.
But another man dies deeply distressed,Never having tasted good things.
Together they will lie down in the dust,And maggots will cover both of them.
Look! I know exactly what you are thinkingAnd the schemes you devise to wrong me.
For you say, ‘Where is the house of the prominent man,And where is the tent in which the wicked one lived?’
Have you not questioned travelers? Do you not carefully study their observations,
That an evil person is spared on the day of disasterAnd rescued on the day of fury?
Who will confront him about his way,And who will repay him for what he has done?
When he is carried to the graveyard,A vigil will be kept over his tomb.
The clods of earth of the valley will be sweet to him,And all mankind follows after himLike the countless number before him.
So why offer me meaningless comfort? There is nothing but deceit in your answers!”
It was after this that Job began to speak and to curse the day of his birth.
Job said:
“Let the day perish on which I was born,Also the night when someone said: ‘A man has been conceived!’
Let that day be darkness. Let God above show no concern for it;Let no light shine upon it.
Let the deepest darkness reclaim it. Let a rain cloud settle over it. Let whatever darkens the day terrify it.
That night—let the gloom seize it;Let it not rejoice among the days of a year,And let it not enter among the number of the months.
Indeed! Let that night become barren;Let no joyful cry be heard in it.
Let those who curse the day put a curse on it,Those who are able to awaken Le·viʹa·than.
Let the stars of its twilight grow dark;Let it wait in vain for daylight,And let it not see the rays of dawn.
For it did not close the doors of my mother’s womb;Nor did it hide trouble from my eyes.
Why did I not die at birth? Why did I not perish when I came from the womb?
Why were there knees to receive meAnd breasts to nurse me?
For now I would be lying down undisturbed;I would be sleeping and at rest
With kings of the earth and their advisers,Who built for themselves places that are now in ruins,
Or with princes who possessed gold,Whose houses were filled with silver.
Or why was I not like a hidden miscarriage,Like children who have never seen the light?
There even the wicked have ceased from agitation;There the weary are at rest.
There the prisoners are at ease together;They do not hear the voice of the one forcing them to work.
Small and great are the same there,And the slave is set free from his master.
Why does he give light to one who is sufferingAnd life to those in bitter distress?
Why do they long for death, but it does not come? They dig for it more than for hidden treasures,
Those who are rejoicing greatly,Who are happy when they find the grave.
Why does he give light to a man who has lost his way,Whom God has hedged in?
For in place of my food comes my sighing,And my groaning pours out like water.
For what I have dreaded has come upon me,And what I have feared has befallen me.
I have had no peace, no quiet, no rest,But trouble keeps coming.”
“Now they laugh at me—Men younger than I am,Whose fathers I would have refusedTo put with the dogs that guarded my flock.
Of what use was the power of their hands to me? Their vigor has perished.
They are worn out from want and hunger;They gnaw at the parched groundThat was already ruined and desolated.
They gather the salt herb from the bushes;Their food is the root of broom trees.
They are driven out of the community;People shout at them as they would at a thief.
They live on the slopes of ravines,In holes in the ground and in the rocks.
From the bushes they cry outAnd huddle together among the nettles.
As sons of the senseless and the nameless ones,They have been driven out of the land.
But now they mock me even in their songs;I have become an object of scorn to them.
They detest me and keep their distance from me;They do not hesitate to spit in my face.
Because God has disarmed me and humbled me,They throw off all restraint in my presence.
On my right they rise up like a mob;They put me to flightAnd put up barriers of destruction in my path.
They tear up my roadwaysAnd make my calamity worse,Without anyone to stop them.
They come as if through a wide breach in the wall;They roll in amid the devastation.
Terror overwhelms me;My dignity is driven away like the wind,And my salvation vanishes like a cloud.
Now my life ebbs from me;Days of affliction take hold of me.
Aching pierces my bones at night;The gnawing pain never stops.
With great force my garment is disfigured;Like the collar of my garment, it chokes me.
God has thrown me down into the mud;I am reduced to dust and ashes.
I cry to you for help, but you do not answer me;I stand up, but you just look at me.
You have cruelly turned against me;With the full might of your hand, you assault me.
You pick me up and carry me off with the wind;Then you toss me about in the storm.
For I know that you will bring me down to death,To the house where everyone living will meet.
But no one would strike at a broken manAs he cries for help during his time of disaster.
Have I not wept for those who have fallen on hard times? Have I not grieved for the poor?
Although I hoped for good, bad came;I expected the light, but darkness came.
The churning inside me did not stop;Days of affliction confronted me.
I walk about gloomy; there is no sunlight. In the assembly, I rise and cry for help.
I have become a brother to jackalsAnd a companion to the daughters of the ostrich.
My skin has blackened and fallen off;My bones burn from the heat.
My harp is used only for mourning,And my flute for the sound of weeping.
Job said in reply:
“For a fact I know that this is so. But how can mortal man be in the right in a case with God?
If someone wishes to argue with Him,That one could not answer one of His questions in a thousand.
He is wise in heart and mighty in power. Who can resist him and come off uninjured?
He moves mountains without anyone knowing it;He overturns them in his anger.
He shakes the earth out of its place,So that its pillars tremble.
He commands the sun not to shineAnd seals off the light of the stars;
He spreads out the heavens by himself,And he treads upon the high waves of the sea.
He made the Ash, the Keʹsil, and the Kiʹmah constellations,And the constellations of the southern sky;
He does great and unsearchable things,Wonderful things that cannot be counted.
He passes by me, and I cannot see him;He moves past me, but I do not discern him.
When he snatches something, who can resist him? Who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’
God will not restrain his anger;Even the helpers of Raʹhab will bow down to him.
How much more when I answer himMust I choose my words carefully to argue with him!
Even if I were in the right, I would not answer him. I could only plead for mercy from my judge.
If I call out to him, will he answer me? I do not believe that he will listen to my voice,
For he crushes me with a stormAnd multiplies my wounds for no reason.
He does not let me catch my breath;He keeps filling me with bitter things.
If it is a matter of power, he is the strong one. If it is a matter of justice, he says: ‘Who can call me to account?’
If I were in the right, my own mouth would condemn me;Even if I keep my integrity, he will declare me guilty.
Even if I keep my integrity, I am not confident about myself;I reject this life of mine.
It is all the same. That is why I say,‘He destroys the innocent and the wicked alike.’
If a flash flood should cause sudden death,He would mock at the despair of the innocent.
The earth has been handed over to the wicked;He covers the eyes of its judges. If it is not he, then, who is it?
Now my days are swifter than a runner;They run away without seeing good.
They glide by like reed boats,Like eagles that swoop down on their prey.
If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint,I will change my expression and be cheerful,’
I would still be afraid because of all my pains,And I know you would not find me innocent.
I would be found guilty. So why should I struggle in vain?
If I wash myself in water from melting snow,And I cleanse my hands in lye,
Then you would dip me in a pit,So that even my own garments would detest me.
For he is not a man like me that I may answer him,That we should go to court together.
There is no person to decide between us,Who could serve as our judge.
If he would stop beating meAnd not let his terror frighten me,
Then I would speak to him unafraid,For it is not in me to speak out of fear.
Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm:
“Who is this who is obscuring my counselAnd speaking without knowledge?
Brace yourself, please, like a man;I will question you, and you inform me.
Where were you when I founded the earth? Tell me, if you think you understand.
Who set its measurements, in case you know,Or who stretched a measuring line across it?
Into what were its pedestals sunk,Or who laid its cornerstone,
When the morning stars joyfully cried out together,And all the sons of God began shouting in applause?
And who barricaded the sea behind doorsWhen it burst out from the womb,
When I clothed it with cloudsAnd wrapped it in thick gloom,
When I established my limit for itAnd put its bars and doors in place,
And I said, ‘You may come this far, and no farther;Here is where your proud waves will stop’?
Have you ever commanded the morningOr made the dawn know its place,
To take hold of the ends of the earthAnd to shake the wicked out of it?
It is transformed like clay under a seal,And its features stand out like those of a garment.
But the light of the wicked is held back from them,And their uplifted arm is broken.
Have you gone down to the sources of the seaOr explored the deep waters?
Have the gates of death been revealed to you,Or have you seen the gates of deep darkness?
Have you understood the vast expanse of the earth? Tell me, if you know all of this.
In which direction does the light reside? And where is the place of darkness,
That you should take it to its territoryAnd understand the paths to its home?
Do you know this because you were already bornAnd the number of your years is great?
Have you entered the storehouses of the snow,Or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
Which I have reserved for the time of distress,For the day of battle and war?
From what direction is light dispersed,And from where does the east wind blow on the earth?
Who has cut a channel for the floodAnd made a path for the thunderous storm cloud,
To make it rain where no man lives,On the wilderness where there are no humans,
To satisfy devastated wastelandsAnd cause the grass to sprout?
Does the rain have a father,Or who fathered the dewdrops?
From whose womb did the ice emerge,And who gave birth to the frost of heaven
When the waters are covered as if with stone,And the surface of the deep waters is frozen solid?
Can you tie the ropes of the Kiʹmah constellationOr untie the cords of the Keʹsil constellation?
Can you lead out a constellation in its seasonOr guide the Ash constellation along with its sons?
Do you know the laws governing the heavens,Or can you impose their authority on the earth?
Can you raise your voice to the cloudsTo cause a flood of water to cover you?
Can you send out lightning bolts? Will they come and say to you, ‘Here we are!’
Who put wisdom within the cloudsOr gave understanding to the sky phenomenon?
Who is wise enough to count the clouds,Or who can tip over the water jars of heaven
When the dust pours into a massAnd the clods of earth stick together?
Can you hunt prey for a lionOr satisfy the appetites of young lions
When they crouch in their lairsOr lie in ambush in their dens?
Who prepares food for the ravenWhen its young cry to God for helpAnd wander about because there is nothing to eat?
“Why does the Almighty not set a time? Why do those who know him not see his day?
People move boundary markers;They carry off flocks for their own pasture.
They drive away the donkey of fatherless childrenAnd seize the widow’s bull as security for a loan.
They force the poor off the road;The helpless of the earth must hide from them.
The poor forage for food like wild donkeys in the wilderness;They seek food in the desert for their children.
They must harvest in another’s fieldAnd glean from the vineyard of the wicked.
They spend the night naked, without clothing;They have no covering for the cold.
They are drenched by the mountain rains;They cling to the rocks for lack of shelter.
The fatherless child is snatched away from the breast;And the garments of the poor are taken as security for a loan,
Forcing them to go about naked, without clothing,And hungry, as they carry the sheaves of grain.
They toil among the terrace walls in the heat of the day;They tread the winepresses, yet they go thirsty.
The dying keep groaning in the city;The fatally wounded cry for help,But God does not regard this as improper.
There are those who rebel against light;They do not recognize its ways,And they do not follow its paths.
The murderer rises at daybreak;He slays the helpless and the poor,While at night he engages in theft.
The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight,Saying, ‘No one will see me!’ And he covers his face.
In the darkness they break into houses;By day they shut themselves in. They are strangers to the light.
For morning is the same as deep darkness for them;They are familiar with the terrors of deep darkness.
But they are swiftly carried away by the waters. Their portion of the land will be cursed. They will not return to their vineyards.
Just as drought and heat take away the melted snow,The Grave takes away those who have sinned!
His mother will forget him; the maggot will feast on him. He will be remembered no more. And unrighteousness will be broken just like a tree.
He preys on the barren woman,And mistreats the widow.
God will use his strength to do away with the powerful;Though they may rise up, they have no assurance of life.
God lets them become confident and secure,But his eyes are on everything they do.
They are exalted for a little while, then they are no more. They are brought low and gathered like everyone else;They are cut off like heads of grain.
Now who can prove me a liarOr refute my word?”
Job continued his discourse, saying:
“As surely as God lives, who has deprived me of justice,As the Almighty lives, who has made me bitter,
As long as my breath is within meAnd spirit from God is in my nostrils,
My lips will not speak unrighteousness;Nor will my tongue mutter deceit!
It is unthinkable for me to declare you men righteous! Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!
I will maintain my righteousness and never let it go;My heart will not condemn me as long as I live.
May my enemy become like the wicked,Those assaulting me like the unrighteous.
For what hope does the godless man have when he is destroyed,When God takes away his life?
Will God hear his outcryWhen distress comes upon him?
Or will he find delight in the Almighty? Will he call on God at all times?
I will teach you about the power of God;I will not hide anything about the Almighty.
Look! If you have all seen visions,Why are your speeches completely empty?
This is the wicked man’s share from God,The inheritance that tyrants receive from the Almighty.
If his sons become many, they will fall by the sword,And his descendants will not have enough food.
Those who survive him will be buried by the plague,And their widows will not weep for them.
Even if he piles up silver like the dustAnd stores up fine clothing like the clay,
Though he may gather it,The righteous man will wear it,And the innocent will divide up his silver.
The house he builds is as fragile as a moth’s cocoon,Like a shelter made by a watchman.
He will go to bed rich but will gather nothing;When he opens his eyes, nothing will be there.
Terror overtakes him like a flood;A storm snatches him away by night.
An east wind will carry him off, and he will be gone;It sweeps him away from his place.
It will hurl itself at him without pityAs he desperately tries to flee from its force.
It claps its hands at himAnd whistles at him from its place.
Afterward the day came when the sons of the true God entered to take their station before Jehovah, and Satan also entered among them to take his station before Jehovah.
Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Where have you come from?” Satan answered Jehovah: “From roving about on the earth and from walking about in it.”
And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad. He is still holding firmly to his integrity, even though you try to incite me against him to destroy him for no reason.”
But Satan answered Jehovah: “Skin for skin. A man will give everything that he has for his life.
But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike his bone and flesh, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”
Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! He is in your hand! Only do not take his life!”
So Satan went out from the presence of Jehovah and struck Job with painful boils from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.
And Job took a piece of broken pottery to scrape himself, and he was sitting among the ashes.
Finally his wife said to him: “Are you still holding firmly to your integrity? Curse God and die!”
But he said to her: “You are talking like one of the senseless women. Should we accept only what is good from the true God and not accept also what is bad?” In all of this, Job did not sin with his lips.
Three companions of Job heard about all the calamities that had come upon him, and each came from his own place—Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite, Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite, and Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite. So they agreed to meet together to go and sympathize with Job and comfort him.
When they saw him from a distance, they did not recognize him. They began to weep loudly and to rip their garments apart, and they threw dust into the air and onto their heads.
Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and seven nights. No one said a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.
“I loathe my life. I will give vent to my complaints. I will speak out in my bitter distress!
I will say to God: ‘Do not pronounce me guilty. Tell me why you are contending with me.
Does it benefit you to oppress,To despise the work of your handsWhile you favor the advice of the wicked?
Do you have eyes of flesh,Or do you see as mortal man does?
Are your days like the days of mortals,Or are your years like those of a man,
That you should search out my errorAnd keep looking for my sin?
You know that I am not guilty;And no one can save me from your hand.
Your own hands have shaped me and made me,But now you would completely destroy me.
Remember, please, that you made me out of clay,But now you make me return to dust.
Did you not pour me out like milkAnd curdle me like cheese?
With skin and flesh you clothed me,And with bones and sinews you wove me together.
You have given me life and loyal love;You have guarded my spirit with your care.
But you secretly intended to do these things. I know that these things are from you.
If I sinned, you would watch me,And you would not acquit me of my error.
If I am guilty, too bad for me! And even if I am innocent, I cannot raise my head,For I am filled with dishonor and affliction.
If I raise my head up, you hunt for me like a lionAnd again show your power against me.
You bring new witnesses against meAnd increase your anger against me,As hardship after hardship comes upon me.
So why did you bring me out from the womb? I should have died before any eye could see me.
It would have been as though I never existed;I would have been taken straight from the womb to the grave.’
Are not my days few? Let him leave me alone;Let him turn his eyes away from me, so that I may find some relief
Before I go away—and I will not return—To the land of deepest darkness,
To the land of utter gloom,A land of deep shadow and disorder,Where even the light is like the gloom.”
Job said in reply:
“I have heard many things like these before. All of you are troublesome comforters!
Is there an end to empty words? What provokes you to answer this way?
I could also speak as you do. If you were in my place,I could make persuasive speeches against youAnd shake my head at you.
Instead, though, I would strengthen you with the words of my mouth,And the consolation of my lips would bring relief.
If I speak, my own pain is not relieved,And if I stop speaking, how much is my pain reduced?
But now he has made me weary;He has devastated my whole household.
You also seize me, and it has become a witness,So that my own skinniness rises up and testifies to my face.
His anger has torn me to pieces, and he harbors animosity against me. He grinds his teeth against me. My adversary pierces me with his eyes.
They have opened their mouth wide against me,And they have scornfully struck my cheeks;In large numbers they gather against me.
God hands me over to young boys,And he thrusts me into the hands of the wicked.
I was untroubled, but he shattered me;He grabbed me by the back of the neck and crushed me;Then he set me up as his target.
His archers surround me;He pierces my kidneys and feels no compassion;He pours out my gall on the earth.
He breaks through against me with breach after breach;He rushes at me like a warrior.
I have sewn sackcloth together to cover my skin,And I have buried my dignity in the dust.
My face is red from weeping,And on my eyelids is deep shadow,
Although my hands have done no violenceAnd my prayer is pure.
O earth, do not cover my blood! And let there be no resting-place for my outcry!
Even now, my witness is in the heavens;The one who can testify for me is in the heights.
My companions ridicule meAs my eye sheds tears to God.
Let someone arbitrate between a man and God,As one would between a man and his fellow.
For the years to come are few,And I will go away on the path of no return.
“Call, please! Is there anyone answering you? To which of the holy ones will you turn?
For resentment will kill the foolish one,And envy will put the simpleminded to death.
I have seen the foolish one taking root,But suddenly his dwelling place is cursed.
His sons are far from safety,And they are crushed at the city gate, with no one to save them.
The hungry one eats what he harvests,Taking it even from among the thorns,And their possessions are ensnared.
For harmful things do not sprout from the dust,And trouble does not spring from the ground.
For man is born for trouble,As surely as sparks fly upward.
But I would appeal to God,And to God I would submit my case,
To the One doing great and unsearchable things,Wonderful things without number.
He gives rain to the earthAnd sends waters upon the fields.
He raises the lowly up high,And he raises up the dejected one to salvation.
He frustrates the schemes of the crafty,So that the work of their hands does not succeed.
He catches the wise in their own cunning,So that the plans of the shrewd are thwarted.
They meet with darkness during the day,And they grope about at midday as if it were night.
He saves from the sword of their mouth,Saving the poor from the hand of the strong,
So that there is hope for the lowly,But the mouth of unrighteousness is shut.
Look! Happy is the man whom God reproves;So do not reject the discipline of the Almighty!
For he causes pain, but binds up the wound;He breaks apart, but heals with his own hands.
He will save you from six calamities,Even the seventh will not harm you.
During famine he will redeem you from death,And from the power of a sword during war.
You will be protected from the lash of the tongue,And you will not fear devastation when it comes.
You will laugh at destruction and hunger,And you will not fear the wild beasts of the earth.
For the stones of the field will not harm you,And the wild beasts of the field will be at peace with you.
You will know that your tent is secure,And nothing will be missing when you inspect your pasture.
You will enjoy many children,And your descendants will be as plentiful as the vegetation of the earth.
You will still be strong when you go to the grave,Like sheaves of grain gathered in their season.
Look! We have investigated this, and it is so. Listen and accept it.”
“Man, born of woman,Is short-lived and filled with trouble.
He comes up like a blossom and then withers away;He flees like a shadow and disappears.
Yes, you have fixed your eye upon him,And you bring him into judgment with yourself.
Who can produce someone clean from someone unclean? No one can!
If his days are decided,The number of his months is with you;You have set a limit for him that he may not go beyond.
Turn your gaze away from him so that he may rest,Until, like a hired worker, he finishes out his day.
For there is hope even for a tree. If it is cut down, it will sprout again,And its twigs will continue to grow.
If its root grows old in the groundAnd its stump dies in the soil,
At the scent of water it will sprout;And it will produce branches like a new plant.
But a man dies and lies powerless;When a human expires, where is he?
Waters disappear from the sea,And a river drains away and dries up.
Man also lies down and does not get up. Until heaven is no more, they will not wake up,Nor will they be aroused from their sleep.
O that in the Grave you would conceal me,That you would hide me until your anger passes by,That you would set a time limit for me and remember me!
If a man dies, can he live again? I will wait all the days of my compulsory serviceUntil my relief comes.
You will call, and I will answer you. You will long for the work of your hands.
But for now, you keep counting my every step;You watch only for my sin.
My transgression is sealed up in a bag,And you seal up my error with glue.
As a mountain falls and crumbles awayAnd a rock is dislodged from its place,
As water wears away stonesAnd its torrents wash away earth’s soil,So you have destroyed the hope of mortal man.
You keep overpowering him until he perishes;You change his appearance, and you send him away.
His sons are honored, but he does not know it;They become insignificant, but he does not realize it.
He feels pain only while he is still in his flesh;He mourns only while he is still alive.”
“There is a place to mine silverAnd a place for gold that they refine;
Iron is taken from the ground,And copper is smelted from rocks.
Man conquers the darkness;He probes to the limit in the gloom and darkness,Searching for ore.
He sinks a shaft far from where people reside,In forgotten places, far from where people walk;Some men descend and swing suspended.
Food grows on top of the earth;But below, there is an upheaval as if by fire.
There in the stones is sapphire,And the dust contains gold.
No bird of prey knows the path to it;The eye of a black kite has not seen it.
No majestic beasts have trodden on it;The young lion has not prowled there.
Man strikes the flinty rock with his hand;He overturns the mountains at their foundation.
He cuts water channels in the rock;His eyes spot every precious thing.
He dams up the sources of riversAnd brings what was hidden to the light.
But wisdom—where can it be found,And where is the source of understanding?
No man recognizes its value,And it cannot be found in the land of the living.
The deep waters say, ‘It is not in me!’ And the sea says, ‘It is not with me!’
It cannot be bought with pure gold;Nor can silver be weighed out in exchange for it.
It cannot be bought with gold of OʹphirNor with rare onyx and sapphire.
Gold and glass cannot be compared to it;Nor can a vessel of fine gold be exchanged for it.
Coral and crystal are not worthy of mention,For a bagful of wisdom is worth more than one full of pearls.
The topaz of Cush cannot be compared to it;It cannot be purchased even with pure gold.
But from where does wisdom come,And where is the source of understanding?
It has been hidden from the eyes of every living thingAnd concealed from the birds of the heavens.
Destruction and death say,‘Our ears have heard only a report of it.’
God understands the way to find it;He alone knows where it resides,
For he looks to the ends of the earth,And he sees everything under the heavens.
When he set the force of the windAnd measured out the waters,
When he made a regulation for the rainAnd a path for the thunderous storm cloud,
Then he saw wisdom and explained it;He established and tested it.
And he said to man: ‘Look! The fear of Jehovah—that is wisdom,And to turn away from bad is understanding.’”
Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply:
“Can a man be of use to God? Can anyone with insight be of benefit to him?
Does the Almighty care that you are righteous,Or does he gain anything because you follow the course of integrity?
Will he punish youAnd enter into judgment with you for your reverence?
Is it not because your own wickedness is so greatAnd there is no end to your errors?
For you seize a pledge from your brothers for no reason,And you strip people of their garments, leaving them naked.
You do not give the tired one a drink of water,And you hold back food from the hungry.
The land belongs to the powerful man,And the favored one dwells in it.
But you sent away widows empty-handed,And you crushed the arms of fatherless children.
That is why you are surrounded by traps,And sudden terrors frighten you;
That is why it is so dark that you cannot see,And a flood of water covers you.
Is not God in the heights of heaven? And see how high all the stars are.
But you have said: ‘What does God really know? Can he judge through thick gloom?
Clouds screen him off so that he does not seeAs he walks about on the vault of heaven.’
Will you follow the ancient pathThat wicked men have walked,
Men who have been snatched away before their time,Whose foundation was washed away by a flood?
They were saying to the true God: ‘Leave us alone!’ And ‘What can the Almighty do to us?’
Yet, he is the One who filled their houses with good things. (Such wicked thinking is far from my own.)
The righteous will see this and rejoice,And the innocent will mock them and say:
‘Our opponents have been destroyed,And a fire will consume what is left of them.’
Get to know Him, and you will be at peace;Then good things will come your way.
Accept the law from his mouth,And keep his sayings in your heart.
If you return to the Almighty, you will be restored;If you remove unrighteousness from your tent,
If you would throw your gold into the dustAnd the gold of Oʹphir into the rocky ravines,
Then the Almighty will become your gold,And he will be your choicest silver.
For then your delight will be in the Almighty,And you will lift up your face to God.
You will entreat him, and he will hear you;And your vows you will pay.
Whatever you decide to do will succeed,And light will shine upon your path.
For you will be humiliated when you speak arrogantly,But he will save the humble.
He will rescue those who are innocent;So if your hands are clean, you will certainly be rescued.”
Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite said in reply:
“Will a wise person answer with empty arguments,Or will he fill his belly with the east wind?
Reproving with mere words is useless,And talk alone is of no benefit.
For you undermine the fear of God,And you diminish any concern for God.
For your error dictates what you say,And you choose crafty speech.
Your own mouth condemns you, and not I;Your own lips testify against you.
Were you the first man ever born,Or was your birth before that of the hills?
Do you listen to the confidential talk of God,Or do you limit wisdom to yourself?
What do you know that we do not know? What do you understand that we do not?
Both the gray-haired and the aged are among us,Men much older than your father.
Are God’s consolations not enough for you,Or words spoken gently to you?
Why does your heart carry you away,And why do your eyes flash with anger?
For you turn your spirit against God himself,And you allow such words to go out of your own mouth.
What is mortal man that he should be pure,Or anyone born of a woman that he should be righteous?
Look! He has no faith in his holy ones,And even the heavens are not pure in his eyes.
How much less so when a person is detestable and corrupt,A man who drinks in unrighteousness just like water!
I will inform you; listen to me! I will relate what I have seen,
What wise men have related from their fathers,Things they have not hidden.
To them alone the land was given,And no stranger passed among them.
A wicked person suffers torment all his days,Throughout all the years reserved for the tyrant.
Terrifying sounds are in his ears;In a time of peace, marauders attack him.
He does not believe that he will escape from darkness;He is reserved for a sword.
He wanders about in search of food—where is it? He well knows that the day of darkness is at hand.
Distress and anguish keep terrifying him;They overpower him like a king ready to launch an attack.
For he raises his hand against God himselfAnd tries to defy the Almighty;
He stubbornly rushes against Him,With his thick, strong shield;
His face is covered with fat,And his hips bulge with fat;
He resides in cities that will be brought to ruin,In houses where no one will dwell,Which will become heaps of stones.
He will not grow rich, and his wealth will not accumulate,Nor will his possessions spread over the land.
He will not escape from darkness;A flame will dry up his twig,And he will pass away by a blast of God’s mouth.
He should not go astray and trust in what is worthless,For what he gets in exchange will be worthless;
It will happen before his day,And his branches will never flourish.
He will be like a vine that shakes off its unripe grapes,And like an olive tree that casts off its blossoms.
For the assembly of godless ones is sterile,And fire will consume the tents of bribery.
They conceive trouble and give birth to what is wicked,And their womb produces deceit.”
So these three men stopped trying to answer Job, because he was convinced of his own righteousness.
But E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite of the family of Ram had become very angry. His anger blazed against Job for trying to prove himself right rather than God.
He was also very angry with Job’s three companions because they could not find an answer but had declared God wicked.
E·liʹhu had been waiting to respond to Job, because they were older than he was.
When E·liʹhu saw that the three men had nothing to say in answer, his anger flared up.
So E·liʹhu the son of Barʹa·chel the Buzʹite began to speak, saying: “I am youngAnd you men are aged. So I respectfully held back,And I dared not tell you what I know.
I thought, ‘Let age speak,And let a multitude of years declare wisdom.’
But it is the spirit in people,The breath of the Almighty, that gives them understanding.
Age alone does not make one wise,Nor is it only old men who understand what is right.
So I say, ‘Listen to me,And I will also tell you what I know.’
Look! I have waited for your words;I kept listening to your reasoningAs you searched for things to say.
I paid close attention to you,But none of you could prove Job wrongOr answer his arguments.
So do not say, ‘We have found wisdom;It is God who refutes him, not a man.’
He did not direct his words against me,So I will not reply to him with your arguments.
They are dismayed, they have no more answers;They have nothing left to say.
I have waited, but they do not continue speaking;They just stand there, with no further answer.
So I too will give an answer;I too will tell what I know,
For I am full of words;The spirit within me compels me.
My insides are like wine that has no vent,Like new wineskins ready to burst.
Let me speak so that I can find relief! I will open my lips and give an answer.
I will not show partiality to anyone;Nor will I flatter any human,
For I do not know how to flatter;If I did, my Maker would quickly do away with me.
Elʹi·phaz the Teʹman·ite then said in reply:
“If someone tries to speak to you, will you become impatient? For who can hold back from speaking?
True, you have corrected many,And you used to strengthen the weak hands.
Your words would raise up anyone stumbling,And you would strengthen those whose knees were buckling.
But now it has happened to you, and you are overwhelmed;It touches you, and you are dismayed.
Does your reverence for God not give you confidence? Does your way of integrity not give you hope?
Remember, please: What innocent person has ever perished? When have the upright ever been destroyed?
What I have seen is that those who plow what is harmfulAnd those who sow trouble will reap the same.
By the breath of God they perish,And through a blast of his anger they come to an end.
The lion roars, and a young lion growls,But even the teeth of strong lions are broken.
A lion perishes for lack of prey,And the cubs of a lion are scattered.
Now a word was brought to me in secret,And a whisper of it reached my ear.
In troubling thoughts during visions of the night,When deep sleep falls upon men,
A terrible trembling came upon me,Filling all my bones with dread.
A spirit passed over my face;The hair of my flesh bristled.
It then stood still,But I did not recognize its appearance. A form was in front of my eyes;There was a calm, and then I heard a voice:
‘Can a mortal man be more righteous than God? Can a man be cleaner than his own Maker?’
Look! He has no faith in his servants,And he finds fault with his angels.
How much more so with those dwelling in houses of clay,Whose foundation is in the dust,Who are crushed as easily as a moth!
They are completely crushed from morning to evening;They perish forever, and no one takes notice.
Are they not like a tent whose cord is pulled out? They die without wisdom.
“Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth? Have you watched the deer give birth to their young?
Do you count the months that they must complete? Do you know the time when they give birth?
They crouch down when they give birth to their young,And their labor pains end.
Their young become strong and grow up in the open field;They go out and do not return to them.
Who set the wild donkey free,And who untied the ropes of the wild donkey?
I have made the desert plain its homeAnd the salt land its dwelling.
It scorns the tumult of the city;It does not hear the shouts of the driver.
It roams the hills, seeking pasture,Looking for every green plant.
Is the wild bull willing to serve you? Will it spend the night in your stable?
Will you hold a wild bull to the furrow with a rope,Or will it follow you to plow the valley?
Will you trust in its great strengthAnd let it do your heavy work?
Will you rely on it to bring back your harvest,And will it gather it to your threshing floor?
The wings of the ostrich flap joyfully,But can her pinions and plumage compare with the stork’s?
For she leaves her eggs on the ground,And she keeps them warm in the dust.
She forgets that some foot may crush themOr that a wild animal may trample them.
She treats her sons harshly, as if they were not hers;She has no fear that her labor may be in vain.
For God has deprived her of wisdomAnd given her no share in understanding.
But when she rises up and flaps her wings,She laughs at the horse and at its rider.
Are you the one who gives the horse its strength? Do you clothe its neck with a rustling mane?
Can you cause it to leap like a locust? Its majestic snorting is terrifying.
It paws the ground in the valley and exults mightily;It charges into the battle.
It laughs at fear and is afraid of nothing. It does not turn back because of the sword.
The quiver rattles against it,The spear and the javelin flash.
Trembling with excitement, it surges forward,It cannot stand still at the sound of the horn.
When the horn blows, it says, ‘Aha!’ It smells the battle from afarAnd hears the shouting of commanders and the battle cry.
Is it by your understanding that the falcon soars,Spreading its wings to the south?
Or is it at your order that an eagle flies upwardAnd builds its nest high up,
Spending the night on a cliff,Dwelling in its stronghold on a rocky crag?
From there it searches for food;Its eyes look far into the distance.
Its young sip up blood;And wherever the slain are, there it is.”
Zoʹphar the Naʹa·ma·thite said in reply:
“This is why my own troubling thoughts urge me to answerBecause of the agitation I feel.
I have heard a reproof that insults me;And my understanding impels me to reply.
Surely you must have always known this,For it has been so since man was put on the earth,
That the joyful cry of the wicked is briefAnd the rejoicing of the godless one is for a moment.
Although his greatness ascends to heavenAnd his head reaches to the clouds,
He will perish forever like his own dung;Those who used to see him will say, ‘Where is he?’
He will fly off like a dream, and they will not find him;He will be chased away like a vision of the night.
The eye that once saw him will not do so again,And his place will behold him no more.
His own children will seek the favor of the poor,And his own hands will give back his wealth.
His bones were full of youthful vigor,But it will lie down with him in mere dust.
If what is bad tastes sweet in his mouth,If he hides it under his tongue,
If he savors it and does not let it goBut keeps holding it in his mouth,
His food will turn sour inside him;It will become like the poison of cobras within him.
He has swallowed down wealth, but he will vomit it up;God will empty it out of his belly.
The venom of cobras he will suck;The fangs of a viper will kill him.
He will never see the streams of water,The torrents of honey and butter.
He will give back his goods without consuming them;He will not enjoy the wealth from his trade.
For he has crushed and abandoned the poor;He has seized a house that he did not build.
But he will feel no peace within himself;His wealth will not help him escape.
There is nothing left for him to devour;That is why his prosperity will not last.
When his wealth reaches its peak, anxiety will overtake him;The full force of misfortune will come against him.
As he fills his belly,God will send his burning anger upon him,Raining it down upon him into his bowels.
When he flees from weapons of iron,Arrows from a copper bow will pierce him.
He pulls an arrow from his back,A glittering weapon from his gall,And terror seizes him.
Total darkness awaits his treasures;A fire that no one fanned will consume him;Calamity awaits any survivors in his tent.
Heaven will uncover his error;The earth will rise up against him.
A flood will sweep his house away;It will be a heavy torrent on the day of God’s anger.
This is the wicked man’s share from God,The inheritance that God has decreed for him.”
Then Job said in reply:
“Surely you are the people who know,And wisdom will die out with you!
But I too have understanding. I am not inferior to you. Who does not know these things?
I have become a laughingstock to my companions,One calling to God for an answer. A righteous and blameless man is a laughingstock.
The carefree person has contempt for calamity,Thinking it is only for those whose feet are unsteady.
The tents of robbers are at peace,And those who provoke God are secure,Those who have their god in their hands.
However, ask, please, the animals, and they will instruct you;Also the birds of the heavens, and they will tell you.
Or give consideration to the earth, and it will instruct you;And the fish of the sea will declare it to you.
Who among all these does not knowThat the hand of Jehovah has done this?
In his hand is the life of every living thingAnd the spirit of every human.
Does not the ear test out wordsAs the tongue tastes food?
Is not wisdom found among the aged,And does not understanding come with a long life?
With him there are wisdom and mightiness;He has counsel and understanding.
When he tears something down, it cannot be rebuilt;What he has shut, no man can open.
When he withholds the waters, everything dries up;When he sends them out, they overwhelm the earth.
With him there are strength and practical wisdom;To him belong the one going astray and the one leading astray;
He makes counselors go barefoot,And he makes fools of judges.
He loosens the bonds imposed by kings,And he binds a belt around their waist.
He makes priests walk barefoot,And he overthrows those who are firmly established in power;
He deprives trusted advisers of speechAnd takes away the sensibleness of old men;
He pours out contempt upon nobles,And he makes powerful ones weak;
He reveals deep things from the darkness,And he brings deep darkness into the light;
He makes nations grow great in order to destroy them;He enlarges nations, that he may lead them into exile.
He takes away the understanding of the leaders of the peopleAnd makes them wander in trackless wastelands.
They grope in darkness, where there is no light;He makes them wander about like drunken men.
Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite said in reply:
“How long before you stop making such speeches? Show some understanding so that we may then speak.
Why should we be viewed as animalsAnd be considered stupid in your eyes?
Even if you tear yourself to pieces in your anger,Will the earth be abandoned for your sake,Or will the rock move away from its place?
Yes, the light of the wicked will be extinguished,And the flame of his fire will not shine.
The light in his tent will certainly grow dark,And the lamp over him will be extinguished.
His vigorous stride is shortened,And his own counsel will make him fall.
For his feet will lead him into a net,And he will wander onto its mesh.
A trap will seize him by the heel;A snare will catch him.
A rope is hidden for him on the ground,And a trap lies in his path.
Terrors frighten him on all sidesAnd chase him at his feet.
His strength fails him,And disaster will make him stagger.
His skin is eaten away;The most deadly disease consumes his limbs.
He is torn away from the security of his tentAnd marched to the king of terrors.
Strangers will live in his tent;Sulfur will be scattered on his home.
His roots will dry up beneath him,And his branches will wither above him.
The memory of him will fade from the earth,And in the street his name will be unknown.
He will be driven from the light into the darknessAnd chased away from the productive land.
He will have no offspring and no descendants among his people,And he will be without a survivor in the place where he lives.
When his day comes, the people in the West will be appalledAnd the people in the East will be seized with horror.
This is what happens to the tents of a wrongdoerAnd to the place of the one who has not known God.”
Job said in reply:
“Even today I will complain stubbornly;My strength is exhausted because of my sighing.
If only I knew where to find God! I would go to his place of dwelling.
I would present my case before himAnd fill my mouth with arguments;
I would learn how he would answer meAnd take note of what he says to me.
Would he contend with me using his great power? No, surely he would give me a hearing.
There the upright one could set matters straight with him,And I would be acquitted once and for all by my Judge.
But if I go east, he is not there;And I return and I cannot find him.
When he is working on the left, I cannot look upon him;Then he turns to the right, but I still do not see him.
But he knows the path I have taken. After he has tested me, I will come out as pure gold.
My feet have closely followed his footsteps;I have kept to his way without deviating.
I have not departed from the commandment of his lips. I have treasured up his sayings even more than what was required of me.
When he is determined, who can resist him? When he wants to do something, he does it.
For he will carry out completely what has been determined for me,And he has many such things in store.
That is why I am anxious because of him;When I think about him, my fear grows.
God has made me fainthearted,And the Almighty has made me afraid.
But I have not yet been silenced by the darknessNor by the gloom that has covered my face.
E·liʹhu continued his response:
“Are you so convinced that you are right that you would say,‘I am more righteous than God’?
For you say, ‘What does it matter to you? Am I better off than if I had sinned?’
I will reply to youAnd to your companions with you.
Look up to heaven and see,Observe the clouds, which are high above you.
If you sin, how do you hurt him? If your transgressions multiply, what do you do to him?
If you are righteous, what do you give him;What does he receive from you?
Your wickedness affects only a human like yourself,And your righteousness, a son of man.
People cry out when under great oppression;They cry for relief from the domination of the powerful.
But no one says, ‘Where is God, my Grand Maker,The one causing songs to be sung in the night?’
He teaches us more than the beasts of the earth,And he makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens.
People cry out, but he does not answer,Because of the pride of the wicked.
Surely God does not hear an empty cry;The Almighty does not pay attention to it.
How much less, then, when you complain that you do not see him! Your legal case is before him, so you should wait anxiously for him.
For he has not angrily called for an accounting;Nor has he taken note of your extreme rashness.
Job opens his mouth wide in vain;He multiplies words without knowledge.”
So E·liʹhu continued to say in reply:
“Listen to my words, you who are wise;Hear me, you who know so much.
For the ear tests wordsJust as the tongue tastes food.
Let us evaluate for ourselves what is right;Let us decide among ourselves what is good.
For Job has said, ‘I am in the right,But God has denied me justice.
Would I lie about what my own judgment should be? My wound is incurable, though there is no transgression.’
What other man is like Job,Who drinks up derision like water?
He is in company with wrongdoersAnd in association with wicked men.
For he has said, ‘A man does not benefitFrom trying to please God.’
So listen to me, you men of understanding: It is unthinkable for the true God to act wickedly,For the Almighty to do wrong!
For he will reward a man according to what he doesAnd bring upon him the consequences of his ways.
For a certainty, God does not act wickedly;The Almighty does not pervert justice.
Who put him in charge of the earth,And who appointed him over the whole world?
If he fixes his attention on them,If he gathers their spirit and breath to himself,
All humans would perish together,And mankind would return to the dust.
So if you have understanding, pay attention to this;Listen carefully to what I say.
Should someone who hates justice be in control,Or would you condemn a powerful one who is righteous?
Would you say to a king, ‘You are good for nothing,’ Or to nobles, ‘You are wicked’?
There is One who does not show partiality to princesAnd who does not favor the rich over the poor,For they are all the work of his hands.
They may die suddenly, in the middle of the night;They shake violently and pass away;Even the powerful are removed, but not by human hands.
For God’s eyes are upon the ways of a man,And He sees all his steps.
There is no darkness or deep shadowWhere wrongdoers can conceal themselves.
For God has not set an appointed time for any manTo appear before him in judgment.
He breaks the powerful without needing to investigateAnd sets up others in their place.
For he knows what they are doing;He overthrows them during the night, and they are crushed.
He strikes them for their wickedness,In a place where all can see,
Because they have turned away from following himAnd have no regard for any of his ways;
They cause the poor to cry out to him,So that he hears the outcry of the helpless.
When God remains silent, who can condemn him? When he hides his face, who can see him? Whether toward a nation or a man, the result is the same,
So that a godless person may not ruleOr lay snares for the people.
For will anyone say to God,‘I have been punished, although I have committed no offense;
Teach me what I have failed to see;If I have done anything wrong, I will not do it again’?
Should he reward you on your terms when you reject his judgment? You must decide, not I. So tell me what you know so well.
Men of understanding will say to me—Any wise man who hears me—
‘Job speaks without knowledge,And his words lack insight.’
Let Job be tested to the limitBecause his replies are like those of wicked men!
He adds rebellion to his sin;He scornfully claps his hands before usAnd multiplies his words against the true God!”
Job then said in reply:
“If only my anguish could be fully weighedAnd put on scales together with my calamity!
For now it is heavier than the sands of the seas. That is why my words have been wild talk.
For the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me,And my spirit is drinking their venom;The terrors from God are lined up against me.
Will a wild donkey cry out when it has grass,Or will a bull bellow when it has fodder?
Is tasteless food eaten without salt,Or is there flavor in the juice of a mallow?
I have refused to touch such things. They are like contamination in my food.
O that my request would be realizedAnd that God would grant my desire!
That God would be willing to crush me,And that he would reach out his hand and do away with me!
For even that would bring me comfort;I would leap for joy despite the unrelenting pain,For I have not denied the sayings of the Holy One.
Do I have the strength to keep waiting? And what end awaits me, that I should continue to live?
Is my strength like that of rock? Or is my flesh made of copper?
Is there any way that I can help myselfWhen all my means of support has been driven from me?
Anyone who withholds loyal love from his fellow manWill forsake the fear of the Almighty.
My own brothers have been as treacherous as a winter stream,Like the water of winter streams that dry up.
They are darkened by ice,And in them the melting snow is hidden.
But in due season they become waterless and come to an end;When it becomes hot, they dry up.
Their course is diverted;They flow into the desert and vanish.
The caravans of Teʹma look for them;The travelers from Sheʹba wait for them.
They are ashamed because of their misplaced trust;They come there only to be disappointed.
For this is how you have become to me;You have seen the terror of my calamity, and you are afraid.
Have I said, ‘Give me something,’ Or requested that you make a gift for me from your wealth?
Have I asked to be rescued from the hand of an enemyOr to be saved from oppressors?
Instruct me, and I will be silent;Help me to understand my mistake.
Honest words are not painful! But what benefit can be found in your reproof?
Are you scheming to reprove my words,A desperate man’s sayings, which the wind blows away?
You would also cast lots over an orphanAnd sell your own friend!
So now turn and look at me,For I would not lie to your very faces.
Reconsider, please—do not misjudge me—Yes, reconsider, for my righteousness is yet intact.
Is my tongue speaking unjustly? Does my palate not discern that something is wrong?
Jehovah continued to answer Job:
“Should a faultfinder contend with the Almighty? Let the one who wants to reprove God answer.”
Job said in answer to Jehovah:
“Look! I am unworthy. What can I reply to you? I put my hand over my mouth.
I spoke once, but I will not answer again;Twice, but I will say no more.”
Then Jehovah answered Job out of the windstorm:
“Brace yourself, please, like a man;I will question you, and you inform me.
Will you call into question my justice? Will you condemn me so that you may be right?
Do you have an arm as powerful as the true God’s,Or can your voice thunder like his?
Adorn yourself, please, with glory and majesty;Clothe yourself with dignity and splendor.
Release the fury of your anger;Look at everyone who is haughty, and bring him low.
Look at everyone who is haughty, and humble him,And tread down the wicked where they stand.
Hide them all in the dust;Bind them in the hidden place,
Then even I would acknowledge to youThat your right hand can save you.
Here, now, is Be·heʹmoth, which I made as I made you. It eats grass like a bull.
Look at the strength in its hipsAnd the power in the muscles of its belly!
It stiffens its tail like a cedar;The sinews of its thighs are woven together.
Its bones are tubes of copper;Its limbs are like wrought-iron rods.
It ranks first among the works of God;Only its Maker can approach it with his sword.
For the mountains produce food for it,Where all the wild animals play.
It lies down under the lotus trees,In the shelter of the reeds of the marsh.
The lotus trees cast their shadow on it,And the poplars of the valley surround it.
If the river is turbulent, it does not panic. It is confident, although the Jordan rushes against its mouth.
Can anyone capture it while it is watching,Or pierce its nose with a hook?
Job continued his discourse, saying:
“If only I were in the months gone by,In the days when God was watching over me,
When he caused his lamp to shine upon my head,When I walked through darkness by his light,
When I was in my prime,When God’s friendship was felt in my tent,
When the Almighty was still with me,When my children were all around me,
When my steps were awash in butter,And the rocks poured out streams of oil for me.
When I used to go out to the city gateAnd take my seat in the public square,
The young men would see me and step aside,And even the old men would rise and remain standing.
Princes refrained from speaking;They would put their hand over their mouth.
The voices of the prominent men were silenced;Their tongue was stuck to the roof of their mouth.
Whoever heard me would speak well of me,And those who saw me would testify for me.
For I would rescue the poor who cried for help,Along with the fatherless child and anyone who had no helper.
The one about to perish would bless me,And I made the heart of the widow rejoice.
I put on righteousness as my clothing;My justice was like a robe and a turban.
I became eyes to the blindAnd feet to the lame.
I was a father to the poor;I would investigate the legal case of those I did not know.
I would break the jaws of the wrongdoerAnd tear the prey away from his teeth.
I used to say, ‘I will die in my own home,And my days will be as numerous as the grains of sand.
My roots will spread out into the waters,And dew will stay all night on my branches.
My glory is constantly renewed,And the bow in my hand will keep shooting.’
People would listen expectantly,Waiting in silence for my advice.
After I had spoken, they had nothing more to say;My words would fall gently on their ears.
They waited for me as for the rain;They opened their mouth wide as for the spring rain.
When I smiled at them, they could hardly believe it;The light of my face would reassure them.
I gave them direction as their head,And I lived like a king among his troops,Like one who comforts the mourners.
Bilʹdad the Shuʹhite then said in reply:
“How long will you keep speaking like this? The words of your mouth are but a mighty wind!
Will God pervert justice,Or will the Almighty pervert righteousness?
If your sons sinned against him,He let them be punished for their revolt;
But if you would just look to GodAnd plead with the Almighty for favor,
And if you were truly pure and upright,He would pay attention to youAnd restore you to your rightful place.
And though your beginning was small,Your future would be great.
Ask, please, the former generation,And pay attention to the things their fathers found out.
For we were born only yesterday, and we know nothing,Because our days on earth are a shadow.
Will they not instruct youAnd tell you what they know?
Will a papyrus plant grow tall where there is no marsh? Will a reed grow tall without water?
While it is still in the bud, not yet plucked off,It will dry up before any other plant.
This is the outcome of all who forget God,For the hope of the godless will perish,
Whose confidence is in vainAnd whose trust is as fragile as a spider’s web.
He will lean against his house, but it will not keep standing;He will try to hold on to it, but it will not last.
He is a moist plant in the sunlight,And his shoots spread out in the garden.
In a heap of stones, his roots become entwined;He looks for a house among the stones.
But when he is uprooted from his place,That place will deny him and say, ‘I have never seen you.’
Yes, that is how he will disappear;Then others will spring up from the dust.
Surely God will not reject those who keep integrity;Nor will he support evil men,
For he will yet fill your mouth with laughterAnd your lips with shouts of joy.
Those hating you will be clothed with shame,And the tent of wicked ones will be no more.”
Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right handUntil I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”
Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”
Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force. In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn,You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.
Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind: “You are a priest foreverIn the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”
Jehovah will be at your right hand;He will crush kings on the day of his anger.
He will execute judgment against the nations;He will fill the land with dead bodies. He will crush the leader of a vast land.
He will drink from the stream along the road. Therefore, he will hold his head high.
Let me praise Jehovah;Let everything within me praise his holy name.
Let me praise Jehovah;May I never forget all that he has done.
He forgives all your errorsAnd heals all your ailments;
He reclaims your life from the pitAnd crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.
He satisfies you with good things all your life,So that your youth is renewed like that of an eagle.
Jehovah acts with righteousness and justiceFor all who are oppressed.
He made known his ways to Moses,His deeds to the sons of Israel.
Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.
He will not always find fault,Nor will he stay resentful forever.
He has not dealt with us according to our sins,Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth,So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him.
As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset,So far off from us he has put our transgressions.
As a father shows mercy to his sons,Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.
For he well knows how we are formed,Remembering that we are dust.
As for mortal man, his days are like those of grass;He blooms like a blossom of the field.
But when a wind blows, it is no more,As though it was never there.
But the loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternityToward those who fear him,And his righteousness toward their children’s children,
Toward those who keep his covenantAnd those who are careful to observe his orders.
Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens;And his kingship rules over everything.
Praise Jehovah, all you his angels, mighty in power,Who carry out his word, obeying his voice.
Praise Jehovah, all his armies,His ministers who do his will.
Praise Jehovah, all his works,In all the places where he rules. Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.
O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.
If errors were what you watch, O Jah,Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?
For with you there is true forgiveness,So that you may be held in awe.
I hope in Jehovah, my whole being hopes in him;I wait for his word.
I eagerly wait for Jehovah,More than watchmen wait for the morning,Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.
Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah,For Jehovah is loyal in his love,And he has great power to redeem.
He will redeem Israel from all their errors.
In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame.
In your righteousness save me and rescue me. Incline your ear to me and save me.
Become for me a rock fortressWhere I can always enter. Give the command to save me,For you are my crag and my stronghold.
O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked,From the grasp of the unjust oppressor.
For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah;I have trusted in you since my youth.
I have depended on you from birth;It was you who took me from my mother’s womb. I praise you constantly.
I have become like a miracle to many,But you are my strong refuge.
My mouth is filled with your praise;All day long I tell about your splendor.
Do not cast me off in my old age;Do not abandon me when my strength fails.
My enemies speak against me,And those seeking to take my life conspire together,
Saying: “God has abandoned him. Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.”
O God, do not remain far away from me. O my God, hurry to help me.
May those who are resisting meBe put to shame and perish. May those seeking my calamityBe covered with disgrace and humiliation.
But as for me, I will continue to wait;I will add to your praise.
My mouth will recount your righteousness,All day long your acts of salvation,Though they are too many for me to grasp.
I will come and tell about your mighty acts,O Sovereign Lord Jehovah;I will mention your righteousness, yours alone.
O God, you have taught me from my youth,And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works.
Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your powerAnd about your mightiness to all those who are to come.
Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights;You have done great things;O God, who is like you?
Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity,Revive me again;Bring me up from the depths of the earth.
May you increase my greatnessAnd surround and comfort me.
Then I will praise you on a stringed instrumentBecause of your faithfulness, O my God. I will sing your praises with the harp,O Holy One of Israel.
My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you,For you have saved my life.
My tongue will speak about your righteousness all day long,For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced.
Why, O God, have you rejected us forever? Why does your anger burn against the flock of your pasture?
Remember the people you acquired long ago,The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance. Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided.
Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins. The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place.
Your foes roared inside your meeting place. They have set up their own banners as signs there.
They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest.
They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars.
They set your sanctuary on fire. They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground.
They and their offspring have said in their hearts: “All the meeting places of God in the land must be burned.”
There are no signs for us to see;There is no longer any prophet,And no one among us knows how long this will last.
How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever?
Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand? Draw it out of your bosom and put an end to them.
But God is my King from long ago,The one performing acts of salvation on the earth.
You stirred up the sea with your strength;You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters.
You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than;You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts.
You cut openings for the springs and the streams;You dried up ever-flowing rivers.
The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light and the sun.
You set up all the boundaries of the earth;You made summer and winter.
Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah,How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect.
Do not surrender the life of your turtledove to the wild beasts. Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever.
Remember the covenant,For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence.
May the crushed one not turn away disappointed;May the lowly and the poor praise your name.
Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case. Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long.
Do not forget what your foes are saying. The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly.
God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.
As for me, my feet had almost strayed;My steps had nearly slipped.
For I became envious of the arrogantWhen I would see the peace of the wicked.
For they have no pain in their death;Their bodies are healthy.
They are not troubled like other humans,Nor do they suffer like other men.
Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace;Violence clothes them as a garment.
Their prosperity makes their eyes bulge;They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.
They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.
They speak as if they were as high as heaven,And their tongues swagger about in the earth.
So his people turn aside to them,And they drink from their abundant water.
They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?”
Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth.
Surely in vain I have kept my heart pureAnd washed my hands in innocence.
And I was troubled all day long;Every morning I was chastised.
But if I had said these things,I would have betrayed your people.
When I tried to understand it,It was troubling to me
Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God,And I discerned their future.
Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin.
How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end!
Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah,When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss their image.
But my heart was sour,And deep inside I felt sharp pain.
I was unreasoning and lacked understanding;I was like a senseless beast before you.
But now I am continually with you;You have taken hold of my right hand.
You guide me with your advice,And afterward you will lead me to glory.
Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth.
My body and my heart may fail,But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever.
Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to everyone who immorally leaves you.
But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge,To declare all your works.
Judge me, O God,Defend my legal case against a disloyal nation. Rescue me from the man of deception and unrighteousness.
For you are my God, my fortress. Why have you cast me off? Why must I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy?
Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me;May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle.
Then I will come to the altar of God,To God, my exceeding joy. And I will praise you with the harp, O God, my God.
Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
As a deer that longs for streams of water,So I long for you, O God.
I do thirst for God, for the living God. When may I come and appear before God?
My tears are my food day and night;All day long people taunt me: “Where is your God?”
These things I remember, and I pour out my soul,For I once walked along with the multitude;I used to walk solemnly before them to the house of God,With sounds of rejoicing and thanksgiving,Those of a crowd celebrating a festival.
Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior.
My God, I am in despair. That is why I remember you,From the land of Jordan and the peaks of Herʹmon,From Mount Mi·zarʹ.
Deep waters call to deep watersAt the sound of your waterfalls. All your surging waves have overwhelmed me.
By day Jehovah will grant me his loyal love,And by night his song will be with me—a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God, my crag: “Why have you forgotten me? Why should I walk about sad because of the oppression by my enemy?”
With murderous hostility my enemies taunt me;All day long they taunt me: “Where is your God?”
Why am I in despair? Why is this turmoil within me? Wait for God,For I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior and my God.
Happy is anyone who shows consideration to the lowly one;Jehovah will rescue him in the day of calamity.
Jehovah will guard him and keep him alive. He will be pronounced happy in the earth;You will never turn him over to the will of his enemies.
Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed;During his sickness you will completely change his bed.
For I said: “O Jehovah, show me favor. Heal me, for I have sinned against you.”
But my enemies speak evil about me: “When will he die and his name perish?”
If one of them comes to see me, his heart speaks falsely. He gathers something harmful to say;Then he goes out and spreads it abroad.
All those who hate me whisper to one another;They are scheming something bad against me:
“A dreadful thing has overtaken him;Now that he is down, he will not rise again.”
Even the man at peace with me, one whom I trusted,Who was eating my bread, has lifted his heel against me.
But you, O Jehovah, show me favor and raise me up,So that I may repay them.
By this I will know that you are pleased with me: When my enemy cannot shout in triumph over me.
As for me, you uphold me because of my integrity;You will keep me in your presence forever.
May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity. Amen and Amen.
Hear my plea for justice, O Jehovah;Pay attention to my cry for help;Listen to my prayer spoken without deceit.
May you make a just decision in my behalf;May your eyes see what is right.
You have examined my heart, you have inspected me by night;You have refined me;You will find that I have not schemed anything bad,And my mouth has not transgressed.
As for the activities of men,In accord with the word of your lips, I avoid the paths of the robber.
Let my steps stay on your tracksSo that my feet will not stumble.
I do call on you, because you will answer me, O God. Incline your ear to me. Hear my words.
Show your loyal love in a wonderful way,O Savior of those seeking refuge at your right handFrom those who rebel against you.
Guard me like the pupil of your eye;Conceal me in the shadow of your wings.
Guard me from the wicked who attack me,From my mortal enemies who surround me.
They have become insensitive;With their mouth they speak arrogantly;
Now they hem us in;They watch for the chance to cause our downfall.
He is like a lion eager to tear its prey to pieces,Like a young lion crouching in ambush.
Rise up, O Jehovah, to confront him and bring him down;Rescue me from the wicked with your sword;
Rescue me with your hand, O Jehovah,From men of this world, whose share is in this life,Those whom you fill with the good things you provideAnd who leave an inheritance to their many sons.
But as for me, in righteousness I will see your face;I am satisfied to awaken in your presence.
I will praise you with all my heart. In the face of other gods,I will sing praises.
I will bow down toward your holy temple,And I will praise your nameBecause of your loyal love and your faithfulness. For you have magnified your saying and your name above everything else.
On the day I called, you answered me;You made me bold and strong.
All the kings of the earth will praise you, O Jehovah,For they will have heard the promises you have spoken.
They will sing about the ways of Jehovah,For the glory of Jehovah is great.
Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble,But the haughty he knows only from a distance.
Even when I walk in the midst of danger, you will preserve me alive. You stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies;Your right hand will save me.
Jehovah will accomplish all things in my behalf. O Jehovah, your loyal love endures forever;Do not forsake the works of your hands.
In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame. Rescue me because of your righteousness.
Incline your ear to me. Come quickly to my rescue. Become for me a mountain stronghold,A fortified place to save me.
For you are my crag and my stronghold;For the sake of your name, you will lead me and guide me.
You will free me from the net that they have secretly laid for me,For you are my fortress.
Into your hand I entrust my spirit. You have redeemed me, O Jehovah, the God of truth.
I hate those who are devoted to worthless, vain idols,But as for me, I trust in Jehovah.
I will rejoice greatly in your loyal love,For you have seen my affliction;You are aware of my deep distress.
You have not handed me over to the enemy,But you make me stand in a place of safety.
Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. Anguish has made my eyes weak, my whole body as well.
My life is consumed with griefAnd my years with groaning. My strength is waning because of my error;My bones grow weak.
I am scorned by all my adversaries,Especially my neighbors. And I am dreaded by my acquaintances;When they see me in public, they flee from me.
I am put out of their heart and forgotten, as if I were dead;I am like a broken jar.
I have heard many evil rumors;Terror surrounds me. When they gather together as one against me,They scheme to take away my life.
But I trust in you, O Jehovah. I declare: “You are my God.”
My days are in your hand. Rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from those persecuting me.
Make your face shine upon your servant. Save me by your loyal love.
O Jehovah, may I not be put to shame when I call on you. May the wicked be put to shame;May they be silenced in the Grave.
May lying lips become speechless,Lips that speak arrogantly against the righteous, with haughtiness and contempt.
How abundant your goodness is! You have stored it up for those who fear you,And you have shown it before all men, in behalf of those taking refuge in you.
You will conceal them in the secret place of your presenceFrom the schemes of men;You will hide them in your shelterFrom malicious attacks.
May Jehovah be praised,For in a wonderful way, he has shown his loyal love to me in a besieged city.
As for me, I panicked and said: “I will perish from before you.” But you heard my pleas for help when I cried out to you.
Love Jehovah, all you who are loyal to him! Jehovah protects the faithful,But he repays exceedingly anyone showing haughtiness.
Be courageous, and may your heart be strong,All you who are waiting for Jehovah.
My heart is stirred by something good. I say: “My song is about a king.” May my tongue be the stylus of a skilled copyist.
You are the most handsome of the sons of men. Gracious speech flows from your lips. That is why God has blessed you forever.
Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one,In your dignity and your splendor.
And in your splendor go on to victory;Ride in the cause of truth and humility and righteousness,And your right hand will accomplish awe-inspiring things.
Your arrows are sharp, making peoples fall before you;They pierce the hearts of the king’s enemies.
God is your throne forever and ever;The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of uprightness.
You loved righteousness, and you hated wickedness. That is why God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions.
All your garments are scented with myrrh and aloeswood and cassia;From the grand ivory palace, stringed instruments make you rejoice.
The daughters of kings are among your ladies of honor. The royal consort has taken her stand at your right hand, adorned in gold of Oʹphir.
Listen, O daughter, pay attention and incline your ear;Forget your people and your father’s house.
And the king will long for your beauty,For he is your lord,So bow down to him.
The daughter of Tyre will come with a gift;The wealthiest of men will seek your favor.
Inside the palace the king’s daughter is absolutely magnificent;Her clothing is adorned with gold.
She will be brought to the king in richly woven garments. The virgin companions following her are brought in before you.
They will be brought with rejoicing and joy;They will enter into the king’s palace.
Your sons will take the place of your forefathers. You will appoint them as princes in all the earth.
I will make your name known throughout all generations to come. That is why peoples will praise you forever and ever.
We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you;Your name is near,And people declare your wondrous works.
You say: “When I set a time,I judge with fairness.
When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved,It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (Selah)
I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.
Do not exalt your strength up highOr speak with arrogance.
For exaltation does not comeFrom the east or the west or the south.
For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.
For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand;The wine is foaming and is fully mixed. He will surely pour it out,And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.”
But as for me, I will proclaim it forever;I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
For he says: “I will cut off all the strength of the wicked,But the strength of the righteous will be exalted.”
The heavens are declaring the glory of God;The skies above proclaim the work of his hands.
Day after day their speech bubbles forth,And night after night they reveal knowledge.
There is no speech, and there are no words;Their voice is not heard.
But into all the earth their sound has gone out,And to the ends of the inhabited earth their message. In the heavens he has pitched a tent for the sun;
It is like a bridegroom emerging from the bridal chamber;It rejoices like a mighty man running his course.
It emerges from one end of the heavens,And it circles to their other end;And nothing is concealed from its heat.
The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength. The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.
The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice;The commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine.
The fear of Jehovah is pure, lasting forever. The judgments of Jehovah are true, altogether righteous.
They are more desirable than gold,Than much fine gold,And sweeter than honey, the honey that drips from the combs.
By them your servant has been warned;In keeping them, there is a large reward.
Who can discern mistakes? Pronounce me innocent from sins I am unaware of.
And hold your servant back from presumptuous acts;Do not let them dominate me. Then I will be complete,And innocent of blatant sins.
May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heartBe pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.
Shout joyfully, you righteous ones, because of Jehovah. It is fitting for the upright to praise him.
Give thanks to Jehovah with the harp;Sing praises to him with a ten-stringed instrument.
Sing to him a new song;Play skillfully on the strings, along with shouts of joy.
For the word of Jehovah is upright,And everything he does is trustworthy.
He loves righteousness and justice. The earth is filled with Jehovah’s loyal love.
By the word of Jehovah the heavens were made,And by the spirit of his mouth everything in them.
He gathers the seawaters like a dam;He puts the surging waters in storehouses.
Let the whole earth fear Jehovah. Let the inhabitants of the productive land be in awe of him.
For he spoke, and it came to be;He commanded, and it stood firm.
Jehovah has frustrated the schemes of the nations;He has thwarted the plans of the peoples.
But the decisions of Jehovah will stand forever;The thoughts of his heart are from generation to generation.
Happy is the nation whose God is Jehovah,The people he has chosen as his own possession.
Jehovah looks down from heaven;He sees all the sons of men.
From his place of residence,He gazes on the inhabitants of the earth.
He is the one forming the hearts of all;He examines all their works.
No king is saved by a large army;A mighty man is not saved by his great power.
The horse is a false hope for salvation;Its great strength does not ensure escape.
Look! The eye of Jehovah watches over those fearing him,Those waiting for his loyal love,
To rescue them from deathAnd to keep them alive during famine.
We are in expectation of Jehovah. He is our helper and our shield.
Our hearts rejoice in him,For we trust in his holy name.
May your loyal love rest upon us, O Jehovah,While we keep waiting for you.
Come, let us shout joyfully to Jehovah! Let us shout in triumph to our Rock of salvation.
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.
For Jehovah is a great God,A great King over all other gods.
In his hand are the depths of the earth;The mountain peaks belong to him.
The sea, which he made, belongs to him,And his hands formed the dry land.
Come, let us worship and bow down;Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.
For he is our God,And we are the people of his pasture,The sheep in his care. Today if you listen to his voice,
Do not harden your heart as at Merʹi·bah,As in the day of Masʹsah in the wilderness,
When your forefathers tested me;They challenged me, though they had seen my works.
For 40 years I felt a loathing toward that generation, and I said: “They are a people who always go astray in their hearts;They have not come to know my ways.”
So I swore in my anger: “They will not enter into my rest.”
It is good to give thanks to JehovahAnd to sing praises to your name, O Most High,
To declare your loyal love in the morningAnd your faithfulness during the nights,
Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument and a lute,By the melodious sound of a harp.
For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds;Because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully.
How great your works are, O Jehovah! How very deep your thoughts are!
No unreasoning man can know them;And no foolish person can understand this:
When the wicked sprout like weedsAnd all the wrongdoers flourish,It is that they may be annihilated forever.
But you are exalted forever, O Jehovah.
Indeed, look in triumph on your enemies, O Jehovah,Look at how your enemies will perish;All the wrongdoers will be scattered.
But you will exalt my strength like that of a wild bull;I will moisten my skin with fresh oil.
My eyes will look in triumph on my foes;My ears will hear about the downfall of the evil men who attack me.
But the righteous will flourish like a palm treeAnd grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non.
They are planted in the house of Jehovah;They flourish in the courtyards of our God.
Even in old age they will still be thriving;They will remain vigorous and fresh,
Declaring that Jehovah is upright. He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness.
O God, do not be silent;Do not keep quiet or still, O Divine One.
For look! your enemies are in an uproar;Those who hate you act arrogantly.
With cunning they secretly plot against your people;They conspire against your treasured ones.
They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation,So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”
They devise a unified strategy;They have made an alliance against you—
The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,
Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek,Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.
As·syrʹi·a too has joined them;They give support to the sons of Lot. (Selah)
Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an,As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream of Kiʹshon.
They were annihilated at En-dor;They became manure for the ground.
Make their nobles like Oʹreb and ZeʹebAnd their princes like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna,
For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.”
O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,Like stubble blown about by the wind.
Like a fire that burns up the forest,Like a flame that scorches the mountains,
So may you pursue them with your tempestAnd terrify them with your windstorm.
Cover their faces with dishonor,So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah.
May they be put to shame and be terrified forever;May they be disgraced and perish;
May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah,You alone are the Most High over all the earth.
Why do you boast about your evil acts, you mighty one? The loyal love of God lasts all day long.
Your tongue, as sharp as a razor,Schemes harm and works deceitfully.
You love evil more than what is good,Lying more than speaking what is right. (Selah)
You love every harmful word,O you deceitful tongue!
That is why God will pull you down once and for all;He will snatch you up and tear you away from your tent;He will uproot you from the land of the living. (Selah)
The righteous ones will see it and be filled with awe,And they will laugh at him.
“Here is a man who did not make God his refuge,But he trusted in his great richesAnd relied on his own evil plots.”
But I will be like a luxuriant olive tree in God’s house;My trust is in God’s loyal love, forever and ever.
I will praise you forever because you have taken action;In the presence of your loyal ones,I will hope in your name, for it is good.
O Jehovah, remember DavidAnd all his suffering;
How he swore to Jehovah,How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:
“I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;
I will not allow my eyes to sleep,Nor my eyelids to slumber
Until I find a place for Jehovah,A fine residence for the Powerful One of Jacob.”
Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah;We found it in the fields of the forest.
Let us come into his residence;Let us bow down at his footstool.
Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place,You and the Ark of your strength.
May your priests be clothed with righteousness,And may your loyal ones shout joyfully.
For the sake of David your servant,Do not reject your anointed one.
Jehovah has sworn to David;He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring,I will place on your throne.
If your sons keep my covenantAnd my reminders that I teach them,Their sons tooWill sit on your throne forever.”
For Jehovah has chosen Zion;He has desired it for his dwelling place:
“This is my resting-place forever;Here I will dwell, for this is my desire.
I will richly bless it with provisions;I will satisfy its poor with bread.
Its priests I will clothe with salvation,And its loyal ones will shout joyfully.
There I will make the strength of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one.
I will clothe his enemies with shame,But the crown on his head will flourish.”
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat. We wept when we remembered Zion.
Upon the poplar trees in her midst,We hung our harps.
For there our captors asked us for a song,Those mocking us wanted amusement: “Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.”
How can we sing the song of JehovahOn foreign soil?
If I should forget you, O Jerusalem,Let my right hand be forgetful.
Let my tongue stick to my palateIf I do not remember you,If I do not place Jerusalem aboveMy greatest reasons for rejoicing.
Remember, O Jehovah,What the Eʹdom·ites said on the day Jerusalem fell: “Tear it down! Tear it down to its foundations!”
O daughter of Babylon, who is soon to be devastated,Happy will be the one who rewards youWith the treatment you inflicted on us.
Happy will be the one who seizes your childrenAnd dashes them against the rocks.
In Jehovah I have taken refuge. So how can you say to me: “Flee like a bird to your mountain!
See how the wicked bend the bow;They set their arrow on the bowstring,To shoot from the darkness those upright in heart.
When the foundations are torn down,What can the righteous do?”
Jehovah is in his holy temple. Jehovah’s throne is in the heavens. His own eyes see, his watchful eyes examine the sons of men.
Jehovah examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one;He hates anyone who loves violence.
Upon the wicked, he will rain down snares;Fire and sulfur and a scorching wind will be the portion of their cup.
For Jehovah is righteous; he loves righteous acts. The upright will see his face.
Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most HighWill lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.
I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold,My God in whom I trust.”
For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher,From the destructive pestilence.
With his pinions he will cover you,And under his wings you will take refuge. His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall.
You will not fear the terrors of the night,Nor the arrow that flies by day,
Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom,Nor the destruction that ravages at midday.
A thousand will fall at your sideAnd ten thousand at your right hand,But to you it will not come near.
You will only see it with your eyesAs you witness the punishment of the wicked.
Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;
No disaster will befall you,And no plague will come near your tent.
For he will give his angels a command concerning you,To guard you in all your ways.
They will carry you on their hands,So that you may not strike your foot against a stone.
On the young lion and the cobra you will tread;You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake.
God said: “Because he has affection for me, I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows my name.
He will call on me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in distress. I will rescue him and glorify him.
I will satisfy him with long life,And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”
Do not be upset because of evil menOr envious of wrongdoers.
They will quickly wither like grassAnd shrivel like green new grass.
Trust in Jehovah and do what is good;Reside in the earth, and act with faithfulness.
Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,And he will grant you the desires of your heart.
Commit your way to Jehovah;Rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.
He will make your righteousness shine like daybreak,And your justice like the midday sun.
Keep silent before JehovahAnd wait expectantly for him. Do not be upset by the manWho succeeds in carrying out his schemes.
Let go of anger and abandon rage;Do not become upset and turn to doing evil.
For evil men will be done away with,But those hoping in Jehovah will possess the earth.
Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more;You will look at where they were,And they will not be there.
But the meek will possess the earth,And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.
The wicked man plots against the righteous;He grinds his teeth at him.
But Jehovah will laugh at him,For He knows that his day will come.
The wicked draw their swords and bend their bowsTo bring down the oppressed and the poor,To slaughter those whose way is upright.
But their sword will pierce their own heart;Their bows will be broken.
Better is the little of the righteous oneThan the abundance of many wicked ones.
For the arms of the wicked will be broken,But Jehovah will support the righteous.
Jehovah is aware of what the blameless go through,And their inheritance will last forever.
They will not be put to shame in the time of disaster;In the time of famine they will have plenty.
But the wicked will perish;The enemies of Jehovah will vanish like glorious pastures;They will vanish like smoke.
The wicked one borrows and does not repay,But the righteous one is generous and giving.
Those blessed by Him will possess the earth,But those cursed by Him will be done away with.
Jehovah guides the steps of a manWhen He finds pleasure in his way.
Although he may fall, he will not be hurled down,For Jehovah supports him by the hand.
I was once young and now I am old,But I have not seen anyone righteous abandoned,Nor his children looking for bread.
He always lends freely,And his children are in line for a blessing.
Turn away from bad and do what is good,And you will remain forever.
For Jehovah loves justice,And he will not abandon his loyal ones. ע [Ayin] They will always be guarded;But the descendants of the wicked will be done away with.
The righteous will possess the earth,And they will live forever on it.
The mouth of the righteous one imparts wisdom,And his tongue speaks about justice.
The law of his God is in his heart;His steps will not falter.
The wicked watches the righteous,Seeking to put him to death.
But Jehovah will not abandon him to the hand of that oneOr find him guilty when he is judged.
Hope in Jehovah and follow his way,And he will exalt you to take possession of the earth. When the wicked are done away with, you will see it.
I have seen the ruthless, evil manSpreading out like a luxuriant tree in its native soil.
But he suddenly passed away and was gone;I kept searching for him, and he could not be found.
Take note of the blameless one,And keep the upright one in sight,For the future of that man will be peaceful.
But all the transgressors will be destroyed;The future of wicked people will be cut off.
The salvation of the righteous is from Jehovah;He is their fortress in the time of distress.
Jehovah will help them and rescue them. He will rescue them from the wicked and save them,Because they take refuge in him.
O Jehovah, you have been our dwelling place throughout all generations.
Before the mountains were bornOr you brought forth the earth and the productive land,From everlasting to everlasting, you are God.
You make mortal man return to dust;You say: “Return, you sons of men.”
For a thousand years are in your eyes just as yesterday when it is past,Just as a watch during the night.
You sweep them away; they become like mere sleep;In the morning they are like grass that sprouts.
In the morning it blossoms and is renewed,But by evening it withers and dries up.
For we are consumed by your angerAnd terrified by your rage.
You place our errors in front of you;Our secrets are exposed by the light of your face.
Our days ebb away because of your fury;And our years come to an end like a whisper.
The span of our life is 70 years,Or 80 if one is especially strong. But they are filled with trouble and sorrow;They quickly pass by, and away we fly.
Who can fathom the power of your anger? Your fury is as great as the fear you deserve.
Teach us how to count our daysSo that we may acquire a heart of wisdom.
Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last? Have pity on your servants.
Satisfy us with your loyal love in the morning,So that we may shout joyfully and rejoice during all our days.
Make us rejoice in proportion to the days you have afflicted us,For as many years as we have experienced calamity.
May your servants see your activity,And may their sons see your splendor.
May the favor of Jehovah our God be upon us;May you prosper the work of our hands. Yes, prosper the work of our hands.
O Jehovah, I call on you. Come quickly to help me. Do pay attention when I call to you.
May my prayer be as incense prepared before you,My uplifted hands like the evening grain offering.
Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah,Do set a watch over the door of my lips.
Do not let my heart incline to anything bad,To share in vile deeds with evil men;May I never feast on their delicacies.
Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love;Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head,Which my head would never refuse. My prayer will continue even during their calamities.
Though their judges are thrown down from the cliff,The people will pay attention to my words, for they are pleasant.
Just as when someone plows and breaks up the soil,So our bones have been scattered at the mouth of the Grave.
But my eyes look to you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. In you I have taken refuge. Do not take away my life.
Protect me from the jaws of the trap they have laid for me,From the snares of evildoers.
The wicked will fall into their own nets all togetherWhile I pass by safely.
Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
Let Israel now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
Let those of the house of Aaron now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
Let those fearing Jehovah now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”
I called on Jah in my distress;Jah answered and brought me into a place of safety.
Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
Jehovah is on my side as my helper;I will look in triumph on those who hate me.
It is better to take refuge in JehovahThan to trust in humans.
It is better to take refuge in JehovahThan to trust in princes.
All the nations surrounded me,But in the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.
They surrounded me, yes, I was completely surrounded,But in the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.
They surrounded me like bees,But they were extinguished as quickly as a fire among thorns. In the name of Jehovah,I warded them off.
I was pushed hard to make me fall,But Jehovah helped me.
Jah is my shelter and my strength,And he has become my salvation.
The sound of rejoicing and salvationIs in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.
The right hand of Jehovah is exalting itself;The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.
I will not die, no, I will live,In order to declare the works of Jah.
Jah disciplined me severely,But he did not hand me over to death.
Open to me the gates of righteousness;I will enter them and praise Jah.
This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous will enter through it.
I will praise you, for you answered meAnd you became my salvation.
The stone that the builders rejectedHas become the chief cornerstone.
This has come from Jehovah;It is wonderful in our eyes.
This is the day that Jehovah has made;We will be joyful and rejoice in it.
Jehovah, save us, please, we beg! Jehovah, grant us victory, please!
Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah;We bless you from the house of Jehovah.
Jehovah is God;He gives us light. Join in the festival procession with branches in hand,Up to the horns of the altar.
You are my God, and I will praise you;My God, I will exalt you.
Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
O God, give your judgments to the king,And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.
May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness,And of your lowly ones with justice.
May the mountains bring peace to the people,And may the hills bring righteousness.
Let him defend the lowly among the people,Let him save the sons of the poor,And let him crush the defrauder.
They will fear you as long as there is a sunAnd as long as the moon remains,For generation after generation.
He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass,Like showers of rain that water the earth.
In his days the righteous will flourish,And peace will abound until the moon is no more.
He will have subjects from sea to seaAnd from the River to the ends of the earth.
The desert dwellers will bow down before him,And his enemies will lick the dust.
The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts.
All the kings will bow down before him,And all the nations will serve him.
For he will rescue the poor who cry for help,Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper.
He will have pity on the lowly and the poor,And the lives of the poor he will save.
From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,And their blood will be precious in his eyes.
May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually,And may he be blessed all day long.
There will be an abundance of grain on the earth;On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non,And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.
May his name endure forever,And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him;May all nations pronounce him happy.
May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God,Who alone does wonderful things.
May his glorious name be praised forever,And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen.
This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse.
Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity;In Jehovah I have trusted without wavering.
Examine me, O Jehovah, and put me to the test;Refine my innermost thoughts and my heart.
For your loyal love is always in front of me,And I walk in your truth.
I do not associate with deceitful men,And I avoid those who hide what they are.
I hate the company of evil men,And I refuse to associate with the wicked.
I will wash my hands in innocence,And I will march around your altar, O Jehovah,
To cause the sound of thanksgiving to be heardAnd to declare all your wonderful works.
Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell,The place where your glory resides.
Do not sweep me away with sinnersNor take my life away with violent men,
Whose hands engage in shameful conduct,And whose right hand is full of bribes.
But as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Rescue me and show me favor.
My foot is standing on level ground;In the great congregation, I will praise Jehovah.
Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wickedAnd does not stand on the path of sinnersAnd does not sit in the seat of scoffers.
But his delight is in the law of Jehovah,And he reads His law in an undertone day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by streams of water,A tree that produces fruit in its season,The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.
The wicked are not like that;They are like the chaff that the wind blows away.
That is why the wicked will not remain standing in the judgment;Nor will sinners remain standing in the assembly of the righteous.
For Jehovah is aware of the way of the righteous,But the way of the wicked will perish.
His city’s foundation is in the holy mountains.
Jehovah loves the gates of ZionMore than all the tents of Jacob.
Glorious things are being said about you, O city of the true God. (Selah)
I will count Raʹhab and Babylon among those who know me;Here are Phi·lisʹti·a and Tyre, together with Cush. It will be said: “This is one who was born there.”
And about Zion it will be said: “Each and every one was born in her.” And the Most High will firmly establish her.
Jehovah will declare, when recording the peoples: “This is one who was born there.” (Selah)
Singers and those performing circle dances will say: “All my springs are in you.”
Show me favor, O God, because mortal man is attacking me. All day long they keep fighting and oppressing me.
My foes keep snapping at me all day long;Many arrogantly fight against me.
When I am afraid, I put my trust in you.
In God—whose word I praise—In God I put my trust; I am not afraid. What can mere man do to me?
All day long they hurt my interests;Their only thought is to harm me.
They conceal themselves to attack;They watch my every step,Hoping to take away my life.
Reject them because of their wickedness. Bring down the nations in your anger, O God.
You keep track of my wandering. Do collect my tears in your skin bottle. Are they not recorded in your book?
My enemies will retreat on the day that I call for help. Of this I am confident: God is on my side.
In God—whose word I praise—In Jehovah—whose word I praise—
In God I put my trust; I am not afraid. What can a mere human do to me?
I am bound by my vows to you, O God;I will offer you expressions of thanksgiving.
For you have rescued me from deathAnd prevented my feet from stumbling,So that I may walk before God in the light of the living.
Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples!
Sing to him, sing praises to him,Ponder over all his wonderful works.
Boast about his holy name. Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
Search for Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face constantly.
Remember the wonderful works he has performed,His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,
You offspring of Abraham his servant,You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are throughout the earth.
He remembers his covenant forever,The promise he made, to a thousand generations,
The covenant he made with Abraham,And the oath he swore to Isaac,
Which he established as a decree to JacobAnd as a lasting covenant to Israel,
Saying, “I will give you the land of CaʹnaanAs your allotted inheritance.”
This was when they were few in number,Yes, very few, and they were foreigners in the land.
They walked about from nation to nation,From one kingdom to another people.
He did not allow any man to oppress them,But on their account he reproved kings,
Saying, “Do not touch my anointed ones,And to my prophets do nothing bad.”
He called down a famine on the land;He cut off their supply of bread.
He sent ahead of them a manWho was sold to be a slave, Joseph.
With fetters they bound his feet,His neck was put in irons;
Until the time that his word proved true,The saying of Jehovah is what refined him.
The king sent to release him,The ruler of the peoples set him free.
He made him master of his household,Ruler over all his property,
To have authority over his princes as he pleasedAnd to teach his elders wisdom.
Then Israel came into Egypt,And Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham.
God made his people very fruitful;He made them mightier than their adversaries,
Whose hearts he let change to hate his people,To plot against his servants.
He sent his servant Moses,And Aaron, whom he had chosen.
They performed his signs among them,His miracles in the land of Ham.
He sent darkness and the land became dark;They did not rebel against his words.
He changed their waters into bloodAnd killed their fish.
Their land swarmed with frogs,Even in the royal chambers.
He ordered the gadflies to invadeAnd gnats in all their territories.
He turned their rain to hailAnd sent lightning on their land.
He struck their vines and their fig treesAnd shattered the trees of their territory.
He said that the locusts should invade,Young locusts without number.
They devoured all the vegetation in the land,And they devoured the produce of the ground.
Then he struck down every firstborn in their land,The beginning of their procreative power.
He brought his people out with silver and gold;And no one among his tribes stumbled.
Egypt rejoiced when they left,For the dread of Israel had fallen on them.
He spread a cloud to screen them off And fire to give light by night.
They asked, and he brought quail;He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven.
He opened a rock, and waters flowed out;These flowed through the desert like a river.
For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant.
So he brought out his people with exultation,His chosen ones with a joyful cry.
He gave them the lands of nations;They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce,
So that they would keep his decreesAnd observe his laws. Praise Jah!
You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land;You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive.
You have pardoned the error of your people;You forgave all their sin. (Selah)
You held back all your fury;You turned away from your hot anger.
Restore us, O God of our salvation,And set aside your displeasure with us.
Will you be furious with us forever? Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation?
Will you not revive us againSo that your people may rejoice in you?
Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah,And grant us your salvation.
I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says,For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones,But let them not return to overconfidence.
Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him,So that his glory may reside in our land.
Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together;Righteousness and peace will kiss each other.
Faithfulness will sprout from the earth,And righteousness will look down from the heavens.
Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,And our land will yield its harvest.
Righteousness will walk before himAnd make a path for his footsteps.
Transgression speaks to the wicked one deep within his heart;There is no fear of God before his eyes.
For in his own eyes he flatters himself too muchTo detect and hate his error.
The words of his mouth are hurtful and deceptive;He shows no insight for doing what is good.
He plots hurtful schemes even on his bed. He is set on a path that is not good;He does not reject what is bad.
O Jehovah, your loyal love reaches to the heavens,Your faithfulness up to the clouds.
Your righteousness is like majestic mountains;Your judgments are like vast, deep waters. Man and beast you preserve, O Jehovah.
How precious your loyal love is, O God! In the shadow of your wings,The sons of men take refuge.
They drink their fill of the rich bounty of your house,And you cause them to drink of the torrent of your delights.
With you is the source of life;By your light we can see light.
Continue showing your loyal love to those who know you,And your righteousness, to the upright in heart.
Do not let the foot of the haughty tread on meOr the hand of the wicked drive me away.
There the wrongdoers have fallen;They have been knocked down and cannot get up.
Let me praise Jehovah. O Jehovah my God, you are very great. With majesty and splendor you are clothed.
You are wrapped in light as with a garment;You stretch out the heavens like a tent cloth.
He lays beams of his upper rooms in the waters above,Making the clouds his chariot,Moving on the wings of the wind.
He makes his angels spirits,His ministers a consuming fire.
He has established the earth on its foundations;It will not be moved from its place forever and ever.
You covered it with deep waters as with a garment. The waters stood above the mountains.
At your rebuke they fled;At the sound of your thunder they ran away in panic
—Mountains ascended and valleys descended—To the place you established for them.
You set a boundary that they should not pass,That they should never again cover the earth.
He sends springs into the valleys;Between the mountains they flow.
They provide water for all the wild beasts of the field;The wild donkeys quench their thirst.
Above them roost the birds of the sky;They sing among the thick foliage.
He is watering the mountains from his upper rooms. With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied.
He is making grass grow for the cattleAnd vegetation for mankind’s use,To grow food from the land
And wine that makes man’s heart rejoice,Oil that makes the face shine,And bread that sustains the heart of mortal man.
The trees of Jehovah are satisfied,The cedars of Lebʹa·non that he planted,
Where the birds make nests. The home of the stork is in the juniper trees.
The high mountains are for the mountain goats;The crags are a refuge for the rock badgers.
He has made the moon to mark the appointed times;The sun well knows when to set.
You bring darkness, and night falls,When all the wild animals of the forest roam about.
The young lions roar for their preyAnd seek their food from God.
When the sun rises,They withdraw and lie down in their dens.
Man goes to his work,And he labors until evening.
How many your works are, O Jehovah! You have made all of them in wisdom. The earth is full of what you have made.
There is the sea, so great and wide,Teeming with countless living things, both small and great.
There the ships travel,And Le·viʹa·than, which you formed to play in it.
All of them wait for youTo give them their food in its season.
What you give them, they gather. When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things.
When you hide your face, they are disturbed. If you take away their spirit, they die and return to the dust.
If you send out your spirit, they are created,And you renew the surface of the ground.
The glory of Jehovah will last forever. Jehovah will rejoice in his works.
He looks at the earth, and it trembles;He touches the mountains, and they smoke.
I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life;I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.
Let my thoughts be pleasing to him. I will rejoice in Jehovah.
The sinners will vanish from the earth,And the wicked will no longer exist. Let me praise Jehovah. Praise Jah!
Praise Jah! Praise the name of Jehovah;Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,
You who are standing in the house of Jehovah,In the courtyards of the house of our God.
Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant.
For Jah has chosen Jacob for himself,Israel for his special property.
For I well know that Jehovah is great;Our Lord is greater than all other gods.
Jehovah does everything he pleases to doIn heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths.
He causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth;He makes lightning for the rain;He brings the wind out of his storehouses.
He struck down the firstborn of Egypt,Both man and beast.
He sent signs and miracles among you, O Egypt,Against Pharʹaoh and all his servants.
He struck down many nationsAnd killed mighty kings
—Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites,Og the king of Baʹshan,And all the kingdoms of Caʹnaan.
He gave their land as an inheritance,An inheritance to Israel his people.
O Jehovah, your name endures forever. O Jehovah, your fame endures for all generations.
For Jehovah will defend his people,And he will feel compassion for his servants.
The idols of the nations are silver and gold,The work of human hands.
A mouth they have, but they cannot speak;Eyes, but they cannot see;
Ears they have, but they cannot hear. There is no breath in their mouth.
The people who make them will become just like them,As will all those who trust in them.
O house of Israel, praise Jehovah. O house of Aaron, praise Jehovah.
O house of Leʹvi, praise Jehovah. You who fear Jehovah, praise Jehovah.
May Jehovah be praised from Zion,The One residing in Jerusalem. Praise Jah!
O Jehovah my God, in you I have taken refuge. Save me from all those persecuting me and rescue me.
Otherwise they will tear me to pieces as a lion does,Carrying me off with no one to rescue me.
O Jehovah my God, if I am at fault in this,If I have acted unjustly,
If I have wronged the one doing good to me,Or if I have plundered my enemy without cause,
Then let an enemy pursue and overtake me;Let him trample my life down to the earthAnd cause my glory to perish in the dust. (Selah)
Rise up in your anger, O Jehovah;Stand up against the fury of my enemies;Awake for me, and demand that justice be done.
Let the nations surround you;And you will act against them from on high.
Jehovah will pass sentence on the peoples. Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousnessAnd according to my integrity.
Please put an end to the evil deeds of the wicked. But establish the righteous,Since you are the righteous God who examines the hearts and the deepest emotions.
God is my shield, the Savior of those upright in heart.
God is a righteous Judge,And God proclaims his judgments every day.
If anyone will not repent, He sharpens his sword;He bends his bow and makes it ready.
He prepares his deadly weapons;He makes ready his flaming arrows.
Look at the one who is pregnant with wickedness;He conceives trouble and gives birth to lies.
He excavates a pit and digs it deep,But he falls into the very hole he made.
The trouble he causes will return on his own head;His violence will fall on the crown of his head.
I will praise Jehovah for his justice;I will sing praises to the name of Jehovah the Most High.
To you, O Jehovah, I turn.
My God, I trust in you;Do not let me be put to shame. Do not let my enemies gloat over me.
Surely none who hope in you will be put to shame,But shame awaits those who are treacherous without cause.
Make me know your ways, O Jehovah;Teach me your paths.
Cause me to walk in your truth and teach me,For you are my God of salvation. ו [Waw] In you I hope all day long.
Remember your mercy, O Jehovah, and your loyal love,Which you have always shown.
Do not remember the sins of my youth and my transgressions. Remember me according to your loyal love,For the sake of your goodness, O Jehovah.
Good and upright is Jehovah. That is why he instructs sinners in the way to live.
He will guide the meek in what is right,And he will teach the meek ones his way.
All the paths of Jehovah are loyal love and faithfulnessFor those observing his covenant and his reminders.
For the sake of your name, O Jehovah,Forgive my error, though it is great.
Who is the man fearing Jehovah? He will instruct him about the way he should choose.
He will experience what is good,And his descendants will take possession of the earth.
Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him,And he makes his covenant known to them.
My eyes are always toward Jehovah,For he will free my feet from the net.
Turn your face to me and show me favor,For I am alone and helpless.
The distresses of my heart have multiplied;Free me from my anguish.
See my affliction and my trouble,And pardon all my sins.
See how numerous my enemies areAnd how violent their hatred is for me.
Guard my life and save me. Do not let me be put to shame, for I have taken refuge in you.
May integrity and uprightness safeguard me,For my hope is in you.
O God, rescue Israel out of all his distresses.
How long, O Jehovah, will you forget me? Forever? How long will you hide your face from me?
How long will I have anxious concern,With grief in my heart each day? How long will my enemy triumph over me?
Look upon me and answer me, O Jehovah my God. Give light to my eyes, so that I may not fall asleep in death,
So that my enemy will not say: “I have defeated him!” Do not let my opponents rejoice over my downfall.
As for me, I trust in your loyal love;My heart will rejoice in your acts of salvation.
I will sing to Jehovah, for he has richly rewarded me.
Praise Jah! Praise Jehovah from the heavens;Praise him in the heights.
Praise him, all his angels. Praise him, all his army.
Praise him, sun and moon. Praise him, all shining stars.
Praise him, O highest heavensAnd waters above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of Jehovah,For he commanded, and they were created.
He keeps them established forever and ever;He has issued a decree that will not pass away.
Praise Jehovah from the earth,You great sea creatures and all deep waters,
You lightning and hail, snow and thick clouds,You storm wind, carrying out his word,
You mountains and all you hills,You fruit trees and all you cedars,
You wild animals and all you domestic animals,You creeping things and winged birds,
You kings of the earth and all you nations,You princes and all you judges of the earth,
You young men and young women,Old men and young together.
Let them praise the name of Jehovah,For his name alone is unreachably high. His majesty is above earth and heaven.
He will exalt the strength of his people,For the praise of all his loyal ones,Of the sons of Israel, the people close to him. Praise Jah!
May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised,Who trains my hands for battle,My fingers for warfare.
He is my loyal love and my stronghold,My secure refuge and my rescuer,My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter,The One subduing peoples under me.
O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him,The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him?
Man resembles a mere breath;His days are like a passing shadow.
O Jehovah, lower your heavens and descend;Touch the mountains and make them smoke.
Make lightning flash and scatter the enemy;Shoot your arrows and throw them into confusion.
Stretch out your hands from above;Rescue me and save me from the surging waters,From the hand of the foreigners,
Whose mouths speak liesAnd who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.
O God, I will sing to you a new song. I will sing praises to you, accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument,
To the One who gives victory to kings,The One rescuing his servant David from the deadly sword.
Rescue me and save me from the hand of the foreigners,Whose mouths speak liesAnd who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.
Then our sons will be like young plants that grow up quickly,Our daughters like corner pillars carved for a palace.
Our storehouses will overflow with every kind of produce;Our flocks in our fields will multiply by the thousands, by the tens of thousands.
Our cattle, heavy with young, will suffer no mishap or miscarriage;There will be no cry of distress in our public squares.
Happy is the people for whom it is this way! Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!
Happy are those who are blameless in their way,Who walk in the law of Jehovah.
Happy are those who observe his reminders,Who search for him with all their heart.
They practice no unrighteousness;They walk in his ways.
You have commandedThat your orders be carefully kept.
If only I could remain steadfastSo as to observe your regulations!
Then I would not be put to shameWhen I consider all your commandments.
I will praise you with an upright heartWhen I learn your righteous judgments.
I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.
How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word.
With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments.
In my heart I treasure up your sayingSo that I may not sin against you.
May you be praised, O Jehovah;Teach me your regulations.
With my lips I declareAll the judgments that you have spoken.
I rejoice over your remindersMore than over all other valuable things.
I will ponder over your ordersAnd keep my eyes on your paths.
I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word.
Deal kindly with your servant,So that I may live and observe your word.
Open my eyes so that I may see clearlyThe wonderful things from your law.
I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me.
I am consumed with longingFor your judgments at all times.
You rebuke the presumptuous,The cursed ones who stray from your commandments.
Remove from me scorn and contempt,For I have observed your reminders.
Even when princes sit together and speak against me,Your servant ponders over your regulations.
I am fond of your reminders;They are my advisers.
I lie prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word.
I told you of my ways, and you answered me;Teach me your regulations.
Make me understand the meaning of your orders,So that I may ponder over your wonderful works.
I have been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word.
Remove from me the way of deception,And favor me with your law.
The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right.
I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.
I will eagerly pursue the way of your commandmentsBecause you make room for it in my heart.
Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations,And I will follow it to the end.
Give me understanding,So that I may observe your lawAnd keep it with my whole heart.
Guide me in the pathway of your commandments,For in it I take delight.
Incline my heart to your reminders,Not to selfish gain.
Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless;Preserve me alive in your way.
Fulfill your promise to your servant,So that you may be feared.
Remove the disgrace that I dread,For your judgments are good.
See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness.
May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah,Your salvation in harmony with your promise;
Then I will reply to the one taunting me,For I put my trust in your word.
Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth,For I have hoped in your judgment.
I will keep your law constantly,Forever and ever.
And I will walk about in a place of safety,For I search for your orders.
I will speak about your reminders in front of kings,And I will not be ashamed.
I am fond of your commandments,Yes, I love them.
I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love,And I will ponder over your regulations.
Remember your word to your servant,Through which you give me hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction,For your saying has preserved me alive.
The presumptuous utterly scorn me,But I do not deviate from your law.
I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah,And I find comfort in them.
I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked,Who forsake your law.
Your regulations are songs to meWherever I dwell.
During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah,So that I may keep your law.
This has been my practiceBecause I have observed your orders.
Jehovah is my portion;I have promised to keep your words.
I appeal to you with all my heart;Show me favor according to your promise.
I have examined my ways,In order to turn my feet back to your reminders.
I hurry and do not delayTo keep your commandments.
The ropes of the wicked surround me,But your law I do not forget.
At midnight I get up to give you thanksFor your righteous judgments.
I am a friend of all who fear youAnd of those who keep your orders.
Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth;Teach me your regulations.
You have dealt well with your servant,O Jehovah, according to your word.
Teach me good sense and knowledge,For I have put my trust in your commandments.
Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,But now I keep your saying.
You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations.
The presumptuous smear me with lies,But I observe your orders with all my heart.
Their heart is insensitive,But I am fond of your law.
It is good that I have been afflicted,So that I may learn your regulations.
The law that you have proclaimed is good for me,More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.
Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding,So that I may learn your commandments.
Those who fear you see me and rejoice,For your word is my hope.
I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteousAnd that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness.
May your loyal love please comfort me,According to the promise you made to your servant.
Show me mercy, so that I may keep living,For I am fond of your law.
May the presumptuous be put to shame,For they wrong me without cause. But I will ponder over your orders.
Let those who fear you return to me,Those who know your reminders.
May my heart be blameless in following your regulations,So that I may not be put to shame.
I long for your salvation,For your word is my hope.
My eyes long for your sayingWhile I say: “When will you comfort me?”
For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke,But your regulations I do not forget.
How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me?
The presumptuous dig pits for me,Those who defy your law.
All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me!
They almost exterminated me from the earth,But I did not abandon your orders.
Preserve me alive because of your loyal love,So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken.
Forever, O Jehovah,Your word will remain in the heavens.
Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand.
By your judgments they remain until today,For they are all your servants.
If I had not been fond of your law,I would have perished in my affliction.
I will never forget your orders,Because by them you have preserved me alive.
I belong to you; save me,Because I have searched for your orders.
The wicked wait to destroy me,But I give close attention to your reminders.
I have seen a limit to all perfection,But your commandment has no limit.
How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.
Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies,Because it is with me forever.
I have more insight than all my teachers,Because I ponder over your reminders.
I act with more understanding than older men,Because I observe your orders.
I refuse to walk on any evil path,So that I may keep your word.
I do not turn aside from your judgments,For you have instructed me.
How sweet your sayings are to my palate,More so than honey to my mouth!
By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path.
Your word is a lamp to my foot,And a light for my path.
I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out,To observe your righteous judgments.
I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word.
Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise, O Jehovah,And teach me your judgments.
My life is in constant danger,But I have not forgotten your law.
The wicked have set a trap for me,But I have not strayed from your orders.
I take your reminders as my permanent possession,For they are the joy of my heart.
I have resolved to obey your regulationsAt all times, down to the last.
I hate the halfhearted ones,But I love your law.
You are my shelter and my shield,For your word is my hope.
Stay away from me, you evil men,So that I may observe the commandments of my God.
Support me as you promised,So that I may keep living;Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.
Support me that I may be saved;Then I will always concentrate on your regulations.
You reject all those who stray from your regulations,For they are false and deceitful.
You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders.
The dread of you makes my body tremble;I am in fear of your judgments.
I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors!
Guarantee the welfare of your servant;May the presumptuous not oppress me.
My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvationAnd for your righteous promise.
Show your loyal love to your servant,And teach me your regulations.
I am your servant; give me understanding,So that I may know your reminders.
The time has come for Jehovah to act,For they have broken your law.
That is why I love your commandmentsMore than gold, even fine gold.
Therefore, I consider every instruction from you to be right;I hate every false path.
Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe them.
The disclosure of your words brings light,Giving understanding to the inexperienced.
I open my mouth wide and sigh,Because I long for your commandments.
Turn to me and show me favor,In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name.
Guide my steps safely by your saying;May nothing wicked dominate me.
Rescue me from oppressive men,And I will keep your orders.
Make your face shine upon your servant,And teach me your regulations.
Tears stream down from my eyesBecause people do not keep your law.
You are righteous, O Jehovah,And your judgments are fair.
The reminders you give are righteousAnd completely reliable.
My zeal consumes me,Because my adversaries have forgotten your words.
Your saying is thoroughly refined,And your servant loves it.
I am insignificant and despised;Yet, I have not forgotten your orders.
Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness,And your law is truth.
Though distress and difficulty come upon me,I remain fond of your commandments.
The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living.
I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe.
I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders.
I have been awake before dawn to cry for help,For your words are my hope.
My eyes open before the night watches,So that I can ponder over your saying.
Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice.
Those who engage in shameful conduct come near;They are far away from your law.
You are near, O Jehovah,And all your commandments are truth.
Long ago I learned about your reminders,That you have established them to last forever.
Look on my affliction and rescue me,For I have not forgotten your law.
Defend me and rescue me;Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.
Salvation is far away from the wicked,For they have not searched for your regulations.
Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice.
My persecutors and my adversaries are many;But I have not deviated from your reminders.
I look on the treacherous with loathing,Because they do not keep your saying.
See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love.
The very essence of your word is truth,And all your righteous judgments endure forever.
Princes persecute me for no cause,But my heart stands in awe of your words.
I rejoice over your sayingLike someone who finds great spoil.
I hate falsehood—I detest it—I love your law.
Seven times a day I praise youBecause of your righteous judgments.
Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law;Nothing can make them stumble.
I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah,And I observe your commandments.
I keep your reminders,And I love them dearly.
I observe your orders and your reminders,For you are aware of all that I do.
May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand.
May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.
May my lips overflow with praise,For you teach me your regulations.
May my tongue sing about your saying,For all your commandments are righteous.
May your hand be ready to help me,Because I choose to obey your orders.
I long for your salvation, O Jehovah,And I am fond of your law.
Let me live so that I may praise you;May your judgments be my help.
I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant,For I have not forgotten your commandments.
Show me favor, O God, according to your loyal love. Blot out my transgressions according to your great mercy.
Thoroughly wash me from my error,And cleanse me from my sin.
For I am well-aware of my transgressions,And my sin is always before me.
Against you—you above all—I have sinned;What is bad in your eyes I have done. Therefore, you are righteous when you speak,You are right in your judgment.
Look! I was born guilty of error,And my mother conceived me in sin.
Look! You find pleasure in truth in the inner person;Teach my innermost self true wisdom.
Purify me from my sin with hyssop, so that I will be clean;Wash me, so that I will be whiter than snow.
Let me hear sounds of joy and rejoicing,So that the bones you crushed will rejoice.
Turn your face away from my sins,And wipe away all my errors.
Create in me a pure heart, O God,And put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.
Do not cast me out from your presence;And do not take your holy spirit away from me.
Restore to me the joy of your salvation;Stir within me a willingness to obey you.
I will teach transgressors your ways,So that sinners will return to you.
Save me from bloodguilt, O God, the God of my salvation,So that my tongue may joyfully declare your righteousness.
O Jehovah, open my lips,So that my mouth may declare your praise.
For you do not want a sacrifice—otherwise I would give it;You do not find delight in a whole burnt offering.
The sacrifices pleasing to God are a broken spirit;A heart broken and crushed, O God, you will not reject.
In your goodwill do what is good for Zion;Build up the walls of Jerusalem.
Then you will take delight in the sacrifices of righteousness,The burnt sacrifices and the whole offerings;Then bulls will be offered up on your altar.
O God of vengeance, Jehovah,O God of vengeance, shine forth!
Rise up, O Judge of the earth. Repay to the haughty what they deserve.
How long will the wicked, O Jehovah,How long will the wicked continue to exult?
They babble and speak arrogantly;All the wrongdoers brag about themselves.
They crush your people, O Jehovah,And oppress your inheritance.
They kill the widow and the foreign resident,And they murder the fatherless children.
They say: “Jah does not see;The God of Jacob does not take notice of it.”
Understand this, you who are unreasoning;You foolish ones, when will you ever show insight?
The One who made the ear, can he not hear? The One who formed the eye, can he not see?
The One correcting the nations, can he not reprove? He is the One who imparts knowledge to people!
Jehovah knows the thoughts of men,That they are but a mere breath.
Happy is the man whom you correct, O Jah,Whom you teach from your law,
To give him tranquillity during days of calamity,Until a pit is dug for the wicked.
For Jehovah will not forsake his people,Nor will he abandon his inheritance.
For judgment will once again be righteous,And all the upright in heart will follow it.
Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will take a stand for me against the wrongdoers?
If Jehovah had not been my helper,I would soon have perished.
When I said: “My foot is slipping,” Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me.
When anxieties overwhelmed me,You comforted and soothed me.
Can a throne of corruption be allied with youWhile it is framing trouble in the name of the law?
They make vicious attacks on the righteous oneAnd condemn the innocent one to death.
But Jehovah will become a secure refuge for me,My God is my rock of refuge.
He will make their wicked deeds come back upon them. He will do away with them by means of their own evil. Jehovah our God will do away with them.
Praise Jah! Let my whole being praise Jehovah.
I will praise Jehovah all my life. I will sing praises to my God as long as I live.
Do not put your trust in princesNor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation.
His spirit goes out, he returns to the ground;On that very day his thoughts perish.
Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper,Whose hope is in Jehovah his God,
The Maker of heaven and earth,Of the sea, and of all that is in them,The One who always remains faithful,
The One securing justice for those defrauded,The One giving bread to the hungry. Jehovah is releasing the prisoners.
Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind;Jehovah is raising up those bowed down;Jehovah loves the righteous.
Jehovah is protecting the foreign residents;He sustains the fatherless child and the widow,But he thwarts the plans of the wicked.
Jehovah will be King forever,Your God, O Zion, for generation after generation. Praise Jah!
O God, save me by your name,And defend me with your power.
O God, hear my prayer;Pay attention to the words of my mouth.
For strangers rise up against me,And ruthless men seek my life. They have no regard for God. (Selah)
Look! God is my helper;Jehovah is with those supporting me.
He will repay my foes with their own evil;In your faithfulness, put an end to them.
I will sacrifice to you willingly. I will praise your name, O Jehovah, for it is good.
For he saves me from every distress,And I will look in triumph on my enemies.
I will exalt you, O my God the King,I will praise your name forever and ever.
All day long I will praise you;I will praise your name forever and ever.
Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise;His greatness is unsearchable.
Generation after generation will praise your works;They will tell about your mighty acts.
Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speakAnd on your wonderful works I will meditate.
They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,And I will declare your greatness.
They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness,And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.
Jehovah is compassionate and merciful,Slow to anger and great in loyal love.
Jehovah is good to all,And his mercy is evident in all his works.
All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah,And your loyal ones will praise you.
They will proclaim the glory of your kingshipAnd speak about your mightiness,
To make known to men your mighty actsAnd the glorious splendor of your kingship.
Your kingship is an eternal kingship,And your dominion endures throughout all generations.
Jehovah supports all who are fallingAnd raises up all who are bowed down.
All eyes look hopefully to you;You give them their food in its season.
You open your handAnd satisfy the desire of every living thing.
Jehovah is righteous in all his waysAnd loyal in all that he does.
Jehovah is near to all those calling on him,To all who call on him in truth.
He satisfies the desire of those who fear him;He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.
Jehovah guards all those who love him,But all the wicked he will annihilate.
My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah;Let every living thing praise his holy name forever and ever.
I love JehovahBecause he hears my voice, my pleas for help.
For he inclines his ear to me,And I will call on him as long as I live.
The ropes of death encircled me;The Grave had me in its grip. I was overcome by distress and grief.
But I called on the name of Jehovah: “O Jehovah, rescue me!”
Jehovah is compassionate and righteous;Our God is merciful.
Jehovah is guarding the inexperienced. I was brought low, and he saved me.
Let my soul rest once again,For Jehovah has dealt kindly with me.
You have rescued me from death,My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.
I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.
I had faith, for I spoke;I was greatly afflicted.
As for me, I panicked and said: “Every man is a liar.”
With what will I repay JehovahFor all the good he has done for me?
I will take up the cup of salvation,And I will call on the name of Jehovah.
I will pay my vows to JehovahIn the presence of all his people.
Costly in the eyes of JehovahIs the death of his loyal ones.
I beg you, O Jehovah,For I am your servant. I am your servant, the son of your slave girl. You have freed me from my bonds.
I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanksgiving;I will call on the name of Jehovah.
I will pay my vows to JehovahIn the presence of all his people,
In the courtyards of the house of Jehovah,In your midst, O Jerusalem. Praise Jah!
Praise Jah! Sing to Jehovah a new song;Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones.
Let Israel rejoice in its Grand Maker;Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.
Let them praise his name with dancingAnd sing praises to him, accompanied by the tambourine and the harp.
For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He adorns the meek with salvation.
Let the loyal ones exult in glory;Let them shout for joy upon their beds.
Let the songs praising God be in their throat,And a two-edged sword be in their hand,
To execute vengeance on the nationsAnd punishment on the peoples,
To bind their kings with shacklesAnd their nobles with iron fetters,
To execute the judgment written against them. This honor belongs to all his loyal ones. Praise Jah!
Praise Jah! Praise God in his holy place. Praise him in the expanse of his strength.
Praise him for his mighty works. Praise him for his exceeding greatness.
Praise him with the sounding of the horn. Praise him with the stringed instrument and the harp.
Praise him with the tambourine and the circle dance. Praise him with strings and the flute.
Praise him with ringing cymbals. Praise him with crashing cymbals.
Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah!
I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”
And now our feet are standingWithin your gates, O Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is built as a cityThat is joined together as one.
The tribes have gone up to it,The tribes of Jah,According to the reminder to Israel,To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.
For thrones for judgment were set up there,Thrones of the house of David.
Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.
May peace continue within your ramparts,Security within your fortified towers.
For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”
For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God,I will seek good for you.
To you I raise my eyes,You who are enthroned in the heavens.
As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master,And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress,So our eyes look to Jehovah our GodUntil he shows us favor.
Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor,For we have had our full share of contempt.
We have had our full share of ridicule from the self-assuredAnd the contempt of the arrogant.
O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst for you. I am faint with longing for youIn a dry and parched land, where there is no water.
So I have looked upon you in the holy place;I have seen your strength and your glory.
Because your loyal love is better than life,My own lips will glorify you.
Thus I will praise you all my life;In your name I will lift up my hands.
I am satisfied with the best and choicest portion,So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.
I remember you while upon my bed;I meditate on you during the watches of the night.
For you are my helper,And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.
I cling to you;Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.
But those who seek to destroy my lifeWill descend into the depths of the earth.
They will be handed over to the power of the sword;They will become food for jackals.
But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult,For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced.
Listen to my prayer, O God,And do not ignore my request for mercy.
Do pay attention to me and answer me. My concern makes me restless,And I am distraught
Because of what the enemy is sayingAnd the pressure from the wicked one. For they heap trouble upon me,And in anger they harbor animosity against me.
My heart is in anguish within me,And the terrors of death overwhelm me.
Fear and trembling come upon me,And shuddering grips me.
I keep saying: “If only I had wings like a dove! I would fly away and reside in safety.
Look! I would flee far away. I would lodge in the wilderness. (Selah)
I would hurry to a place of shelterAway from the raging wind, away from the storm.”
Confuse them, O Jehovah, and frustrate their plans,For I have seen violence and conflict in the city.
Day and night they walk around on its walls;Within it are malice and trouble.
Ruin is in its midst;Oppression and deception never depart from its public square.
For it is not an enemy who taunts me;Otherwise I could put up with it. It is not a foe who has risen up against me;Otherwise I could conceal myself from him.
But it is you, a man like me,My own companion whom I know well.
We used to enjoy a warm friendship together;Into the house of God we used to walk along with the multitude.
May destruction overtake them! Let them go down alive into the Grave;For evil resides among them and within them.
As for me, I will call out to God,And Jehovah will save me.
Evening and morning and noontime, I am troubled and I groan,And he hears my voice.
He will rescue me and give me peace from those fighting against me,For multitudes come against me.
God will hear and respond to them,The one who sits enthroned from of old. (Selah) They will refuse to change,Those who have not feared God.
He attacked those at peace with him;He violated his covenant.
His words are smoother than butter,But conflict is in his heart. His words are softer than oil,But they are drawn swords.
Throw your burden on Jehovah,And he will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.
But you, O God, will bring them down to the deepest pit. Those bloodguilty and deceitful men will not live out half their days. But as for me, I will trust in you.
O Jehovah, in your strength the king rejoices;How greatly he rejoices in your acts of salvation!
You have granted him the desire of his heart,And you have not withheld the request of his lips. (Selah)
For you meet him with rich blessings;You place a crown of fine gold on his head.
He asked you for life, and you gave it to him,A long life, forever and ever.
Your acts of salvation bring him great glory. Dignity and splendor you bestow on him.
You make him blessed forever;You make him glad with the joy of your presence.
For the king trusts in Jehovah;Because of the loyal love of the Most High, he will never be shaken.
Your hand will find all your enemies;Your right hand will find those hating you.
You will make them like a fiery furnace at the appointed time when you give them attention. Jehovah will swallow them up in his anger, and fire will consume them.
Their descendants you will destroy from the earth,And their offspring from the sons of men.
For they intended to do what is bad against you;They have devised schemes that will not succeed.
For you will make them retreatBy aiming your bow at them.
Rise up, O Jehovah, in your strength. We will sing praises to your mightiness.
O Jehovah, why have my adversaries become so numerous? Why are so many rising up against me?
Many are saying about me: “God will not save him.” (Selah)
But you, O Jehovah, are a shield around me,My glory and the One who lifts up my head.
I will call aloud to Jehovah,And he will answer me from his holy mountain. (Selah)
I will lie down and sleep;And I will wake up in safety,For Jehovah continues to support me.
I am not afraid of the tens of thousandsLined up against me on every side.
Rise up, O Jehovah! Save me, O my God! For you will strike all my enemies on the jaw;You will break the teeth of the wicked.
Salvation belongs to Jehovah. Your blessing is upon your people. (Selah)
I will exalt you, O Jehovah, for you have lifted me up;You did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
O Jehovah my God, I cried to you for help, and you healed me.
O Jehovah, you have lifted me up from the Grave. You kept me alive; you spared me from sinking into the pit.
Sing praises to Jehovah, you his loyal ones,Give thanks to his holy name;
Because being under his anger is only for a moment,But being in his favor is for a lifetime. Weeping may come in the evening, but in the morning, there is a joyful cry.
When I was untroubled, I said: “I will never be shaken.”
O Jehovah, while I was in your favor, you made me as strong as a mountain. But when you hid your face, I became terrified.
To you, O Jehovah, I kept calling;And to Jehovah, I kept pleading for favor.
What profit is there in my death, in my going down to the pit? Will the dust praise you? Will it tell of your faithfulness?
Hear, O Jehovah, and show me favor. O Jehovah, become my helper.
You have changed my mourning into dancing;You have removed my sackcloth, and you clothe me with rejoicing,
So that I may sing your praise and not keep silent. O Jehovah my God, I will praise you forever.
Unless Jehovah builds the house,It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city,It is in vain that the guard stays awake.
It is in vain that you rise up early,That you stay up late,That you toil for your food,Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.
Look! Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah;The fruit of the womb is a reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man,So are the sons of one’s youth.
Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame,For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.
I will praise you, O Jehovah, with all my heart;I will tell about all your wonderful works.
I will rejoice and exult in you;I will sing praises to your name, O Most High.
When my enemies retreat,They will stumble and perish from before you.
For you defend my just cause;You sit on your throne judging with righteousness.
You have rebuked nations and destroyed the wicked,Blotting out their name forever and ever.
The enemy has been ruined forever;You uprooted their cities,And all memory of them will perish.
But Jehovah is enthroned forever;He has firmly established his throne for justice.
He will judge the inhabited earth in righteousness;He will render righteous legal decisions for the nations.
Jehovah will become a secure refuge for the oppressed,A secure refuge in times of distress.
Those knowing your name will trust in you;You will never abandon those seeking you, O Jehovah.
Sing praises to Jehovah, who is dwelling in Zion;Make his deeds known among the peoples.
For the One who avenges their blood remembers them;He will not forget the cry of the afflicted.
Show me favor, O Jehovah; see my affliction by those hating me,You who raise me from the gates of death,
So that I may declare your praiseworthy deeds in the gates of the daughter of Zion,And rejoice in your acts of salvation.
The nations have sunk down into the pit they made;Their own foot has been caught in the net they hid.
Jehovah is known by the judgment he executes. The wicked one has been ensnared in the work of his own hands. Hig·gaʹion. (Selah)
The wicked will retreat toward the Grave,All the nations who forget God.
But the poor will not always be forgotten;Nor will the hope of the meek ever perish.
Rise up, O Jehovah! Do not let mortal man prevail. May the nations be judged in your presence.
Strike them with fear, O Jehovah,Let the nations know that they are only mortal men. (Selah)
O God whom I praise, do not remain silent.
For the wicked and the deceitful open their mouths against me. They speak about me with lying tongues;
They surround me with hateful words,And they attack me without cause.
They resist me in response to my love;But I continue to pray.
They repay me with bad for goodAnd hatred for my love.
Appoint a wicked man over him;May a resister stand at his right hand.
When he is judged, may he be found guilty;May even his prayer be counted as a sin.
Let his days be few;His office of oversight let someone else take.
Let his children become fatherless,And his wife, a widow.
May his children become wandering beggars,Foraging for food from their ruined homes.
May his creditor seize all that he has,And may strangers plunder his possessions.
May no one extend kindness to him,And may no one show favor to his fatherless children.
Let his descendants be cut off;May their name be erased within a generation.
Let the error of his forefathers be remembered by Jehovah,And may the sin of his mother not be erased.
May Jehovah always be mindful of what they have done;And may he cut off the memory of them from the earth.
For he did not remember to show kindness,But he kept pursuing the oppressed, poor, and brokenhearted manTo put him to death.
He loved to pronounce a curse, so that is what came upon him;He had no desire to bless, so he received no blessing.
He was clothed with curses as his garment. And they were poured into his body like water,Into his bones like oil.
May his curses be like the clothing in which he wraps himselfAnd like a belt he always wears.
This is the payment from Jehovah for the one who resists meAnd for those who speak evil things against me.
But you, Jehovah the Sovereign Lord,Act in my behalf for the sake of your name. Rescue me, because your loyal love is good.
For I am helpless and poor,And my heart has been pierced within me.
I am passing away like a fading shadow;I have been shaken off like a locust.
My knees give way from fasting;My body is thin, and I am wasting away.
I have become the object of their taunts. When they see me, they shake their heads.
Help me, O Jehovah my God;Save me by your loyal love.
May they know that this is by your hand;That you, O Jehovah, have done it.
Let them pronounce a curse, but may you give a blessing. When they rise up against me, may they be put to shame,But let your servant rejoice.
Let those who resist me be clothed with humiliation;May they be wrapped in their shame as in a robe.
My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah;I will praise him in front of many people.
For he will stand at the right hand of the poorTo save him from those who condemn him.
O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger,Nor correct me in your wrath.
For your arrows have pierced deep into me,And your hand presses down on me.
My whole body is sick because of your indignation. There is no peace within my bones because of my sin.
For my errors loom over my head;Like a heavy burden, they are too much for me to bear.
My wounds stink and festerBecause of my foolishness.
I am distressed and extremely downcast;I walk around sad all day long.
There is a burning within me;My whole body is sick.
I have grown numb and become completely crushed;My anguished heart makes me groan aloud.
O Jehovah, all my desires are before you,And my sighing is not hidden from you.
My heart pounds, my strength is gone,And the light of my eyes has left me.
My friends and my companions avoid me because of my plague,And my close acquaintances keep their distance.
Those seeking my life set traps;Those trying to harm me speak of ruin;They mutter deception all day long.
But like someone deaf, I would not listen;Like someone speechless, I would not open my mouth.
I have become like a man who cannot hear,Whose mouth has nothing to say in defense.
For on you, O Jehovah, I waited,And you answered me, O Jehovah my God.
For I said: “May they not gloat over meOr exalt themselves over me if my foot slips.”
For I was ready to collapse,And my pain was always with me.
I confessed my error;I was troubled by my sin.
But my enemies are vigorous and mighty,Those hating me for no reason have become numerous.
They repaid me with bad for good;They were resisting me for pursuing what is good.
Do not abandon me, O Jehovah. O God, do not remain far away from me.
Do hurry to help me,O Jehovah, my salvation.
How lovely your grand tabernacle is,O Jehovah of armies!
My whole being yearns,Yes, I am faint with longing,For the courtyards of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God.
Even the bird finds a home thereAnd the swallow a nest for herself,Where she cares for her youngNear your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies,My King and my God!
Happy are those dwelling in your house! They continue to praise you. (Selah)
Happy are the men who find their strength in you,Whose hearts are set on the highways.
When they pass through the Baʹca Valley,They make it into a place of springs;And the early rain clothes it with blessings.
They will walk on from strength to strength;Each one appears before God in Zion.
O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer;Listen, O God of Jacob. (Selah)
Look, our shield and our God,Look upon the face of your anointed one.
For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my GodRather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield;He gives favor and glory. Jehovah will not hold back anything goodFrom those walking in integrity.
O Jehovah of armies,Happy is the man who trusts in you.
The God of gods, Jehovah, has spoken;He summons the earthFrom the rising of the sun until its setting.
Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God shines forth.
Our God will come and cannot remain silent. Before him is a consuming fire,And a great storm rages all around him.
He summons the heavens above and the earth,So as to judge his people:
“Gather to me my loyal ones,Those making a covenant with me over sacrifice.”
The heavens proclaim his righteousness,For God himself is Judge. (Selah)
“Listen, O my people, and I will speak;Israel, I will bear witness against you. I am God, your God.
I do not reprove you because of your sacrifices,Nor because of your whole burnt offerings that are constantly before me.
I do not need to take a bull from your house,Nor goats from your pens.
For every wild animal of the forest is mine,Even the beasts upon a thousand mountains.
I know every bird of the mountains;The countless animals of the field are mine.
If I were hungry, I would not tell you,For the productive land and everything in it is mine.
Will I eat the flesh of bullsAnd drink the blood of goats?
Offer thanksgiving as your sacrifice to God,And pay your vows to the Most High;
Call on me in the time of distress. I will rescue you, and you will glorify me.”
But God will say to the wicked: “What right do you have to relate my regulationsOr to speak about my covenant?
For you hate discipline,And you keep turning your back on my words.
When you see a thief, you approve of him,And you keep company with adulterers.
You use your mouth to spread what is bad,And deception is attached to your tongue.
You sit and speak against your own brother;You reveal the faults of your own mother’s son.
When you did these things, I remained silent,So you thought that I would be just like you. But now I will reprove you,And I will state my case against you.
Please consider this, you who forget God,So that I may not tear you to pieces with no one to rescue you.
The one who offers thanksgiving as his sacrifice glorifies me,And as for the one who follows a set course,I will cause him to see salvation by God.”
To Jehovah belong the earth and everything in it,The productive land and those dwelling on it.
For he has solidly fixed it on the seasAnd firmly established it on the rivers.
Who may ascend to the mountain of Jehovah,And who may stand up in his holy place?
Anyone with innocent hands and a pure heart,Who has not sworn a false oath by My life,Nor taken an oath deceitfully.
He will receive blessings from JehovahAnd righteousness from his God of salvation.
This is the generation of those seeking him,Of those seeking your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah)
Lift up your heads, you gates;Open up, you ancient doorways,That the glorious King may enter!
Who is this glorious King? Jehovah, strong and mighty,Jehovah, mighty in battle.
Lift up your heads, you gates;Open up, you ancient doorways,That the glorious King may enter!
Who is he, this glorious King? Jehovah of armies—he is the glorious King. (Selah)
All you peoples, clap your hands. Shout in triumph to God with joyful cries.
For Jehovah the Most High is awe-inspiring;He is the great King over all the earth.
He subdues peoples under us;He puts nations under our feet.
He chooses our inheritance for us,The pride of Jacob, whom he loves. (Selah)
God has ascended amid joyful shouting;Jehovah, amid the sound of the horn.
Sing praises to God, sing praises. Sing praises to our King, sing praises.
For God is King of all the earth;Sing praises, and show insight.
God has become King over the nations. God sits on his holy throne.
The leaders of the peoples have gathered togetherWith the people of the God of Abraham. For the rulers of the earth belong to God. He is highly exalted.
“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—
“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me;But they have not defeated me.
Plowmen have plowed across my back;They have made their furrows long.”
But Jehovah is righteous;He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.
They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace,All those who hate Zion.
They will become like grass on the rooftopsThat withers before it is pulled up,
That cannot fill the reaper’s handNor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.
Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you;We bless you in the name of Jehovah.”
Those who trust in JehovahAre like Mount Zion, which cannot be shakenBut endures forever.
Just as mountains surround Jerusalem,So Jehovah surrounds his peopleFrom now on and forever.
The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous,So that the righteous do not turn to doing what is wrong.
Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good,To those who are upright in heart.
As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways,Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel.
Jehovah has become King! With grandeur he is clothed;Jehovah is clothed with strength;He wears it like a belt. The earth is firmly established;It cannot be moved.
Your throne was firmly established long ago;From eternity you have existed.
The rivers have surged, O Jehovah,The rivers have surged and roared;The rivers keep surging and pounding.
Above the sound of many waters,Mightier than the breaking waves of the sea,Jehovah is majestic in the heights.
Your reminders are very trustworthy. Holiness adorns your house, O Jehovah, for all times.
Jehovah is my light and my salvation. Whom should I fear? Jehovah is the stronghold of my life. Whom should I dread?
When evil men attacked me to devour my flesh,My adversaries and my enemies were the ones who stumbled and fell.
Though an army should set up camp against me,My heart will not fear. Though war should break out against me,Even then I will remain confident.
One thing I have asked from Jehovah—It is what I will look for—That I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life,To gaze upon the pleasantness of JehovahAnd to look with appreciation upon his temple.
For he will hide me in his shelter on the day of calamity;He will conceal me in the secret place of his tent;High on a rock he will place me.
Now my head is high above my enemies who surround me;I will offer sacrifices at his tent with joyful shouting;I will sing praises to Jehovah.
Hear me, O Jehovah, when I cry out;Show me favor and answer me.
Speaking for you, my heart has said: “Seek to find my face.” Your face, O Jehovah, I will seek to find.
Do not hide your face from me. Do not turn your servant away in your anger. You are my helper;Do not forsake me or leave me, my God of salvation.
Even if my own father and mother abandon me,Jehovah himself will take me in.
Instruct me in your way, O Jehovah,Lead me in the path of uprightness because of my foes.
Do not hand me over to my adversaries,For false witnesses have risen up against me,And they threaten me with violence.
Where would I be if I did not have faithThat I would see Jehovah’s goodness in the land of the living?
Hope in Jehovah;Be courageous and strong of heart. Yes, hope in Jehovah.
Why are the nations agitatedAnd the peoples muttering an empty thing?
The kings of the earth take their standAnd high officials gather together as oneAgainst Jehovah and against his anointed one.
They say: “Let us tear off their shacklesAnd throw off their ropes!”
The One enthroned in the heavens will laugh;Jehovah will scoff at them.
At that time he will speak to them in his angerAnd terrify them in his burning anger,
Saying: “I myself have installed my kingOn Zion, my holy mountain.”
Let me proclaim the decree of Jehovah;He said to me: “You are my son;Today I have become your father.
Ask of me, and I will give nations as your inheritanceAnd the ends of the earth as your possession.
You will break them with an iron scepter,And you will smash them like a piece of pottery.”
So now, you kings, show insight;Accept correction, you judges of the earth.
Serve Jehovah with fear,And rejoice with trembling.
Honor the son, or God will become indignantAnd you will perish from the way,For His anger flares up quickly. Happy are all those taking refuge in Him.
O God, we have heard with our own ears,Our forefathers have recounted to us,The deeds you accomplished in their days,In the days of long ago.
With your hand you drove away nationsAnd settled our forefathers there. You crushed nations and drove them out.
It was not by their own sword that they took possession of the land,And their own arm did not bring them victory. Rather, it was by your right hand and your arm and the light of your face,For you took pleasure in them.
You are my King, O God;Command complete victory for Jacob.
By your power we will drive back our adversaries;In your name we will trample down those who rise up against us.
For I do not trust in my bow,And my sword cannot save me.
It was you who saved us from our adversaries,You who humiliated those who hate us.
To God we will offer praise all day long,And we will give thanks to your name forever. (Selah)
But now you have cast us off and humiliated us,And you do not go out with our armies.
You keep making us retreat from our adversary;Those who hate us take whatever they want.
You hand us over to be devoured like sheep;You have scattered us among the nations.
You sell your people for next to nothing;You make no profit from the sale.
You make us a reproach to our neighbors,An object of ridicule and jeering to those all around us.
You make us an object of scorn among the nations,Something for the peoples to shake their heads at.
I feel humiliated all day long,And I am overwhelmed by my shame,
On account of the sound of their taunts and insults,Because of our enemy who is taking revenge.
All of this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten you,And we have not violated your covenant.
Our heart has not deviated;Our footsteps do not stray from your path.
But you have crushed us where the jackals dwell;You have covered us with deep shadow.
If we have forgotten the name of our GodOr if we spread out our hands in prayer to a foreign god,
Will not God discover this? He is aware of the secrets of the heart.
For your sake we are being put to death all day long;We have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.
Rouse yourself. Why do you keep sleeping, O Jehovah? Awake! Do not keep casting us off forever.
Why do you hide your face? Why do you forget our affliction and our oppression?
For we have been brought down to the dust;Our bodies are pressed to the ground.
Rise up as our helper! Rescue us because of your loyal love.
Indeed, I wait silently for God. My salvation comes from him.
Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;I will never be greatly shaken.
How long will you assault a man in order to murder him? All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.
For they consult together to topple him from his high position;They take pleasure in lying. With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (Selah)
Indeed, I wait silently for GodBecause my hope comes from him.
Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;I will never be shaken.
Upon God depends my salvation and my glory. My strong rock, my refuge, is God.
Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (Selah)
The sons of men are a mere breath,The sons of mankind are a delusion. When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath.
Do not trust in extortionOr put false hopes in robbery. If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it.
Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this: That strength belongs to God.
Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah,For you repay each one according to his deeds.
O Jehovah, the God of my salvation,By day I cry out,And by night I come before you.
Let my prayer come to you,Incline your ear to my cry for help.
For my soul has been filled with calamity,And my life is on the brink of the Grave.
I am already counted among those going down to the pit;I have become a helpless man,
Left among the deadLike the slain lying in a grave,Whom you remember no longerAnd who have been separated from your care.
You have put me in the lowest pit,In dark places, in a large abyss.
Your rage weighs heavily on me,And you overwhelm me with your crashing waves. (Selah)
You have driven my acquaintances far away from me;You have made me something detestable to them. I am trapped and cannot escape.
My eye is worn out because of my affliction. I call on you, O Jehovah, all day long;To you I spread out my hands.
Will you perform wonders for the dead? Can those powerless in death rise up to praise you? (Selah)
Will your loyal love be declared in the grave,Your faithfulness in the place of destruction?
Will your wonders be known in the darknessOr your righteousness in the land of oblivion?
But I still cry to you for help, O Jehovah,Each morning my prayer comes before you.
Why, O Jehovah, do you reject me? Why do you hide your face from me?
From my youth on,I have been afflicted and ready to perish;I am numb from the terrible things you allow me to suffer.
Your burning anger overwhelms me;Your terrors destroy me.
They surround me like waters all day long;They close in on me from all sides.
You have driven my friends and companions far away from me;Darkness has become my companion.
Why, O Jehovah, do you stand at a distance? Why do you hide yourself in times of distress?
The wicked one arrogantly pursues the helpless one,But he will be caught in the schemes he devises.
For the wicked one boasts about his selfish desiresAnd blesses the greedy one;נ [Nun]He disrespects Jehovah.
In his haughtiness, the wicked man makes no investigation;All his thoughts are: “There is no God.”
His ways keep prospering,But your judgments are beyond his understanding;He scoffs at all his adversaries.
He says in his heart: “I will never be shaken;For generation after generationI will never see calamity.”
His mouth is full of curses, lies, and threats;Under his tongue are trouble and injury.
He waits in ambush near the settlements;From his hiding place he kills an innocent one. ע [Ayin] His eyes are watching for an unfortunate victim.
He waits in his hiding place like a lion in its lair. He waits to seize the helpless one. He seizes the helpless one when he pulls his net shut.
The victim is crushed and brought down;The unfortunate ones fall into his clutches.
He says in his heart: “God has forgotten. He has turned away his face. He never notices.”
Rise up, O Jehovah. O God, lift up your hand. Do not forget the helpless ones.
Why has the wicked one disrespected God? He says in his heart: “You will not hold me accountable.”
But you do see trouble and distress. You look on and take matters in hand. To you the unfortunate victim turns;You are the helper for the fatherless child.
Break the arm of the wicked and evil man,So that when you search for his wickedness,You will find it no more.
Jehovah is King forever and ever. The nations have perished from the earth.
But you will hear the request of the meek, O Jehovah. You will make their hearts firm and pay close attention to them.
You will render justice to the fatherless and to those who are crushed,So that mortal man of the earth may no longer make them afraid.
Can you speak about righteousness when you are silent? Can you judge in uprightness, you sons of men?
Instead, you devise unrighteousness in your heart,And your hands dispense violence in the land.
The wicked go astray from birth;They are wayward, liars from the time they are born.
Their venom is like the venom of serpents;They are deaf like the cobra that stops up its ear.
It will not listen to the voice of charmers,No matter how skillful their spells.
O God, knock the teeth out of their mouth! Break the jaws of these lions, O Jehovah!
May they disappear like waters that drain away. May He bend his bow and make them fall by his arrows.
May they be like a snail that melts away as it moves along;Like a woman’s stillborn child who never sees the sun.
Before your cooking pots feel the heat of the bramble,He will sweep away both the moist and the burning twig, as in a storm wind.
The righteous one will rejoice because he has seen the vengeance;His feet will be drenched with the blood of the wicked.
Then men will say: “Surely there is a reward for the righteous. There is indeed a God who judges in the earth.”
Praise Jah! Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty actsOr proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?
Happy are those who act with justice,Who always do what is right.
Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,
So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones,That I may rejoice along with your nation,That I may proudly praise you along with your inheritance.
We have sinned just as our forefathers did;We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.
Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love,But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.
But he saved them for the sake of his name,To make his mightiness known.
He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up;He led them through its depths as through a desert;
He saved them from the hand of their foeAnd reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy.
The waters covered their adversaries;Not one of them survived.
Then they had faith in his promise;They began to sing his praise.
But they quickly forgot what he did;They did not wait for his counsel.
They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness;They tested God in the desert.
He gave them what they requested,But then struck them with disease that made them waste away.
In the camp they grew jealous of MosesAnd of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah.
The earth then opened up and swallowed DaʹthanAnd covered those assembled with A·biʹram.
A fire blazed among their group;A flame consumed the wicked.
They made a calf in HoʹrebAnd bowed down to a statue of metal;
They exchanged my gloryFor the representation of a grass-eating bull.
They forgot God their Savior,Who did great things in Egypt,
Wonderful works in the land of Ham,Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea.
He was about to order their annihilation,But Moses his chosen one interceded with himTo avert his destructive anger.
Then they despised the desirable land;They had no faith in his promise.
They kept grumbling in their tents;They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah.
So he raised his hand in an oath concerning themThat he would make them fall in the wilderness;
He would make their descendants fall among the nations,And he would scatter them throughout the lands.
Then they joined in worship of Baʹal of Peʹor,And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.
They provoked Him by their actions,And a scourge broke out among them.
But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened,The scourge was halted.
And it was counted to him as righteousnessThrough all generations forever.
They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah,And it went badly for Moses because of them.
They embittered his spirit,And he spoke rashly with his lips.
They did not annihilate the peoples,As Jehovah had commanded them.
But they mingled with the nationsAnd adopted their ways.
They kept serving their idols,And these became a snare to them.
They would sacrifice their sonsAnd their daughters to demons.
They kept spilling innocent blood,The blood of their own sons and daughtersWhom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan;And the land was polluted with bloodshed.
They became unclean by their works;They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds.
So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people,And he grew to detest his inheritance.
He repeatedly handed them over to the nations,So that those who hated them might rule over them.
Their enemies oppressed them,And they were subject to their power.
Many times he rescued them,But they would rebel and disobey,And they would be brought low for their error.
But he would see their distressAnd hear their cry for help.
For their sake he would remember his covenant,And he would feel pity, moved by his great loyal love.
He would cause them to be pitiedBy all who held them captive.
Save us, O Jehovah our God,And gather us from the nationsSo that we may give thanks to your holy nameAnd exult in praising you.
May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praisedThroughout all eternity. And let all the people say, “Amen!” Praise Jah!
Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us,But to your name give gloryBecause of your loyal love and your faithfulness.
Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?”
Our God is in the heavens;He does whatever he pleases.
Their idols are silver and gold,The work of human hands.
A mouth they have, but they cannot speak;Eyes, but they cannot see;
Ears they have, but they cannot hear;A nose, but they cannot smell;
Hands they have, but they cannot feel;Feet, but they cannot walk;They make no sound with their throat.
The people who make them will become just like them,As will all those who trust in them.
O Israel, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.
O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.
You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah—He is their help and their shield.
Jehovah remembers us and will bless;He will bless the house of Israel;He will bless the house of Aaron.
He will bless those who fear Jehovah,The small as well as the great.
Jehovah will give you an increase,To you and your children.
May you be blessed by Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth.
As for the heavens, they belong to Jehovah,But the earth he has given to the sons of men.
The dead do not praise Jah;Nor do any who go down into the silence of death.
But we will praise JahFrom now on and forever. Praise Jah!
Shout joyfully to God our strength. Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob.
Begin the music and take a tambourine,The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument.
Blow the horn on the new moon,On the full moon, for the day of our festival.
For it is a decree for Israel,A ruling of the God of Jacob.
He established it as a reminder for JosephWhen He went out against the land of Egypt. I heard a voice that I did not recognize:
“I lifted the burden from his shoulder;His hands were freed from the basket.
In your distress you called, and I rescued you;I answered you from the thundercloud. I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah. (Selah)
Hear, my people, and I will testify against you. O Israel, if you would only listen to me.
Among you, there will be no strange god,And you will not bow down to a foreign god.
I, Jehovah, am your God,The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it.
But my people did not listen to my voice;Israel would not submit to me.
So I let them follow their stubborn hearts;They did what they thought was right.
If only my people would listen to me,If only Israel would walk in my ways!
Their enemies I would quickly subdue;I would turn my hand against their adversaries.
Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence,And their outcome will be forever.
But he will feed you with the finest wheatAnd satisfy you with honey from the rock.”
Protect me, O God, for I have taken refuge in you.
I have said to Jehovah: “You are Jehovah, my Source of goodness.
And the holy ones in the earth,The majestic ones, bring me great delight.”
Those who pursue other gods multiply their sorrows. I will never pour out their drink offerings of blood,Nor will my lips mention their names.
Jehovah is my portion, my allotted share, and my cup. You safeguard my inheritance.
Pleasant places have been measured out to me. Yes, I am content with my inheritance.
I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice. Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me.
I keep Jehovah before me constantly. Because he is at my right hand, I will never be shaken.
So my heart rejoices, my whole being is joyful. And I reside in security.
For you will not leave me in the Grave. You will not allow your loyal one to see the pit.
You make known to me the path of life. In your presence is abundant joy;There is happiness at your right hand forever.
Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
Let those reclaimed by Jehovah say this,Those whom he reclaimed from the hand of the adversary,
Whom he gathered together from the lands,From the east and from the west,From the north and from the south.
They wandered about in the wilderness, in the desert;They did not find a way to a city where they could live.
They were hungry and thirsty;They were faint from exhaustion.
They kept crying out to Jehovah in their distress;He rescued them from their plight.
He had them walk in the right wayTo come to a city where they could live.
Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
For he has satisfied the thirstyAnd filled the hungry with good things.
Some were living in deepest darkness,Prisoners in affliction and in irons.
For they had rebelled against the word of God;They disrespected the counsel of the Most High.
So he humbled their hearts through hardship;They stumbled, and there was no one to help them.
They called to Jehovah for help in their distress;He saved them from their plight.
He brought them out of deepest darkness,And he tore off their shackles.
Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
For he has broken down the doors of copperAnd cut through the bars of iron.
They were foolish and suffered afflictionOn account of their transgressions and their errors.
They lost their appetite for all food;They drew near the gates of death.
They would call to Jehovah for help in their distress;He would save them from their plight.
He would send his word and heal themAnd rescue them from the pits they were trapped in.
Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgivingAnd declare his works with a joyful cry.
Those who travel on the sea in ships,Who ply their trade over the vast waters,
They have seen the works of JehovahAnd his wonderful works in the deep;
How by his word a windstorm arises,Lifting up the waves of the sea.
They rise up to the sky;They plunge down to the depths. Their courage melts away because of the impending calamity.
They reel and stagger like a drunken man,And all their skill proves useless.
Then they cry out to Jehovah in their distress,And he rescues them from their plight.
He calms the windstorm;The waves of the sea grow quiet.
They rejoice when these grow still,And he leads them to their desired harbor.
Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal loveAnd for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.
Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people,And let them praise him in the council of the elders.
He turns rivers into a desertAnd springs of water into parched ground,
Fruitful land into salty wasteland,Because of the wickedness of those dwelling in it.
He turns the desert into reedy pools of water,And dry land into springs of water.
He causes the hungry to dwell there,So that they may establish a city where they can live.
They sow fields and plant vineyardsThat yield fruitful crops.
He blesses them and they increase greatly;He does not let their cattle diminish.
But again they become few and are humiliatedBecause of oppression, calamity, and grief.
He pours out contempt upon noblesAnd makes them wander in trackless wastelands.
But he protects the poor from oppressionAnd makes their families as numerous as a flock.
The upright see this and rejoice;But all the unrighteous shut their mouths.
Whoever is wise will observe these thingsAnd will carefully consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love.
When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion,We thought we were dreaming.
At that time our mouth was filled with laughterAnd our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”
Jehovah has done great things for us,And we are overjoyed.
Do gather back our captives, O Jehovah,Like streams in the Negʹeb.
Those sowing seed with tearsWill reap with a joyful shout.
The one who does go out, though weeping,Carrying his bag of seed,Will surely return with a joyful shout,Carrying in his sheaves.
God takes his place in the divine assembly;In the middle of the gods he judges:
“How long will you continue to judge with injusticeAnd show partiality to the wicked? (Selah)
Defend the lowly and the fatherless. Render justice to the helpless and destitute.
Rescue the lowly and the poor;Save them out of the hand of the wicked.”
They do not know, nor do they understand;They are walking about in darkness;All the foundations of the earth are being shaken.
“I have said, ‘You are gods,All of you are sons of the Most High.
But you will die just as men do;And like any other prince you will fall!’”
Rise up, O God, and judge the earth,For all the nations belong to you.
Listen to my words, O Jehovah;Be attentive to my sighing.
Pay attention to my cry for help,O my King and my God, because to you I pray.
O Jehovah, you will hear my voice in the morning;In the morning I will express my concern to you and wait expectantly.
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wickedness;No one bad may remain with you.
No arrogant person may stand in your presence. You hate all those who behave wickedly;
You will destroy those who speak lies. Jehovah detests violent and deceptive people.
But I will come into your house because of your great loyal love;I will bow down toward your holy temple in reverential fear of you.
Lead me, O Jehovah, in your righteousness because of my foes;Make your way clear for me.
For nothing they say can be trusted;Within them is nothing but malice;Their throat is an open grave;They flatter with their tongue.
But God will declare them guilty;Their own schemes will cause their downfall. May they be driven away because of their many transgressions,For they have rebelled against you.
But all those who take refuge in you will rejoice;They will always shout joyfully. You will block approach to them,And those loving your name will rejoice in you.
For you will bless anyone righteous, O Jehovah;You will surround them with approval as with a large shield.
God is our refuge and strength,A help that is readily found in times of distress.
That is why we will not fear, though the earth undergoes change,Though the mountains topple into the depths of the sea,
Though its waters roar and foam over,Though the mountains rock on account of its turbulence. (Selah)
There is a river the streams of which make the city of God rejoice,The holy grand tabernacle of the Most High.
God is in the city; it cannot be overthrown. God will come to its aid at the break of dawn.
The nations were in an uproar, the kingdoms were overthrown;He raised his voice, and the earth melted.
Jehovah of armies is with us;The God of Jacob is our secure refuge. (Selah)
Come and witness the activities of Jehovah,How he has done astonishing things on the earth.
He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear;He burns the military wagons with fire.
“Give in and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations;I will be exalted in the earth.”
Jehovah of armies is with us;The God of Jacob is a secure refuge for us. (Selah)
O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance;They have defiled your holy temple;They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.
They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavensAnd the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth.
They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem,And no one is left to bury them.
We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors;Those around us ridicule and jeer us.
How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever? How long will your indignation burn just like fire?
Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know youAnd on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
For they have devoured JacobAnd have desolated his homeland.
Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors. Quickly show us your mercy,For we have been brought very low.
Help us, O God of our salvation,For the sake of your glorious name;Rescue us and forgive our sins for the sake of your name.
Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?” Before our eyes may it become known among the nationsThat the shed blood of your servants has been avenged.
May you hear the sighing of the prisoner. Use your great power to preserve those sentenced to death.
Repay our neighbors sevenfoldFor the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah.
Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture,Will give thanks to you forever;And we will declare your praise from generation to generation.
Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men;Protect me from violent men,
Those who scheme evil in their heartsAnd stir up conflict all day long.
They sharpen their tongue like that of a serpent;Venom of vipers is behind their lips. (Selah)
Protect me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked;Safeguard me from violent men,Those who scheme to trip me.
The haughty ones hide a trap for me;With ropes they spread out a net beside the path. They set snares for me. (Selah)
I say to Jehovah: “You are my God. Listen, O Jehovah, to my pleas for help.”
O Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, my strong Savior,You shield my head in the day of battle.
Do not grant, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked. Do not let their plots succeed, so that they are not exalted. (Selah)
May the heads of those surrounding meBe covered with the evil spoken by their lips.
May burning coals rain down on them. May they be hurled into the fire,Into deep pits, never to rise again.
May the slanderer find no place on the earth. May evil pursue men of violence and strike them down.
I know that Jehovah will defend the lowlyAnd give justice to the poor.
Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name;The upright will dwell before your face.
The foolish one says in his heart: “There is no Jehovah.” Their actions are corrupt, and their dealings are detestable;No one is doing good.
But Jehovah looks down from heaven on the sons of menTo see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah.
They have all turned aside;They are all alike corrupt. No one is doing good,Not even one.
Do none of the wrongdoers understand? They devour my people as if they were eating bread. They do not call on Jehovah.
But they will be filled with great terror,For Jehovah is with the generation of the righteous.
You wrongdoers try to frustrate the plans of the lowly one,But Jehovah is his refuge.
O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion! When Jehovah gathers back his captive people,Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
Praise Jah! It is good to sing praises to our God;How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!
Jehovah is building Jerusalem;He gathers together the dispersed ones of Israel.
He heals the brokenhearted;He binds up their wounds.
He counts the number of the stars;He calls all of them by name.
Our Lord is great and is mighty in power;His understanding is beyond measure.
Jehovah raises up the meek,But he hurls the wicked to the ground.
Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving;Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp,
The One who covers the heavens with clouds,The One providing rain for the earth,The One making grass sprout on the mountains.
To the animals he gives food,To the young ravens that call out for it.
He does not delight in the power of the horse;Nor is he impressed by the strong legs of a man.
Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him,In those waiting for his loyal love.
Glorify Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise your God, O Zion.
He makes the bars of your city gates strong;He blesses your sons within you.
He brings peace to your territory;He satisfies you with the finest wheat.
He sends his command to the earth;His word runs swiftly.
He sends the snow like wool;He scatters the frost just like ashes.
He hurls down his hailstones like morsels of bread. Who can withstand his cold?
He sends out his word, and they melt. He makes his wind blow, and the waters flow.
He declares his word to Jacob,His regulations and judgments to Israel.
He has not done so with any other nation;They know nothing about his judgments. Praise Jah!
Praise Jehovah,All you servants of Jehovah,You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.
Raise your hands in holinessAnd praise Jehovah.
May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth,Bless you from Zion.
My heart is steadfast, O God. I will sing and make music with my whole being.
Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.
I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah,And I will sing praises to you among the nations.
For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens,And your faithfulness, up to the skies.
Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth.
So that your loved ones may be rescued,Save us with your right hand and answer me.
God has spoken in his holiness: “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance,And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth.
Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh,And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head;Judah is my commander’s staff.
Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”
Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?
Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us,Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?
Help us in our distress,For salvation by humans is worthless.
By God we will gain power,And he will trample on our adversaries.
To you I keep calling, O Jehovah my Rock;Do not turn a deaf ear to me. If you keep silent toward me,I will become like those going down to the pit.
Hear my pleas when I cry to you for helpAs I lift up my hands toward the innermost room of your sanctuary.
Do not drag me away with the wicked, with those practicing what is hurtful,Those who are speaking words of peace with their fellow man while evil is in their hearts.
Pay them back for their deeds,According to their evil practices. Repay them for the work of their hands,According to what they have done.
For they pay no attention to the activities of Jehovah,Nor to the work of his hands. He will tear them down and not build them up.
May Jehovah be praised,For he has heard my pleas for help.
Jehovah is my strength and my shield;In him my heart trusts. I have received his help, and my heart rejoices,So I will praise him with my song.
Jehovah is a strength for his people;He is a stronghold, bringing grand salvation to his anointed one.
Save your people, and bless your inheritance. Shepherd them and carry them in your arms forever.
My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Why are you far from saving me,Far from my cries of anguish?
My God, I keep calling by day, and you do not answer;And by night there is no silence on my part.
But you are holy,Surrounded by the praises of Israel.
In you our fathers put their trust;They trusted, and you kept rescuing them.
To you they cried out, and they were saved;They trusted in you, and they were not disappointed.
But I am a worm and not a man,Scorned by men and despised by the people.
All those seeing me mock me;They sneer and shake their heads in derision:
“He entrusted himself to Jehovah. Let Him rescue him! Let Him save him, for he is so dear to Him!”
You were the One who brought me out of the womb,The One who made me feel secure on my mother’s breasts.
I have been entrusted to your care from birth;From my mother’s womb, you have been my God.
Do not stay far off from me, for trouble is nearAnd I have no other helper.
Many young bulls surround me;Powerful bulls of Baʹshan encircle me.
They open their mouth wide against me,Like a roaring lion that tears its prey to pieces.
I am poured out like water;All my bones are out of joint. My heart has become like wax;It melts deep within me.
My strength has dried up like a piece of pottery;My tongue sticks to my gums;You are bringing me down to the dust of death.
For dogs surround me;They close in on me like a pack of evildoers,Like a lion they are at my hands and feet.
I can count all my bones. They look on and stare at me.
They divide my garments among themselves,And they cast lots for my clothing.
But you, O Jehovah, do not remain far away. You are my strength; hurry to help me.
Save me from the sword,My precious life from the paws of dogs;
Save me from the mouth of the lion and the horns of wild bulls;Answer and save me.
I will declare your name to my brothers;In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.
You who fear Jehovah, praise him! All you offspring of Jacob, glorify him! Stand in awe of him, all you offspring of Israel.
For he has not despised nor loathed the suffering of the oppressed one;He has not hidden his face from him. When he cried to him for help, he heard.
I will praise you in the large congregation;I will pay my vows before those who fear him.
The meek will eat and be satisfied;Those seeking Jehovah will praise him. May you enjoy life forever.
All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to Jehovah. All the families of the nations will bow down before you.
For the kingship belongs to Jehovah;He rules over the nations.
All the prosperous ones of the earth will eat and will bow down;All those going down to the dust will kneel before him;None of them can preserve their lives.
Their descendants will serve him;The generation to come will be told about Jehovah.
They will come and tell of his righteousness. They will tell the people yet to be born what he has done.
Jehovah has become King! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.
Clouds and thick gloom are all around him;Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.
Fire goes before himAnd consumes his adversaries on every side.
His lightning bolts light up the land;The earth sees it and trembles.
The mountains melt like wax before Jehovah,Before the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens proclaim his righteousness,And all the peoples see his glory.
Let all those serving any carved image be put to shame,Those who boast about their worthless gods. Bow down to him, all you gods.
Zion hears and rejoices;The towns of Judah are joyfulBecause of your judgments, O Jehovah.
For you, O Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth;You are exalted far above all other gods.
O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives of his loyal ones;He rescues them from the hand of the wicked.
Light has flashed up for the righteousAnd rejoicing for those upright in heart.
Rejoice in Jehovah, you righteous ones,And give thanks to his holy name.
Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and answer me,For I am afflicted and poor.
Guard my life, for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you,For you are my God.
Show me favor, O Jehovah,For I call to you all day long.
Make your servant rejoice,For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.
For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive;You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.
Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer;And pay attention to my pleas for help.
I call on you in the day of my distress,For you will answer me.
There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah,There are no works like yours.
All the nations that you madeWill come and bow down before you, O Jehovah,And they will give glory to your name.
For you are great and do wondrous things;You are God, you alone.
Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart to fear your name.
I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart,And I will glorify your name forever,
For your loyal love toward me is great,And you have saved my life from the depths of the Grave.
O God, presumptuous men rise up against me;A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,And they have no regard for you.
But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.
Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant,And save the son of your slave girl.
Show me a sign of your goodness,So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.
O Jehovah, hear my prayer;Listen to my plea for help. In your faithfulness and in your righteousness, answer me.
Do not enter into judgment with your servant,For no one living can be righteous before you.
For the enemy pursues me;He has crushed my life into the ground. He has caused me to dwell in darkness like those long dead.
My spirit is failing;My heart is numb within me.
I remember the days of old;I meditate on all your activity;I eagerly ponder over the work of your hands.
I spread out my hands to you;I am like a parched land that thirsts for you. (Selah)
Do answer me quickly, O Jehovah;My strength has come to an end. Do not hide your face from me,Or I will be like those going down into the pit.
Let me hear your loyal love in the morning,For I trust in you. Make known to me the way I should walk,For to you I turn.
Rescue me from my enemies, O Jehovah. I seek your protection.
Teach me to do your will,For you are my God. Your spirit is good;May it lead me on level ground.
For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, preserve me alive. In your righteousness, rescue me from distress.
In your loyal love, put an end to my enemies;Destroy all those harassing me,For I am your servant.
O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.
You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.
You observe me when I travel and when I lie down;You are familiar with all my ways.
There is not a word on my tongue,But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.
Behind and before me, you surround me;And you lay your hand upon me.
Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension. It is too high for me to reach.
Where can I escape from your spirit,And where can I run away from your face?
If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there,And if I were to make my bed in the Grave, look! you would be there.
If I would fly away with the wings of the dawnTo reside by the most remote sea,
Even there your hand would lead meAnd your right hand would take hold of me.
If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light.
Even the darkness would not be too dark for you,But night would be as bright as the day;Darkness is the same as light to you.
For you produced my kidneys;You kept me screened off in my mother’s womb.
I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful,I know this very well.
My bones were not hidden from youWhen I was made in secret,When I was woven in the depths of the earth.
Your eyes even saw me as an embryo;All its parts were written in your bookRegarding the days when they were formed,Before any of them existed.
So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them!
If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.
O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent men would depart from me,
Those who say things against you with evil intent;They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way.
Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah,And loathe those who revolt against you?
I have nothing but hatred for them;They have become real enemies to me.
Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious thoughts.
See whether there is in me any harmful way,And lead me in the way of eternity.
Look! How good and how pleasant it isFor brothers to dwell together in unity!
It is like fine oil poured on the headThat runs down the beard,Aaron’s beard,And runs down onto the collar of his garments.
It is like the dew of HerʹmonThat descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing—Life everlasting.
O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty,Nor are my eyes lofty;Nor do I aspire to things too great,Or to things that are beyond me.
No, but I have calmed and quieted my soulLike a weaned child with its mother;I am contented like a weaned child.
Let Israel wait for JehovahFrom now on and forever.
O Jehovah, who may be a guest in your tent? Who may reside in your holy mountain?
The one who is walking faultlessly,Practicing what is rightAnd speaking the truth in his heart.
He does not slander with his tongue,He does nothing bad to his neighbor,And he does not defame his friends.
He rejects anyone who is contemptible,But he honors those fearing Jehovah. He does not go back on his promise, even when it is bad for him.
He does not lend his money on interest,And he does not accept a bribe against the innocent. Whoever does these things will never be shaken.
Listen, my people, to my law;Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.
I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.
The things we have heard and know,Which our fathers have related to us,
We will not hide from their sons;We will relate to the generation to comeThe praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength,The wonderful things he has done.
He established a reminder in JacobAnd set a law in Israel;He commanded our forefathersTo make these things known to their children,
So that the next generation,The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.
Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s worksBut would observe his commandments.
Then they would not be like their forefathers,A stubborn and rebellious generation,A generation whose heart was unsteadyAnd whose spirit was not faithful to God.
The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow,But they retreated in the day of battle.
They did not keep the covenant of GodAnd refused to walk in his law.
They also forgot what he had done,His wonderful works that he showed them.
He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers,In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan.
He split the sea to let them pass through,And he made the waters stand up like a dam.
He led them with a cloud by dayAnd the whole night with the light of a fire.
He split rocks in the wilderness,He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters.
He brought streams out of a cragAnd caused waters to flow down like rivers.
But they continued to sin against himBy rebelling against the Most High in the desert;
They challenged God in their heartBy demanding food that they craved.
So they spoke against God,Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?”
Look! He struck a rockSo that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread,Or can he provide meat for his people?”
When Jehovah heard them, he became furious;A fire blazed against Jacob,And his anger flared up against Israel
Because they did not put faith in God;They did not trust in his ability to save them.
So he commanded the cloudy skies above,And he opened the doors of heaven.
He kept raining down manna for them to eat;He gave them the grain of heaven.
Men ate the bread of mighty ones;He provided enough to satisfy them.
He stirred up the east wind in the heavensAnd made a south wind blow by his power.
And he rained down meat on them like dust,Birds like the sand of the seashore.
He made them fall in the midst of his camp,All around his tents.
And they ate and gorged themselves;He gave them what they desired.
But before they fully satisfied their craving,While their food was yet in their mouth,
God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men;He brought down the young men of Israel.
Despite this they sinned even moreAnd did not put faith in his wonderful works.
So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath,And their years by sudden terrors.
But as often as he killed them, they would search for him;They would return and look for God,
Remembering that God was their RockAnd that the Most High God was their Redeemer.
But they tried to deceive him with their mouthAnd lied to him with their tongue.
Their heart was not steadfast toward him;And they were not faithful to his covenant.
But he was merciful;He would forgive their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his angerInstead of stirring up all his wrath.
For he remembered that they were flesh,A wind that blows past and does not return.
How often they rebelled against him in the wildernessAnd made him feel hurt in the desert!
Again and again they put God to the test,And they grieved the Holy One of Israel.
They did not remember his power,The day that he rescued them from the adversary,
How he displayed his signs in EgyptAnd his miracles in the region of Zoʹan,
And how he turned the Nile canals into bloodSo that they could not drink from their streams.
He sent swarms of gadflies to devour themAnd frogs to bring them to ruin.
He gave their crops to the voracious locusts,The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts.
He destroyed their vines with hailAnd their sycamore trees with hailstones.
He gave their beasts of burden over to the hailAnd their livestock to the lightning bolts.
He inflicted his burning anger on them,Fury and indignation and distress,Companies of angels bringing calamity.
He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them from death;And he gave them over to pestilence.
Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt,The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham.
Then he brought his people out like a flockAnd guided them like a drove in the wilderness.
He led them in security,And they felt no fear;The sea covered their enemies.
And he brought them to his holy territory,This mountainous region that his right hand acquired.
He drove out the nations from before them;He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line;He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes.
But they kept challenging God the Most High, and rebelling against him;They did not pay attention to his reminders.
They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow.
They kept offending him with their high places,And they incited him to fury with their carved images.
God heard and became furious,So he utterly rejected Israel.
He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh,The tent where he had resided among men.
He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity;His splendor into the hand of the adversary.
He handed his people over to the swordAnd became furious with his inheritance.
Fire consumed his young men,And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.
His priests fell by the sword,And their own widows did not weep.
Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep,Like a mighty man waking up from wine.
And he drove his adversaries back;He put them to lasting disgrace.
He rejected the tent of Joseph;He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im.
But he chose the tribe of Judah,Mount Zion, which he loves.
He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,Like the earth that he has established forever.
He chose David his servantAnd took him from the sheep pens,
From tending the nursing ewes;He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people,And over Israel, his inheritance.
He shepherded them with integrity of heart,And with skillful hands he led them.
Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered,And let those who hate him flee from before him.
As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away;As wax melts before the fire,So let the wicked perish before God.
But let the righteous rejoice;May they be overjoyed before God;May they exult with rejoicing.
Sing to God; sing praises to his name. Sing to the One riding through the desert plains. Jah is his name! Rejoice before him!
A father of the fatherless and a protector of widowsIs God in his holy dwelling.
God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in;He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn must live in a parched land.
O God, when you led your people,When you marched through the desert, (Selah)
The earth quaked;Heaven poured down rain because of God;This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel.
You made it rain in abundance, O God;You reinvigorated your exhausted people.
They dwelled in your tent community;In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God.
Jehovah gives the command;The women proclaiming the good news are a large army.
The kings of armies flee, they flee! She who remains at home shares in the spoil.
Although you men were lying among the campfires,There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver,With pinions of fine gold.
When the Almighty One scattered its kings,Snow fell in Zalʹmon.
The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God;The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks.
Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks,Toward the mountain that God has chosen as his dwelling? Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever.
The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands. Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place.
You ascended on high;You carried away captives;You took gifts in the form of men,Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God.
May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load,The true God of our salvation. (Selah)
The true God is for us a God who saves;And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death.
Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies,The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues in his guilt.
Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan;I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
So that your foot may be awash in bloodAnd the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.”
They see your processions, O God,The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place.
The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them;In between are the young women playing tambourines.
In congregated throngs, praise God;Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel.
There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them,Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd,The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li.
Your God has decreed that you will be strong. Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf.
Because of your temple at Jerusalem,Kings will bring gifts to you.
Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds,The assembly of bulls and their calves,Until the peoples bow down bringing pieces of silver. But he scatters the peoples who delight in war.
Bronze articles will be brought out of Egypt;Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God.
O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God,Sing praises to Jehovah, (Selah)
To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens. Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice.
Acknowledge God’s strength. His majesty is over Israel,And his strength is in the skies.
God is awe-inspiring from his grand sanctuary. He is the God of Israel,Who gives strength and power to the people. Praise to God.
I called to Jehovah in my distress,And he answered me.
O Jehovah, rescue me from lying lipsAnd from the deceitful tongue.
What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,You deceitful tongue?
With sharp arrows of a warriorAnd burning coals of broomwood.
Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.
I have been dwelling far too longWith those who hate peace.
I am for peace, but when I speak,They are for war.
Hear this, all you peoples. Pay attention, all you inhabitants of the world,
Both small and great,Rich and poor alike.
My own mouth will speak wisdom,And the meditation of my heart will show understanding.
I will pay attention to a proverb;I will expound my riddle with the harp.
Why should I fear during times of trouble,When I am surrounded by the evil of those trying to overthrow me?
Those who are trusting in their wealthAnd who boast about their great riches,
None of them can ever redeem a brotherOr give to God a ransom for him,
(The ransom price for their life is so preciousThat it is always beyond their reach);
That he should live forever and not see the pit.
He sees that even wise people die;The stupid and the unreasoning perish together,And they must leave their wealth to others.
Their inner wish is that their houses will last forever,Their tents to generation after generation. They have named their estates after themselves.
But man, although honored, will not remain;He is no better than the beasts that perish.
This is the way of the stupid onesAnd of those who follow them, who take pleasure in their empty words. (Selah)
They are assigned like sheep to the Grave. Death will shepherd them;The upright will rule over them in the morning. Every trace of them will fade away;The Grave rather than a palace will be their home.
But God will redeem me from the power of the Grave,For he will take hold of me. (Selah)
Do not be afraid because a man becomes rich,Because the splendor of his house increases,
For when he dies he can take nothing with him;His splendor will not go down with him.
For during his lifetime he congratulates himself. (People praise you when you prosper.)
But he finally joins the generation of his forefathers. They will never again see the light.
A man who does not understand this, although honored,Is no better than the beasts that perish.
Happy is the one whose transgression is pardoned, whose sin is covered.
Happy is the man whom Jehovah does not charge with guilt,In whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept silent, my bones wasted away because of my groaning all day long.
For day and night your hand was heavy upon me. My strength evaporated like water in the dry summer heat. (Selah)
Finally I confessed my sin to you;I did not cover my error. I said: “I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah.” And you pardoned the error of my sins. (Selah)
This is why every loyal one will pray to youWhile you may yet be found. Then even the floodwaters will not reach him.
You are a hiding place for me;You will safeguard me from distress. You will surround me with joyful shouts of deliverance. (Selah)
“I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.
Do not become like a horse or a mule, without understanding,Whose spiritedness must be controlled with a bridle or a halterBefore it will come near to you.”
Many are the pains of the wicked;But the one trusting in Jehovah is surrounded by His loyal love.
Rejoice in Jehovah and be joyful, you righteous ones;Shout joyfully, all you who are upright in heart.
When I call, answer me, O my righteous God. Make a way of escape for me in my distress. Show me favor and hear my prayer.
You sons of men, how long will you turn my honor into humiliation? How long will you love what is worthless and search for what is false? (Selah)
Know that Jehovah will treat his loyal one in a special way;Jehovah will hear when I call to him.
Be agitated, but do not sin. Have your say in your heart, upon your bed, and keep silent. (Selah)
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness,And trust in Jehovah.
There are many saying: “Who will show us anything good?” Let the light of your face shine upon us, O Jehovah.
You have filled my heart with greater rejoicingThan those who have an abundant harvest of grain and new wine.
I will lie down and sleep in peace,For you alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.
Praise Jah! א [Aleph] I will praise Jehovah with all my heartב [Beth]In the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.
The works of Jehovah are great;ד [Daleth]They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.
His activity is glorious and splendid,ו [Waw]And his righteousness endures forever.
He causes his wonderful works to be remembered. ח [Heth] Jehovah is compassionate and merciful.
Food he gives to those fearing him. י [Yod] He remembers his covenant forever.
He has revealed to his people his powerful worksל [Lamed]By giving them the inheritance of the nations.
The works of his hands are truth and justice;נ [Nun]Trustworthy are all his orders.
They are always reliable, now and forever;ע [Ayin]They are made in truth and righteousness.
He has given redemption to his people. צ [Tsade] He commanded that his covenant should last forever. ק [Qoph] His name is holy and awe-inspiring.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom. ש [Sin] All those observing his orders show good insight. ת [Taw] His praise endures forever.
Rescue me from my enemies, O my God;Protect me from those rising up against me.
Rescue me from those who act wickedly,And save me from violent men.
Look! They wait to ambush me;Strong men attack meBut not because I have revolted or sinned, O Jehovah.
Though I did no wrong, they run and prepare to attack. Do arise at my calling and see.
For you, O Jehovah God of armies, are the God of Israel. Awake to turn your attention to all the nations. Do not show mercy to any malicious traitors. (Selah)
They return each evening;They growl like dogs and prowl around the city.
Look what pours forth from their mouth;Their lips are like swords,For they say: “Who is listening?”
But you, O Jehovah, will laugh at them;You will scoff at all the nations.
O my Strength, I will keep watch for you;For God is my secure refuge.
The God who shows loyal love to me will come to my aid;God will cause me to look in triumph on my foes.
Do not kill them, so that my people may not forget. By your power make them wander about;Cause their downfall, O Jehovah, our shield.
For the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips,May they be trapped by their pride,Because of the cursing and deception that they speak.
Finish them off in your wrath;Finish them off, so that they are no more;Make them know that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah)
Let them return in the evening;Let them growl like dogs and prowl around the city.
Let them wander about for something to eat;Do not let them be satisfied or find a lodging place.
But as for me, I will sing about your strength;In the morning I will joyfully tell about your loyal love. For you are my secure refugeAnd a place for me to flee in my time of distress.
O my Strength, to you I will sing praises,For God is my secure refuge, the God who shows loyal love to me.
O Jehovah, hear my prayer;Let my cry for help reach you.
Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear to me;Do answer me quickly when I call.
For my days are vanishing like smoke,And my bones are charred like a fireplace.
My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered,For I forget to eat my food.
Because of my loud groaning,My bones cling to my flesh.
I resemble the pelican of the wilderness;I am like a little owl among the ruins.
I lie awake;I am like a solitary bird on a roof.
All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me use my name as a curse.
For I eat ashes as my bread,And my drink is mingled with tears,
Because of your anger and your indignation,For you lifted me up only to cast me aside.
My days are like a fading shadow,And I am withering like grass.
But you remain forever, O Jehovah,And your fame will endure for all generations.
Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion,For it is time to show her your favor;The appointed time has come.
For your servants find pleasure in her stonesAnd have affection even for her dust.
The nations will fear the name of Jehovah,And all the kings of the earth your glory.
For Jehovah will rebuild Zion;He will appear in his glory.
He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute;He will not despise their prayer.
This is written for the future generation,So that a people yet to be brought forth will praise Jah.
For he looks down from his holy height,From the heavens Jehovah views the earth,
To hear the sighing of the prisoner,To release those sentenced to death,
So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in ZionAnd his praise in Jerusalem,
When the peoples and kingdomsGather together to serve Jehovah.
He prematurely robbed me of my strength;He cut short my days.
I said: “O my God,Do not do away with me in the middle of my life,You whose years span all generations.
Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth,And the heavens are the work of your hands.
They will perish, but you will remain;Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away.
But you are the same, and your years will never end.
The children of your servants will dwell securely,And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”
Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good;His loyal love endures forever.
Give thanks to the God of gods,For his loyal love endures forever.
Give thanks to the Lord of lords,For his loyal love endures forever.
He alone does great wonders,For his loyal love endures forever.
He skillfully made the heavens,For his loyal love endures forever.
He spread out the earth over the waters,For his loyal love endures forever.
He made the great lights,For his loyal love endures forever,
The sun to rule over the day,For his loyal love endures forever,
The moon and the stars to rule over the night,For his loyal love endures forever.
He struck down Egypt’s firstborn,For his loyal love endures forever.
He brought Israel out from their midst,For his loyal love endures forever,
With a mighty hand and an outstretched arm,For his loyal love endures forever.
He split the Red Sea in two,For his loyal love endures forever.
He caused Israel to pass through the middle of it,For his loyal love endures forever.
He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea,For his loyal love endures forever.
He led his people through the wilderness,For his loyal love endures forever.
He struck down great kings,For his loyal love endures forever.
He killed mighty kings,For his loyal love endures forever,
Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites,For his loyal love endures forever,
And Og the king of Baʹshan,For his loyal love endures forever.
He gave their land as an inheritance,For his loyal love endures forever,
An inheritance to Israel his servant,For his loyal love endures forever.
He remembered us when we were low,For his loyal love endures forever.
He kept rescuing us from our adversaries,For his loyal love endures forever.
He gives food to every living thing,For his loyal love endures forever.
Give thanks to the God of the heavens,For his loyal love endures forever.
Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.
From the ends of the earth I will cry out to youWhen my heart is in despair. Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am.
For you are my refuge,A strong tower that protects me from the enemy.
I will be a guest in your tent forever;I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (Selah)
For you, O God, have heard my vows. You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name.
You will add days to the life of the king,And his years will be from generation to generation.
He will sit enthroned forever before God;Grant him loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him.
Then I will sing praises to your name foreverAs I pay my vows day after day.
With my voice I call to Jehovah for help;With my voice I plead with Jehovah for favor.
Before him I pour out my concern;Before him I tell about my distress
When my spirit fails within me. Then you watch my roadway. In the path where I walk,They hide a trap for me.
Look at my right hand and seeThat no one cares about me. There is nowhere I can flee;No one is concerned about me.
I call to you, O Jehovah, for help. I say: “You are my refuge,All I have in the land of the living.”
Pay attention to my cry for help,For I have been brought very low. Rescue me from my persecutors,For they are stronger than I am.
Bring me out of the dungeonTo praise your name. May the righteous gather around meBecause you deal kindly with me.
O Shepherd of Israel, listen,You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock. You who sit enthroned above the cherubs,Shine forth.
Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh,Do stir up your mightiness;Come and save us.
O God, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward the prayer of your people?
You feed them tears as their bread,And you make them drink tears beyond measure.
You let our neighbors quarrel over us;Our enemies keep mocking us as they please.
O God of armies, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
You made a vine depart from Egypt. You drove out the nations and planted it.
You cleared a space for it,And it took root and filled the land.
The mountains were covered by its shadow,And the cedars of God by its branches.
Its branches reached as far as the sea,And its shoots to the River.
Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard,So that all those passing by pluck its fruit?
The boars of the forest ravage it,And the wild animals of the field feed on it.
O God of armies, please return. Look down from heaven and see! Take care of this vine,
The stock that your right hand has planted,And look upon the son whom you made strong for yourself.
It is burned with fire, cut down. They perish at your rebuke.
May your hand give support to the man at your right hand,To the son of man you have made strong for yourself.
Then we will not turn away from you. Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name.
O Jehovah God of armies, restore us;Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.
When Israel went out of Egypt,The house of Jacob from a people speaking a foreign language,
Judah became his sanctuary,Israel, his dominion.
The sea saw it and fled;The Jordan turned back.
The mountains skipped about like rams,The hills, like lambs.
What made you flee, O sea? Why, O Jordan, did you turn back?
Why did you skip about like rams, O mountains,Like lambs, O hills?
Tremble, O earth, because of the Lord,Because of the God of Jacob,
Who turns the rock into a reedy pool of water,The flinty rock into springs of water.
I said: “I will guard my stepTo avoid sinning with my tongue. I will guard my mouth with a muzzleAs long as anyone wicked is in my presence.”
I was speechless and silent;I kept quiet even about what is good,But my pain was intense.
My heart smoldered inside me. As I pondered, the fire kept burning. Then my tongue spoke:
“O Jehovah, help me to know what my end will be,And the measure of my days,So that I may know how short my life is.
Indeed, you have made my days just a few;And my life span is as nothing before you. Surely every man, though he seems secure, is nothing but a mere breath. (Selah)
Surely every man walks about like a shadow. He rushes around for nothing. He piles up wealth, not knowing who will enjoy it.
What, then, can I hope for, O Jehovah? You are my only hope.
Save me from all my transgressions. Do not let the foolish one make me an object of contempt.
I remained speechless;I could not open my mouth,Because this was your doing.
Remove your plague from me. I am worn down because your hand strikes me.
You correct man with punishment for his error;You consume the things he treasures just as a moth does. Surely every man is but a mere breath. (Selah)
Hear my prayer, O Jehovah,Listen to my cry for help. Do not ignore my tears. For I am but a foreign resident to you,A traveler passing through, just like all my forefathers.
Turn your harsh gaze away from me so that I may cheer upBefore I pass away and I am gone.”
May Jehovah answer you in the day of distress. May the name of the God of Jacob protect you.
May he send you help from the holy placeAnd sustain you from Zion.
May he remember all your gift offerings;May he accept with favor your burnt offering. (Selah)
May he grant you the desires of your heartAnd give success to all your plans.
We will shout joyfully over your acts of salvation;We will lift our banners in the name of our God. May Jehovah fulfill all your requests.
Now I do know that Jehovah saves his anointed one. He answers him from his holy heavensWith great salvation by his right hand.
Some rely on chariots and others on horses,But we call on the name of Jehovah our God.
They have collapsed and fallen,But we have risen up and been restored.
O Jehovah, save the king! He will answer us in the day we call for help.
Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!
Sing to Jehovah; praise his name. Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day.
Declare his glory among the nations,His wonderful works among all the peoples.
Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.
All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods,But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.
In his presence are majesty and splendor;Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.
Give Jehovah the glory due his name;Bring a gift and come into his courtyards.
Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment;Tremble before him, all the earth!
Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King! The earth is firmly established, it cannot be moved. He will judge the peoples fairly.”
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful;Let the sea thunder and all that fills it;
Let the fields and everything in them rejoice. At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully
Before Jehovah, for he is coming,He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousnessAnd the peoples with his faithfulness.
Save me, O Jehovah, for the loyal one is no more;Faithful people have vanished from among men.
They speak lies to one another;They flatter with their lips and speak with deceitful hearts.
Jehovah will cut off all flattering lipsAnd the tongue that makes great boasts,
Those who say: “We will prevail with our tongues. We use our lips as we please;Who will be our master?”
“Because the afflicted are oppressed,Because of the sighing of the poor,I will rise up to act,” says Jehovah. “I will save them from those who treat them with contempt.”
The sayings of Jehovah are pure;They are like silver refined in an earthen furnace, purified seven times.
You will guard them, O Jehovah;You will protect each one of them from this generation forever.
The wicked walk around unrestrainedBecause the sons of men promote depravity.
The foolish one says in his heart: “There is no Jehovah.” Their unrighteous actions are corrupt and detestable;No one is doing good.
But God looks down from heaven on the sons of menTo see whether anyone has insight, whether anyone is seeking Jehovah.
They have all turned away;They are all alike corrupt. No one is doing good,Not even one.
Do none of the wrongdoers understand? They devour my people as if they were eating bread. They do not call on Jehovah.
But they will be filled with great terror,Terror they have never felt before,For God will scatter the bones of those attacking you. You will put them to shame, for Jehovah has rejected them.
O that Israel’s salvation may come from Zion! When Jehovah gathers back his captive people,Let Jacob be joyful, let Israel rejoice.
Jehovah is great and most worthy of praiseIn the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its loftiness, the joy of the whole earth,Is Mount Zion in the far north,The city of the Grand King.
In her fortified towers,God has made known that he is a secure refuge.
For look! kings have assembled;Together they have advanced.
When they saw it, they were amazed. They panicked and fled in terror.
Trembling seized them there,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth.
With an east wind you wreck the ships of Tarʹshish.
What we heard about, we have now seen for ourselvesIn the city of Jehovah of armies, in the city of our God. God will firmly establish it forever. (Selah)
We ponder your loyal love, O God,Within your temple.
Like your name, O God, your praiseReaches to the ends of the earth. Your right hand is filled with righteousness.
May Mount Zion rejoice,May the towns of Judah be joyful, because of your judgments.
March around Zion; go all around it;Count its towers.
Set your hearts upon its ramparts. Inspect its fortified towers,So that you may tell about it to future generations.
For this God is our God forever and ever. He will guide us forevermore.
I have affection for you, O Jehovah, my strength.
Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me. My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge,My shield and my horn of salvation, my secure refuge.
I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise,And I will be saved from my enemies.
The ropes of death encircled me;Flash floods of worthless men terrified me.
The ropes of the Grave surrounded me;The snares of death confronted me.
In my distress I called on Jehovah,To my God I kept crying for help. From his temple he heard my voice,And my cry to him for help reached his ears.
Then the earth began to shake and rock;The foundations of the mountains trembledAnd shook back and forth because he had been angered.
Smoke ascended from his nostrils,And a consuming fire came from his mouth;Glowing coals blazed from him.
He made the heavens bend as he descended,And thick gloom was beneath his feet.
He rode on a cherub and came flying. He swooped down on the wings of a spirit.
He then covered himself in darkness,All around him as a shelter,Dark waters and thick clouds.
From the brightness before himHail and fiery coals broke through the clouds.
Then Jehovah began to thunder in the heavens;The Most High made his voice heardWith hailstones and fiery coals.
He shot his arrows and scattered them;He hurled his lightning and threw them into confusion.
The streambeds became visible;The foundations of the land were exposed by your rebuke, O Jehovah,By the blast of the breath from your nostrils.
He reached down from on high;He took hold of me and pulled me from deep waters.
He rescued me from my strong enemy,From those hating me, who were stronger than I was.
They confronted me on the day of my disaster,But Jehovah was my support.
He brought me out into a place of safety;He rescued me because he was pleased with me.
Jehovah rewards me according to my righteousness;He repays me according to the innocence of my hands.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah,And I have not wickedly abandoned my God.
All his judgments are before me;I will not disregard his statutes.
I will remain blameless before him,And I will keep myself from error.
May Jehovah repay me according to my righteousness,According to the innocence of my hands before him.
With someone loyal you act in loyalty;With the blameless man you deal blamelessly;
With the pure you show yourself pure,But with the crooked you show yourself shrewd.
For you save those who are lowlyBut you abase the haughty.
For it is you who light my lamp, O Jehovah,My God who lights up my darkness.
With your help I can charge against a marauder band;By God’s power I can scale a wall.
The way of the true God is perfect;The saying of Jehovah is refined. He is a shield to all those taking refuge in him.
For who is a God besides Jehovah? And who is a rock except our God?
The true God is the one who clothes me with strength,And he will make my way perfect.
He makes my feet like those of a deer;He makes me stand on high places.
He trains my hands for warfare;My arms can bend a bow of copper.
You give me your shield of salvation,Your right hand supports me,And your humility makes me great.
You widen the path for my footsteps;My feet will not slip.
I will pursue my enemies and overtake them;I will not return until they are wiped out.
I will crush them so that they cannot rise up;They will fall under my feet.
You will equip me with strength for the battle;You will make my foes collapse under me.
You will make my enemies retreat from me,And I will put an end to those who hate me.
They cry for help, but there is no one to save them;They even cry to Jehovah, but he does not answer them.
I will pound them as fine as dust in the wind;I will throw them out like mud in the streets.
You will rescue me from the faultfinding of the people. You will appoint me the head of nations. A people whom I have not known will serve me.
At a mere report they will obey me;Foreigners will come cringing before me.
Foreigners will lose courage;They will come trembling from their strongholds.
Jehovah is alive! Praised be my Rock! Let the God of my salvation be exalted.
The true God executes vengeance for me;He subdues the peoples under me.
He rescues me from my angry enemies;You lift me high above those who attack me;You save me from the man of violence.
That is why I will glorify you among the nations, O Jehovah,And to your name I will sing praises.
He performs great acts of salvation for his king;He displays loyal love to his anointed one,To David and his offspring forever.
I will sing about loyal love and justice. To you, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.
I will act with discretion and blamelessness. When will you come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house.
I will not set anything worthless before my eyes. I hate the deeds of those who deviate from what is right;I will have nothing to do with them.
A crooked heart is far from me;I will not accept what is bad.
Anyone slandering his neighbor in secret,I will silence. Anyone with haughty eyes and an arrogant heart,I will not tolerate.
I will look to the faithful ones of the earth,So that they may dwell with me. The one walking in blamelessness will minister to me.
No deceitful person will dwell in my house,And no liar will stand in my presence.
Every morning I will silence all the wicked of the earth,To cut off all wrongdoers from the city of Jehovah.
God will show us favor and bless us;He will make his face shine upon us (Selah)
So that your way may be known throughout the earth,Your acts of salvation among all the nations.
Let peoples praise you, O God;Let all the peoples praise you.
Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully,For you will judge the peoples fairly. You will guide the nations of the earth. (Selah)
Let peoples praise you, O God;Let all the peoples praise you.
The earth will give its produce;God, our God, will bless us.
God will bless us,And all the ends of the earth will fear him.
Praise Jah! א [Aleph] Happy is the man who fears Jehovah,ב [Beth]Who takes great pleasure in his commandments.
His descendants will be mighty in the earth,ד [Daleth]And the generation of the upright will be blessed.
Wealth and riches are in his house,ו [Waw]And his righteousness continues forever.
To the upright he shines like a light in the darkness. ח [Heth] He is compassionate and merciful and righteous.
It goes well for the man who generously lends. י [Yod] He conducts his affairs with justice.
He will never be shaken. ל [Lamed] The righteous will be remembered forever.
He will not fear bad news. נ [Nun] His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.
His heart is unshakable; he is not afraid;ע [Ayin]In the end he will look in triumph on his adversaries.
He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor. צ [Tsade] His righteousness continues forever. ק [Qoph] His own strength will be exalted with glory.
The wicked one will see and be upset. ש [Shin] He will grind his teeth and melt away. ת [Taw] The desires of the wicked will perish.
Show me favor, O God, show me favor,For I take refuge in you,And in the shadow of your wings I take refuge until the troubles pass.
I call to God the Most High,To the true God, who brings them to an end for me.
He will send help from heaven and save me. He will frustrate the one snapping at me. (Selah) God will send his loyal love and his faithfulness.
I am surrounded by lions;I must lie among men who want to devour me,Whose teeth are spears and arrowsAnd whose tongue is a sharp sword.
Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth.
They have prepared a net to ensnare my feet;I am bowed down with distress. They have dug a pit ahead of me,But they fell into it themselves. (Selah)
My heart is steadfast, O God,My heart is steadfast. I will sing and make music.
Do awake, my glory. Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.
I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah;I will sing praises to you among the nations.
For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens,And your faithfulness, up to the skies.
Be exalted above the heavens, O God;May your glory be over all the earth.
Shout in triumph to God, all the earth.
Sing praises to his glorious name. Make his praise glorious.
Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power,Your enemies will cringe before you.
All the earth will bow down to you;They will sing praises to you;They will sing praises to your name.” (Selah)
Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.
He changed the sea into dry land;They crossed the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.
He rules forever by his might. His eyes keep watch on the nations. Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (Selah)
Praise our God, you peoples,And let the sound of his praise be heard.
He preserves us alive;He does not allow our feet to stumble.
For you have examined us, O God;As silver is refined, so you have refined us.
You brought us into a hunting net;You put a crushing burden upon us.
You allowed mortal man to ride over us;We came through fire and through water;Then you brought us to a place of relief.
I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings;I will pay my vows to you
That my lips promisedAnd my mouth spoke when I was in distress.
I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to youWith the smoke of sacrificial rams. I will offer bulls along with male goats. (Selah)
Come and listen, all you who fear God,And I will tell you what he has done for me.
I called to him with my mouthAnd glorified him with my tongue.
If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart,Jehovah would not have heard me.
But God did hear;He paid attention to my prayer.
Praise to God, who did not reject my prayerOr withhold his loyal love from me.
Praise Jehovah, all you nations;Glorify him, all you peoples.
For his loyal love toward us is great;The faithfulness of Jehovah endures forever. Praise Jah!
Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack nothing.
In grassy pastures he makes me lie down;He leads me to well-watered resting-places.
He refreshes me. He leads me in the paths of righteousness for the sake of his name.
Though I walk in the valley of deep shadow,I fear no harm,For you are with me;Your rod and your staff reassure me.
You prepare a table for me before my enemies. You refresh my head with oil;My cup is well-filled.
Surely goodness and loyal love will pursue me all the days of my life,And I will dwell in the house of Jehovah for all my days.
“If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—
“If Jehovah had not been with usWhen men rose up to attack us,
Then they would have swallowed us up aliveWhen their anger was burning against us.
Then the waters would have washed us away,The torrent would have swept over us.
The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.
May Jehovah be praised,For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.
We are like a bird that escapedFrom the hunter’s trap;The trap was broken,And we escaped.
Our help is in the name of Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth.”
O Jehovah, defend my case against my opposers;Fight against those who fight against me.
Take up your buckler and large shield,And rise up to my defense.
Lift up your spear and battle-ax against my pursuers. Say to me: “I am your salvation.”
May those who are hunting for my life be put to shame and humiliated. May those who are plotting to destroy me retreat in disgrace.
May they become like chaff in the wind;May Jehovah’s angel drive them away.
May their path be dark and slipperyAs Jehovah’s angel pursues them.
For without cause they have hidden a net to trap me;Without cause they have dug a pit for me.
May disaster come upon him by surprise;May the net that he hid catch him;May he fall into it and be destroyed.
But I will rejoice in Jehovah;I will be joyful in his acts of salvation.
All my bones will say: “O Jehovah, who is like you? You rescue the helpless from those who are stronger,The helpless and the poor from those who rob them.”
Malicious witnesses come forward,Asking me things I know nothing about.
They repay me with bad for good,Making me feel bereaved.
But when they were ill, I clothed myself with sackcloth;I afflicted myself by fasting,And when my prayer would return unanswered,
I walked about mourning as for a friend or a brother of mine;I bowed down in sorrow, like one mourning for his mother.
But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together;They gathered together to strike me down in ambush;They tore me to pieces and did not keep silent.
The ungodly scornfully mock me,They grind their teeth against me.
O Jehovah, how long will you just look on? Rescue me from their attacks,My precious life from the young lions.
Then I will give thanks to you in the great congregation;I will praise you among the throngs of people.
Do not let those who for no reason are my enemies gloat over me;Do not let those hating me without cause wink their eyes maliciously.
For they do not speak words of peace,But they deceptively scheme against the peaceful ones of the land.
They open their mouth wide to accuse me,Saying: “Aha! Aha! Our eyes have seen it.”
You have seen this, O Jehovah. Do not remain silent. O Jehovah, do not stay far from me.
Awake and rise to my defense,My God, Jehovah, defend me in my legal case.
Judge me according to your righteousness, O Jehovah my God;Do not let them gloat over me.
May they never say to themselves: “Aha! We got what we wanted.” May they never say: “We have swallowed him up.”
Let all of them be put to shame and disgraced,Those who gloat over my calamity. Let those who exalt themselves over me be clothed with shame and humiliation.
But let those who take pleasure in my righteousness shout joyfully;May they constantly say: “May Jehovah be magnified, who takes pleasure in the peace of his servant.”
Then my tongue will recount your righteousnessAnd praise you all day long.
Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah,Who walks in His ways.
You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.
Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house;Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.
Look! That is how the man who fears JehovahWill be blessed.
Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life
And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel.
God is known in Judah;In Israel his name is great.
His shelter is in Saʹlem,And his dwelling is in Zion.
There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow,The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (Selah)
You shine brightly;You are more majestic than the mountains of prey.
The courageous of heart have been plundered. They have fallen asleep;The warriors were all helpless.
From your rebuke, O God of Jacob,Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep.
You alone are awe-inspiring. Who can withstand your intense anger?
From heaven you pronounced judgment;The earth was afraid and was silent
When God rose up to execute judgment,To save all the meek of the earth. (Selah)
For the rage of man will serve to your praise;With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself.
Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them,Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear.
He will humble the pride of leaders;He inspires fear in the kings of the earth.
O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses. You were angry with us; but now accept us back!
You caused the earth to quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is falling.
You caused your people to suffer hardship. You made us drink wine that makes us stagger.
Give a signal to those fearing youTo flee and dodge the bow. (Selah)
So that your loved ones may be rescued,Save us with your right hand and answer us.
God has spoken in his holiness: “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance,And I will measure off the Valley of Sucʹcoth.
Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh,And Eʹphra·im is the helmet for my head;Judah is my commander’s staff.
Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”
Who will bring me to the besieged city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom?
Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us,Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies?
Help us in our distress,For salvation by humans is worthless.
By God we will gain power,And he will trample on our adversaries.
I will praise Jehovah at all times;His praise will be on my lips constantly.
I will boast in Jehovah;The meek will hear and rejoice.
Magnify Jehovah along with me;Let us exalt his name together.
I inquired of Jehovah, and he answered me. He rescued me from all my fears.
Those who looked to him became radiant;Their faces could not be put to shame.
This lowly one called, and Jehovah heard. He saved him from all his distresses.
The angel of Jehovah camps all around those fearing Him,And he rescues them.
Taste and see that Jehovah is good;Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.
Fear Jehovah, all you his holy ones,For those who fear him lack nothing.
Even strong young lions have been reduced to hunger,But those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.
Come, my sons, listen to me;I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.
Who among you takes pleasure in lifeAnd would love to see many good days?
Then guard your tongue from what is bad,Your lips from speaking deception.
Turn away from what is bad and do what is good;Seek peace and pursue it.
The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous,And his ears listen to their cry for help.
But the face of Jehovah is against those doing what is bad,To erase all memory of them from the earth.
They cried out, and Jehovah heard;He rescued them from all their distresses.
Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted;He saves those who are crushed in spirit.
Many are the hardships of the righteous one,But Jehovah rescues him from them all.
He is guarding all his bones;Not one of them has been broken.
Disaster will put the wicked to death;Those hating the righteous will be found guilty.
Jehovah is redeeming the life of his servants;None of those taking refuge in him will be found guilty.
O Jehovah, do not reprove me in your anger,And do not correct me in your rage.
Show me favor, O Jehovah, for I am growing weak. Heal me, O Jehovah, for my bones are shaking.
Yes, I am greatly disturbed,And I ask you, O Jehovah—how long will it be?
Return, O Jehovah, and rescue me;Save me for the sake of your loyal love.
For in death there is no mention of you;In the Grave, who will praise you?
I have grown weary with my sighing;All night long I soak my bed with tears;I flood my couch with weeping.
My eye is weak from my grief;It has dimmed because of all those harassing me.
Get away from me, all you who behave wickedly,For Jehovah will hear the sound of my weeping.
Jehovah will hear my request for favor;Jehovah will accept my prayer.
All my enemies will be put to shame and dismayed;They will fall back in sudden disgrace.
Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion;We will pay our vows to you.
O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts will come.
My errors have overwhelmed me,But you cover over our transgressions.
Happy is the one whom you choose and bring nearTo reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house,Your holy temple.
You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness,O God of our salvation;You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earthAnd of those distant across the sea.
You firmly established the mountains by your power;You are clothed with mightiness.
You calm the raging seas,The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations.
The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs;You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully.
You care for the earth,Making it abundantly fruitful and very rich. The stream from God is full of water;You provide grain for them,For that is how you prepared the earth.
You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil;You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth.
You crown the year with your goodness;Your tracks overflow with abundance.
The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing,And the hills are clothed with joyfulness.
The pastures are covered with flocks,And the valleys are carpeted with grain. They shout in triumph, yes, they sing.
With my voice I will cry out to God;To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.
In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah. At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing. I cannot be comforted.
When I remember God, I groan;I am troubled and my strength fails. (Selah)
You hold my eyelids open;I am agitated and cannot speak.
My thoughts turn to the days of long ago,The years of the distant past.
During the night I remember my song;I ponder in my heart;I make a diligent search.
Will Jehovah cast us off forever? Will he never again show his favor?
Has his loyal love ceased forever? Will his promise come to nothing for all generations?
Has God forgotten to show his favor,Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (Selah)
Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me: The Most High has changed his position toward us”?
I will remember the works of Jah;I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago.
And I will meditate on all your activityAnd ponder over your dealings.
O God, your ways are holy. What god is as great as you, O God?
You are the true God, who does marvelous things. You have revealed your strength to the peoples.
With your power you have rescued your people,The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (Selah)
The waters saw you, O God;The waters saw you and were disturbed. And the deep waters became agitated.
The clouds poured down water. The cloudy skies thundered,And your arrows flew here and there.
The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels;Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth;The earth trembled and quaked.
Your way was through the sea,Your path through many waters;But your footprints could not be traced.
You led your people just like a flock,In the care of Moses and Aaron.
Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.
Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men,From the crowd of wrongdoers.
They sharpen their tongue just like a sword;They aim their cruel words like arrows,
To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places;They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.
They hold fast to their evil intent;They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”
They search out new ways of wrongdoing;They secretly devise their shrewd strategy;The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.
But God will shoot at them;Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.
Their own tongue will cause their downfall;All those looking on will shake their head.
Then all men will become afraid,And they will proclaim what God has done,And they will have insight into his deeds.
The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him;All the upright in heart will exult.
Sing to Jehovah a new song,For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.
Jehovah has made known his salvation;He has revealed his righteousness before the nations.
He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God.
Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises.
Sing praises to Jehovah with the harp,With the harp and the melodious song.
With the trumpets and the sound of the horn,Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.
Let the sea thunder and all that fills it,The earth and those dwelling in it.
Let the rivers clap their hands;Let the mountains shout joyfully together
Before Jehovah, for he is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth with righteousnessAnd the peoples with fairness.
I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?
My help comes from Jehovah,The Maker of heaven and earth.
He will never allow your foot to slip. The One guarding you will never be drowsy.
Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep,The One guarding Israel.
Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.
By day the sun will not strike you,Nor the moon by night.
Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.
Jehovah will guard you in all you doFrom now on and forever.
I earnestly hoped in Jehovah,And he inclined his ear to me and heard my cry for help.
He brought me up out of a roaring pit,Out of the slimy mire. And he set my feet upon a crag;He made my footing secure.
Then he put a new song in my mouth,Praise to our God. Many will look on in aweAnd put their trust in Jehovah.
Happy is the man who trusts in JehovahAnd who does not look to the defiant or to those who are false.
How many things you have done,O Jehovah my God,Your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us. None can compare to you;If I were to try to tell and speak of them,They would be too numerous to recount!
Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,But you opened up my ears to hear. You did not ask for burnt offerings and sin offerings.
Then I said: “Look, I have come. In the scroll it is written about me.
To do your will, O my God, is my delight,And your law is deep within me.
I proclaim the good news of righteousness in the great congregation. Look! I do not restrain my lips,O Jehovah, as you well know.
I do not cover over your righteousness in my heart. I declare your faithfulness and salvation. I do not hide your loyal love and your truth in the great congregation.”
O Jehovah, do not withhold your mercy from me. May your loyal love and your truth constantly safeguard me.
The calamities surrounding me are too many to count. So many of my errors overwhelm me that I cannot see my way;They are more numerous than the hairs of my head,And I have lost heart.
Please be willing, O Jehovah, to save me. O Jehovah, hurry to help me.
May all those seeking to take my lifeBe put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamityRetreat in humiliation.
May those who are saying to me: “Aha! Aha!” Be appalled because of their own shame.
But let those seeking youExult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May Jehovah be magnified.”
But I am helpless and poor;May Jehovah pay attention to me. You are my helper and my rescuer;My God, do not delay.
Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth.
Serve Jehovah with rejoicing. Come into his presence with joyful shouting.
Know that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him. We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.
Come into his gates with thanksgiving,Into his courtyards with praise. Give thanks to him; praise his name.
For Jehovah is good;His loyal love endures forever,And his faithfulness through all generations.
Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble. He sits enthroned above the cherubs. Let the earth shake.
Jehovah is great in Zion,And he is high over all the peoples.
Let them praise your great name,For it is awe-inspiring and holy.
He is a mighty king who loves justice. You have firmly established what is upright. You have brought about justice and righteousness in Jacob.
Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down at his footstool;He is holy.
Moses and Aaron were among his priests,And Samuel was among those calling on his name. They would call to Jehovah,And he would answer them.
He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud. They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them.
O Jehovah our God, you answered them. You were a God who pardoned them,But you punished them for their sinful deeds.
Exalt Jehovah our GodAnd bow down before his holy mountain,For Jehovah our God is holy.
Give Jehovah his due, you sons of mighty ones,Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.
Give Jehovah the glory due his name. Bow down to Jehovah in holy adornment.
The voice of Jehovah is heard over the waters;The glorious God thunders. Jehovah is over many waters.
The voice of Jehovah is powerful;The voice of Jehovah is splendid.
The voice of Jehovah is breaking the cedars;Yes, Jehovah shatters the cedars of Lebʹa·non.
He makes Lebʹa·non skip like a calf,And Sirʹi·on like a young wild bull.
The voice of Jehovah strikes with flames of fire;
The voice of Jehovah makes the wilderness shudder;Jehovah makes the wilderness of Kaʹdesh shudder.
The voice of Jehovah makes the deer shudder and give birthAnd strips bare the forests. And all in his temple say: “Glory!”
Jehovah sits enthroned above the flooding waters;Jehovah sits enthroned as King forever.
Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.
O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth;You have set your splendor even higher than the heavens!
Out of the mouth of children and infants you have established strengthOn account of your adversaries,To silence the enemy and the avenger.
When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers,The moon and the stars that you have prepared,
What is mortal man that you keep him in mind,And a son of man that you take care of him?
You made him a little lower than godlike ones,And you crowned him with glory and splendor.
You gave him dominion over the works of your hands;You have put everything under his feet:
All the flocks and cattle,As well as the wild animals,
The birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea,Whatever passes through the paths of the seas.
O Jehovah our Lord, how majestic your name is throughout the earth!
Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life.
I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground. I have come into deep waters,And the rushing stream has swept me away.
I am exhausted from calling out;My throat has become hoarse. My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God.
Those hating me without causeAre more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me,My treacherous enemies, have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.
O God, you are aware of my foolishness,And my guilt is not hidden from you.
May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me,O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies. May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me,O God of Israel.
I suffer reproach on your account;Humiliation covers my face.
I have become a stranger to my brothers,A foreigner to the sons of my mother.
Zeal for your house has consumed me,And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.
When I humbled myself with fasting,I was reproached for it.
When I made sackcloth my clothing,I became an object of scorn to them.
I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate,And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs.
But may my prayer come to you,O Jehovah, at an acceptable time. In your abundant loyal love, O God,Answer me with your sure acts of salvation.
Rescue me from the mire;Do not let me sink down. Rescue me from those who hate meAnd from the deep waters.
Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away,Or let the deep swallow me,Or let the well close its mouth over me.
Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good. According to your abundant mercy turn toward me,
And do not hide your face from your servant. Answer me quickly, for I am in distress.
Come near to me and rescue me;Redeem me on account of my enemies.
You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation. You see all my foes.
Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable. I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none,And for comforters, but I found none.
But for food they gave me poison,And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Let their table become a trap for them,And their prosperity, a snare.
Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see,And make their hips tremble constantly.
Pour out upon them your indignation,And may your burning anger overtake them.
Let their encampment become desolate;Let there be no inhabitant in their tents.
For they pursue the one whom you struck,And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded.
Add more guilt to their guilt,And may they have no share in your righteousness.
Let them be erased from the book of the living,And may they not be enrolled among the righteous.
But I am afflicted and in pain. May your saving power, O God, protect me.
I will sing praises to the name of God,And I will magnify him with thanksgiving.
This will please Jehovah more than a bull,More than a young bull with horns and hooves.
The meek will see it and rejoice. You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive.
For Jehovah is listening to the poor,And he will not despise his captive people.
Let heaven and earth praise him,The seas and everything that moves in them.
For God will save ZionAnd will rebuild the cities of Judah,And they will dwell there and possess it.
The descendants of his servants will inherit it,And those who love his name will reside in it.
Praise Jah! Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,Praise the name of Jehovah.
May Jehovah’s name be praisedFrom now on and forever.
From the rising of the sun to its setting,Let Jehovah’s name be praised.
Jehovah is high above all the nations;His glory is above the heavens.
Who is like Jehovah our God,The one who dwells on high?
He stoops down to look on heaven and earth,
Raising the lowly from the dust. He lifts up the poor from the ash heap
In order to make him sit with nobles,With the nobles of his people.
He gives the barren woman a homeAs a happy mother with children. Praise Jah!
I will sing about Jehovah’s expressions of loyal love forever. With my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations.
For I have said: “Loyal love will be built up forever,And you have firmly established your faithfulness in the heavens.”
“I have made a covenant with my chosen one;I have sworn to David my servant:
‘I will firmly establish your offspring forever,And I will build up your throne for all generations.’” (Selah)
The heavens praise your marvels, O Jehovah,Yes, your faithfulness in the congregation of the holy ones.
For who in the skies can compare to Jehovah? Who among the sons of God is like Jehovah?
God is held in awe in the council of holy ones;He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him.
O Jehovah God of armies,Who is mighty like you, O Jah? Your faithfulness surrounds you.
You rule over the raging of the sea;When its waves surge, you calm them.
You have crushed Raʹhab like one who is slain. With your strong arm you have scattered your enemies.
The heavens are yours, and the earth is yours;The productive land and what fills it—you have founded them.
The north and the south—you created them;Taʹbor and Herʹmon joyously praise your name.
Your arm is mighty;Your hand is strong;Your right hand is exalted.
Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne;Loyal love and faithfulness stand before you.
Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face.
They rejoice in your name all day long,And in your righteousness they are exalted.
For you are the glory of their strength,And by your approval our strength is exalted.
For our shield belongs to Jehovah,Our king belongs to the Holy One of Israel.
At that time you spoke in a vision to your loyal ones and said: “I have granted strength to a mighty one;I have exalted a chosen one from among the people.
I have found David my servant;With my holy oil I have anointed him.
My hand will support him,And my arm will strengthen him.
No enemy will exact tribute from him,And no unrighteous man will oppress him.
I will crush to pieces his adversaries from before himAnd strike down those who hate him.
My faithfulness and loyal love are with him,And in my name his strength will be exalted.
I will put his hand over the seaAnd his right hand over the rivers.
He will call out to me: ‘You are my Father,My God and the Rock of my salvation.’
And I will place him as firstborn,The highest of the kings of the earth.
I will maintain my loyal love for him forever,And my covenant with him will never fail.
I will establish his offspring foreverAnd make his throne as enduring as the heavens.
If his sons leave my lawAnd do not walk according to my decrees,
If they violate my statutesAnd do not keep my commandments,
Then I will punish their disobedience with a rodAnd their error with flogging.
But I will never abandon my loyal love for himNor be untrue to my promise.
I will not violate my covenantOr change what my lips have spoken.
I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all;I will not tell lies to David.
His offspring will endure forever;His throne will endure like the sun before me.
Like the moon, it will be firmly established foreverAs a faithful witness in the skies.” (Selah)
But you yourself have cast off and rejected him;You have become furious with your anointed one.
You have spurned the covenant with your servant;You have profaned his crown by throwing it to the ground.
You have broken down all his stone walls;You have reduced his fortifications to ruins.
All who pass by have pillaged him;He is a reproach to his neighbors.
You have made his adversaries victorious;You have caused all his enemies to rejoice.
You have also driven back his sword,And you have made him lose ground in the battle.
You have brought an end to his splendorAnd hurled his throne to the ground.
You have cut short the days of his youth;You have clothed him with shame. (Selah)
How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever? Will your rage continue to burn like a fire?
Remember how short my life is! Was it to no purpose that you created all humans?
What man can live and never see death? Can he save himself from the power of the Grave? (Selah)
Where are your former acts of loyal love, O Jehovah,That you swore about to David in your faithfulness?
Remember, O Jehovah, the taunts hurled at your servants;How I have to bear the taunts of all the peoples;
How your enemies have hurled insults, O Jehovah;How they have insulted every footstep of your anointed one.
May Jehovah be praised forever. Amen and Amen.
O God, save me;O Jehovah, hurry to help me.
May those seeking to take my lifeBe put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamityRetreat in humiliation.
May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!” Be driven back in shame.
But let those who are seeking youExult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May God be magnified!”
But I am helpless and poor;O God, act quickly in my behalf. You are my helper and my rescuer;O Jehovah, do not delay.
Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peaceThan a house full of feasting along with quarreling.
A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully;He will share in the inheritance as one of the brothers.
The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,But Jehovah is the examiner of hearts.
A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech,And a deceptive man listens to a malicious tongue.
Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker,And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.
Grandsons are a crown to the aged,And fathers are the glory of their sons.
Upright speech does not befit a fool. How much less does false speech befit a ruler!
A gift is like a precious stone to its owner;Everywhere he turns, it brings him success.
Whoever forgives a transgression seeks love,But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.
A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understandingThan striking a stupid person a hundred times.
A bad man seeks only rebellion,But a cruel messenger will be sent to punish him.
Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubsThan to encounter someone stupid in his foolishness.
If anyone repays bad for good,Bad will not depart from his house.
Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate;Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.
Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one—Both of them are detestable to Jehovah.
What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdomWhen he has no heart for acquiring it?
A true friend shows love at all timesAnd is a brother who is born for times of distress.
A man lacking good sense shakes hands and agreesTo put up security in the presence of his neighbor.
The one who loves conflict loves transgression. Anyone who makes his entryway high invites a crash.
The one who is crooked at heart will not find success,And the one who speaks deceitfully will fall into ruin.
The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief;And the father of a senseless child has no joy.
A joyful heart is good medicine,But a crushed spirit saps one’s strength.
A wicked man will take a bribe in secretTo pervert the course of justice.
Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person,But the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth.
A stupid son brings grief to his fatherAnd heartache to the one who gave birth to him.
To punish the righteous one is not good,And to flog honorable people goes against what is right.
A man of knowledge restrains his words,And a discerning man will remain calm.
Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise,And the one who seals his lips, discerning.
The words of King Lemʹu·el, the weighty message his mother gave to instruct him:
What should I tell you, O my son,What, O son of my womb,And what, O son of my vows?
Do not give your vigor to women,Nor follow ways that destroy kings.
It is not for kings, O Lemʹu·el,It is not for kings to drink wineNor for rulers to say, “Where is my drink?”
So that they do not drink and forget what is decreedAnd pervert the rights of the lowly ones.
Give alcohol to those who are perishingAnd wine to those in bitter distress.
Let them drink and forget their poverty;Let them remember their trouble no more.
Speak up in behalf of the speechless;Defend the rights of all who are perishing.
Speak up and judge righteously;Defend the rights of the lowly and the poor.
Who can find a capable wife? Her value is far more than that of corals.
Her husband trusts her from his heart,And he lacks nothing of value.
She rewards him with good, not bad,All the days of her life.
She obtains wool and linen;She delights to work with her hands.
She is like the ships of a merchant,Bringing her food in from afar.
She also rises while it is still night,Providing food for her householdAnd portions for her female servants.
She sets her mind on a field and buys it;She plants a vineyard from her own labors.
She prepares herself for hard work,And she strengthens her arms.
She sees that her trading is profitable;Her lamp does not go out at night.
Her hands seize the distaff,And her hands take hold of the spindle.
She extends her palm to the lowly one,And she opens her hands to the poor.
She does not worry about her household because of the snow,For her whole household is clothed in warm garments.
She makes her own bed covers. Her clothing is of linen and purple wool.
Her husband is well-known in the city gates,Where he sits among the elders of the land.
She makes and sells linen garmentsAnd supplies belts to the merchants.
She is clothed with strength and splendor,And she looks to the future with confidence.
She opens her mouth in wisdom;The law of kindness is on her tongue.
She watches over the activity of her household,And the bread of laziness she does not eat.
Her children rise up and declare her happy;Her husband rises up and praises her.
There are many capable women,But you—you surpass them all.
Charm may be false, and beauty may be fleeting,But the woman who fears Jehovah will be praised.
Give her the reward for what she does,And let her works praise her in the city gates.
It is better to be poor and walk in integrityThan to be stupid and speak lies.
A person without knowledge is not good,And the one who acts rashly is sinning.
It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way,And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah.
Wealth attracts many friends,But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend.
A false witness will not go unpunished,And the one who lies with every breath will not escape.
Many seek the favor of a noble,And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts.
All the brothers of a poor man hate him;How much more he is shunned by his friends! He pursues them with requests, but no one responds.
Whoever acquires good sense loves himself. Whoever treasures discernment will find success.
A false witness will not go unpunished,And the one who lies with every breath will perish.
It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury;How much less for a servant to rule over princes!
The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger,And it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.
The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion,But his favor is like dew on the vegetation.
A stupid son brings adversity on his father,And a quarrelsome wife is like a roof that never stops leaking.
A house and wealth are inherited from fathers,But a discreet wife is from Jehovah.
Laziness brings on a deep sleep,And a sluggish person will go hungry.
The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life;The one who is reckless about his ways will die.
The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah,And He will repay him for what he does.
Discipline your son while there is hope,And do not become responsible for his death.
The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty;If you try to spare him, you will have to do it again and again.
Listen to counsel and accept discipline,In order to become wise in your future.
Many are the plans in a man’s heart,But the counsel of Jehovah is what will prevail.
The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love;And it is better to be poor than to be a liar.
The fear of Jehovah leads to life;The one who has it will have a pleasant rest, free from harm.
The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,But he does not even bother to bring it back to his mouth.
Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd,And reprove the understanding one, so that he will increase in knowledge.
The one who mistreats his father and drives away his motherIs a son causing shame and disgrace.
My son, if you stop listening to discipline,You will stray from the sayings of knowledge.
A worthless witness mocks justice,And the mouth of the wicked gulps down evil.
Judgment is in store for ridiculers,And beatings for the back of the stupid ones.
Dishonest scales are detestable to Jehovah,But an accurate weight brings pleasure to him.
When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow,But wisdom is with the modest ones.
The integrity of the upright is what guides them,But the deviousness of the treacherous will destroy them.
Wealth will be of no benefit on the day of fury,But righteousness is what will rescue from death.
The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight,But the wicked one will fall because of his own wickedness.
The righteousness of the upright will rescue them,But the treacherous will be caught by their own desires.
When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes;And expectations based on his power also perish.
The righteous one is rescued from distress,And the wicked one takes his place.
By his mouth the apostate brings his neighbor to ruin,But by knowledge the righteous are rescued.
The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice,And when the wicked perish, there is a joyful cry.
Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,But the mouth of the wicked tears it down.
Whoever is lacking good sense shows contempt for his neighbor,But the man of true discernment remains silent.
A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk,But the trustworthy person keeps a confidence.
When there is no skillful direction, the people fall,But there is success through many advisers.
Whoever guarantees a loan for a stranger is sure to fare badly,But whoever avoids shaking hands in a pledge will be secure.
A gracious woman acquires glory,But ruthless men seize riches.
A kind man benefits himself,But the cruel person brings trouble on himself.
The wicked one earns deceptive wages,But the one who sows righteousness receives a true reward.
The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life,But the one chasing after evil is in line for death.
Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah,But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him.
Be assured of this: An evil person will not go unpunished,But the children of the righteous will escape.
Like a gold ring in the snout of a pigIs a beautiful woman who rejects good sense.
The desire of the righteous leads to good,But what the wicked hope for leads to fury.
One gives generously and ends up with more;Another withholds what should be given, but he comes to poverty.
The generous person will prosper,And whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.
The people will curse the one who withholds grain,But they will bless the one who sells it.
The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor,But the one searching for bad—that is what will surely come upon him.
The one trusting in his riches will fall,But the righteous will flourish like the foliage.
Anyone who brings trouble on his household will inherit the wind,And the fool will be a servant to the wisehearted one.
The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life,And the one who wins souls is wise.
If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded,How much more the wicked one and the sinner!
Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime,Honor is not fitting for someone stupid.
Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly,So a curse does not come without a real reason.
A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey,And the rod is for the back of stupid people.
Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,So that you do not put yourself on his level.
Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness,So that he does not think he is wise.
Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himselfIs the one who entrusts matters to someone stupid.
Like the limp legs of the lame,So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.
Like tying a stone to a sling,So is giving glory to someone stupid.
Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard,So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.
Like an archer who wounds at random,So is the one who hires the stupid one or those passing by.
Like a dog that returns to its vomit,The stupid one repeats his foolishness.
Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise? There is more hope for someone stupid than for him.
The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road,A lion in the public square!”
A door keeps turning on its hinges,And the lazy one on his bed.
The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl,But he is too tired to bring it back to his mouth.
The lazy one thinks he is wiserThan seven people who give a sensible reply.
Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s earsIs the one passing by who becomes furious about a quarrel that is not his.
Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death
Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!”
Where there is no wood, the fire goes out,And where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases.
As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire,So a contentious man kindles a quarrel.
The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;They are gulped right down into the stomach.
Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenwareAre affectionate words from an evil heart.
The one who hates others disguises it with his lips,But inside he harbors deceit.
Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him,For there are seven detestable things in his heart.
Though his hatred is concealed by deceit,His evil will be exposed in the congregation.
The one who digs a pit will fall into it,And whoever rolls away a stone—it will come back on him.
A lying tongue hates those crushed by it,And a flattering mouth causes ruin.
The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel:
To learn wisdom and discipline;To understand wise sayings;
To acquire the discipline that gives insight,Righteousness, good judgment, and uprightness;
To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced;To give a young man knowledge and thinking ability.
A wise person listens and takes in more instruction;A man of understanding acquires skillful direction
To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying,The words of the wise and their riddles.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.
Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father,And do not forsake the instruction of your mother.
They are an attractive wreath for your headAnd a fine ornament for your neck.
My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent.
If they say: “Come with us. Let us set an ambush to shed blood. We will lie hidden, waiting for innocent victims without cause.
We will swallow them alive as the Grave does,Whole, like those going down to the pit.
Let us seize all their precious treasures;We will fill our houses with spoil.
You should join us,And we will all share equally what we steal.”
My son, do not follow them. Keep your feet off their path,
For their feet run to do evil;They hurry to shed blood.
It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird.
That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood;They lie hidden to take the lives of others.
These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit,Which will take away the life of those who obtain it.
True wisdom cries aloud in the street. It keeps raising its voice in the public squares.
At the corner of the busy streets it calls out. At the entrances of the city gates it says:
“How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience? How long will you ridiculers take pleasure in ridicule? And how long will you foolish ones hate knowledge?
Respond to my reproof. Then I will pour out my spirit for you;I will make my words known to you.
Because I called out, but you kept refusing,I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention,
You kept neglecting all my adviceAnd rejecting my reproof,
I also will laugh when disaster strikes you;I will mock when what you dread comes,
When what you dread comes like a storm,And your disaster arrives like a storm wind,When distress and trouble come upon you.
At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer;They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me,
Because they hated knowledge,And they did not choose to fear Jehovah.
They refused my advice;They disrespected all my reproof.
So they will bear the consequences of their way,And they will be glutted with their own counsel.
For the waywardness of the inexperienced will kill them,And the complacency of fools will destroy them.
But the one listening to me will dwell in securityAnd be undisturbed by the dread of calamity.”
My son, keep my sayings,And treasure up my commandments.
Keep my commandments and live;Guard my instruction like the pupil of your eye.
Tie them around your fingers;Write them on the tablet of your heart.
Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”
To guard you against the wayward woman,Against the immoral woman and her smooth words.
From the window of my house,Through my lattice, I looked down,
And as I observed the naive ones,I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.
He passed along the street near her corner,And he marched in the direction of her house
In the twilight, in the evening,At the approach of night and darkness.
Then I saw a woman meet him,Dressed like a prostitute, with a cunning heart.
She is loud and defiant. She never stays at home.
One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares,She lurks near every corner.
She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss;With a bold face, she says to him:
“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows.
That is why I came out to meet you,To look for you, and I found you!
I have spread fine covers upon my bed,Colorful linen from Egypt.
I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning;Let us enjoy passionate love together,
For my husband is not at home;He has gone on a distant journey.
He took a bag of money with him,And he will not return until the day of the full moon.”
She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech.
Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter,Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,
Until an arrow pierces his liver;Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.
And now, my sons, listen to me;Pay attention to the words I speak.
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths,
For she has caused many to fall down slain,And those she has killed are numerous.
Her house leads to the Grave;It goes down to the inner chambers of death.
These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed:
It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret,And the glory of kings is to search through a matter.
As the heavens are high and the earth is deep,So the heart of kings is unsearchable.
Remove the dross from the silver,And it will emerge completely refined.
Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence,And his throne will be firmly established in righteousness.
Do not honor yourself before the king,And do not take a place among the prominent,
For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” Than to humiliate you in the presence of a noble.
Do not rush into a legal dispute,For what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you?
Plead your case with your neighbor,But do not reveal what you were told confidentially,
So that the one listening will not put you to shameAnd you spread a bad report that cannot be recalled.
Like apples of gold in silver carvingsIs a word spoken at the right time.
Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine goldIs a wise reprover to the receptive ear.
Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvestIs a faithful messenger to those who sent him,For he refreshes his master.
Like clouds and wind that bring no rainIs a man who boasts about a gift never given.
By patience a commander is won over,And a gentle tongue can break a bone.
If you find honey, eat only what you need,For if you take too much, you may vomit it up.
Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house,So that he does not get tired of you and hate you.
Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrowIs a man bearing false witness against his neighbor.
Like a broken tooth or an unsteady footIs confidence in an unreliable person in times of trouble.
Like one who removes a garment on a cold dayAnd like vinegar poured on sodaIs the one who sings songs to a gloomy heart.
If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat;If he is thirsty, give him water to drink,
For you will be heaping burning coals on his head,And Jehovah will reward you.
The north wind brings a downpour,And a gossiping tongue brings an angry face.
Better to dwell on a corner of the roofThan in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.
Like cold water on a tired soulIs a good report from a distant land.
Like a muddied spring and a ruined wellIs a righteous person who gives in to a wicked one.
It is not good to eat too much honey,Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory.
As a city broken through, without a wall,Is the man who cannot control his temper.
A wise son accepts his father’s discipline,But the scoffer does not listen to a rebuke.
From the fruitage of his speech a man will eat what is good,But the very desire of the treacherous is for violence.
The one guarding his mouth protects his life,But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.
The lazy person has his cravings, yet he has nothing,But the diligent one will be fully satisfied.
The righteous one hates lies,But the actions of the wicked bring shame and disgrace.
Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent,But wickedness brings down the sinner.
There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing;There is another who pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.
Riches are the ransom for a man’s life,But the poor are not even threatened.
The light of the righteous shines brightly,But the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
Presumptuousness leads only to strife,But wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.
Wealth quickly gained will dwindle,But the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little will increase.
Expectation postponed makes the heart sick,But a desire realized is a tree of life.
Whoever despises instruction will pay the penalty,But the one who respects the commandment will be rewarded.
The teaching of the wise one is a source of lifeTo turn one away from the snares of death.
Keen insight wins favor,But the way of the treacherous is harsh.
The shrewd person acts with knowledge,But the fool exposes his own foolishness.
A wicked messenger falls into trouble,But a faithful envoy brings healing.
Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace,But the one accepting correction will be glorified.
Desire when realized is sweet to a person,But the stupid hate to turn away from bad.
The one walking with the wise will become wise,But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.
Calamity pursues sinners,But prosperity rewards the righteous.
The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren,But the sinner’s wealth will be stored up for the righteous one.
The plowed field of the poor yields much food,But it may be swept away by injustice.
Whoever holds back his rod hates his son,But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.
The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite,But the stomach of the wicked is empty.
A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand. He directs it wherever He pleases.
All of a man’s ways seem right to him,But Jehovah examines the hearts.
To do what is right and justIs more pleasing to Jehovah than a sacrifice.
Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart—The lamp that guides the wicked is sin.
The plans of the diligent surely lead to success,But all who are hasty surely head for poverty.
Gaining treasures by a lying tongueIs like a vanishing mist, a deadly snare.
The violence of the wicked will sweep them away,For they refuse to act with justice.
The way of a guilty man is crooked,But the activity of the pure man is upright.
Better to dwell on a corner of the roofThan in the same house with a quarrelsome wife.
The wicked man craves what is bad;He shows no favor toward his neighbor.
When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser,And when a wise person receives insight, he gains knowledge.
The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one;He overthrows the wicked to their ruin.
Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly oneWill himself call and not be answered.
A secret gift subdues anger,And a hidden bribe, fierce rage.
It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice,But it is something terrible to those who practice evil.
The man who strays from the way of insightWill rest in the company of those powerless in death.
The one who loves having a good time will come to poverty;The one who loves wine and oil will not grow rich.
The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one,And the treacherous one will be taken in place of the upright.
Better to dwell in the wildernessThan with a quarrelsome and irritable wife.
Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise,But the stupid man will squander what he has.
Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal loveWill find life, righteousness, and glory.
A wise man can scale the city of the mightyAnd undermine the strength in which they trust.
The one guarding his mouth and his tongueKeeps himself out of trouble.
A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you callThe man who acts with reckless presumptuousness.
What the lazy man craves will put him to death,For his hands refuse to work.
All day long he greedily craves,But the righteous one gives, holding nothing back.
The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable. How much more when he offers it with evil intent!
A lying witness will perish,But the man who listens will testify with success.
The wicked man puts on a bold face,But it is the upright one whose course is sure.
There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.
The horse is prepared for the day of battle,But salvation belongs to Jehovah.
My son, do not forget my teaching,And may your heart observe my commandments,
Because they will add many daysAnd years of life and peace to you.
Do not let loyal love and faithfulness leave you. Tie them around your neck;Write them on the tablet of your heart;
Then you will find favor and good insightIn the eyes of God and man.
Trust in Jehovah with all your heart,And do not rely on your own understanding.
In all your ways take notice of him,And he will make your paths straight.
Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.
It will be a healing to your bodyAnd refreshment for your bones.
Honor Jehovah with your valuable things,With the firstfruits of all your produce;
Then your storehouses will be completely filled,And your vats will overflow with new wine.
My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah,And do not loathe his reproof,
For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves,Just as a father does a son in whom he delights.
Happy is the man who finds wisdomAnd the man who acquires discernment;
To gain it is better than gaining silver,And having it as profit is better than having gold.
It is more precious than corals;Nothing you desire can compare to it.
Long life is in its right hand;Riches and glory are in its left hand.
Its ways are pleasant,And all its paths are peaceful.
It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it,And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy.
Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment.
By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apartAnd the cloudy skies dripped with dew.
My son, do not lose sight of them. Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability;
They will give you lifeAnd be an adornment for your neck;
Then you will walk on your way in safety,And your foot will never stumble.
When you lie down, you will have no fear;You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant.
You will not fear any sudden terrorNor the storm that is coming on the wicked.
For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence;He will keep your foot from being caught.
Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give itIf it is within your power to help.
Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now.
Do not plot harm against your neighborWhen he lives in a sense of security with you.
Do not quarrel with a man for no reasonIf he has done nothing bad to you.
Do not envy the violent manNor choose any of his ways,
For Jehovah detests a devious person,But His close friendship is with the upright.
The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one,But he blesses the home of the righteous.
For he mocks those who ridicule,But he shows favor to the meek.
The wise will inherit honor,But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.
The weighty message contained in the words of Aʹgur son of Jaʹkeh, which he spoke to Ithʹi·el, to Ithʹi·el and Uʹcal.
I am more ignorant than anyone else,And I lack the understanding a man should have.
I have not learned wisdom,And I do not possess the knowledge of the Most Holy One.
Who has ascended to heaven and then descended? Who has gathered the wind in the palms of both hands? Who has wrapped up the waters in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name and the name of his son—if you know?
Every saying of God is refined. He is a shield to those taking refuge in him.
Add nothing to his words,Or he will reprove you,And you will be proved a liar.
Two things I ask of you. Do not withhold them from me before I die.
Remove untruth and lies far from me. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Just let me consume my portion of food,
So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say, “Who is Jehovah?” Nor let me become poor and steal and dishonor the name of my God.
Do not slander a servant to his master,Or he may curse you and you will be found guilty.
There is a generation that curses its fatherAnd does not bless its mother.
There is a generation that is pure in its own eyesBut has not been cleansed from its filth.
There is a generation whose eyes are so haughtyAnd whose eyes look so arrogantly!
There is a generation whose teeth are swordsAnd whose jaws are slaughtering knives;They devour the lowly ones of the earthAnd the poor from among mankind.
The leeches have two daughters that cry, “Give! Give!” There are three things that do not get satisfied,Four that never say, “Enough!”
—The Grave and a barren womb,A land that is deprived of water,And fire that never says, “Enough!”
The eye that mocks a father and despises obedience to a mother—The ravens of the valley will peck it out,And the young eagles will eat it up.
There are three things that are beyond my comprehension,And four that I do not understand:
The way of an eagle in the heavens,The way of a serpent on a rock,The way of a ship in the open sea,And the way of a man with a young woman.
This is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats, she wipes her mouth;Then she says, “I have done nothing wrong.”
There are three things that make the earth shudderAnd four things it cannot endure:
When a slave rules as king,When a fool is glutted with food,
When a hated woman is taken as a wife,And when a servant girl takes the place of her mistress.
Four things on earth are among the smallest,But they are instinctively wise:
The ants are not strong creatures,Yet they prepare their food in the summer.
The rock badgers are not mighty creatures,Yet they make their house in the crags.
The locusts have no king,Yet they all go forward in formation.
The gecko lizard clings with its feet,And it goes into the palace of a king.
There are three things that have an impressive stride,Four that are impressive as they move:
The lion, the mightiest among beasts,Which does not retreat from anyone;
The greyhound; the male goat;And a king whose army is with him.
If you have foolishly exalted yourselfOr if you have schemed to do so,Put your hand over your mouth.
For as the churning of milk produces butterAnd the squeezing of the nose produces blood,So the stirring up of anger produces quarrels.
True wisdom has built its house;It has carved out its seven pillars.
It has fully prepared its meat;It has mixed its wine;It has also arranged its table.
It has sent out its female servantsTo call out from the heights above the city:
“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:
“Come, eat my breadAnd share in drinking the wine that I have mixed.
Leave behind your inexperience and live;Walk forward in the way of understanding.”
The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor,And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt.
Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.
Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom,And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding.
For by me your days will be many,And years will be added to your life.
If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage,But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it.
A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing.
She sits at the entrance of her houseOn a seat in the high places of the city,
Calling out to those passing by,To those walking straight ahead on their way:
“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:
“Stolen waters are sweet,And food eaten in secret is pleasant.”
But he does not know that those powerless in death are there,That her guests are in the depths of the Grave.
Do not envy evil men,And do not crave their company,
For their heart meditates on violence,And their lips speak of trouble.
By wisdom a house is built up,And by discernment it is made secure.
By knowledge its rooms are filledWith all sorts of precious and pleasant treasures.
A wise man is powerful,And with knowledge a man increases his power.
By skillful direction you will wage your war,And through many advisers there is victory.
True wisdom is unattainable for a fool;He has nothing to say in the city gate.
Anyone who plots evilWill be called a master schemer.
Foolish schemes are sinful,And people detest a ridiculer.
If you become discouraged in the day of distress,Your strength will be meager.
Rescue those who are being taken away to death,And hold back those staggering to the slaughter.
If you say, “But we did not know about this,” Does not the One who examines hearts discern it? Yes, the One who watches you will knowAnd will repay each man according to his activity.
My son, eat honey, because it is good;Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste.
Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you. If you find it, you will have a futureAnd your hope will not be cut off.
Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one;Do not destroy his place of rest.
For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again,But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.
When your enemy falls, do not rejoice,And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful;
Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased,And He will turn away his anger from him.
Do not be upset because of evil men;Do not envy wicked people,
For there is no future for anyone evil;The lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
My son, fear Jehovah and the king. And do not associate with dissenters,
For their disaster will arise suddenly. Who knows what ruin both will bring upon them?
These sayings also belong to the wise: Partiality in judgment is not good.
Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,” Will be cursed by the peoples and denounced by the nations.
But it will go well for those reproving him;Blessings of good things will come upon them.
People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.
Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field;Then build your house.
Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds. Do not use your lips to deceive others.
Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me;I will repay him for what he did.”
I passed by the field of the lazy one,By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.
I saw that it was overgrown with weeds;The ground was covered with nettles,And its stone wall was broken down.
I observed this and took it to heart;I saw it and learned this lesson:
A little sleep, a little slumbering,A little folding of the hands to rest,
And your poverty will come like a bandit,And your want like an armed man.
Do not boast about tomorrow,For you do not know what a day will bring.
Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth;Others, and not your own lips.
A stone is heavy and sand is weighty,But the irritation caused by a fool is heavier than both.
There is the cruelty of rage and the flood of anger,But who can withstand jealousy?
Open reproof is better than concealed love.
The wounds inflicted by a friend are faithful,But an enemy’s kisses are plentiful.
One whose appetite is satisfied turns down honey from the comb,But to the hungry, even what is bitter tastes sweet.
Like a bird that strays from its nestIs a man who strays from his home.
Oil and incense make the heart rejoice;So does sweet friendship springing from sincere counsel.
Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend,And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster;Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.
Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice,So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.
The shrewd person sees the danger and conceals himself,But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.
When someone blesses his fellow man with a loud voice early in the morning,It will be counted as a curse to him.
A quarrelsome wife is like a constantly leaking roof on a rainy day.
Whoever can restrain her can restrain the windAnd can grip oil with his right hand.
As iron sharpens iron,So one man sharpens his friend.
The one who cares for a fig tree will eat its fruit,And the one who takes care of his master will be honored.
As water reflects one’s face,So the heart of one man reflects another’s.
The Grave and the place of destruction are never satisfied,Nor are a man’s eyes ever satisfied.
As the refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,So a person is tested by the praise he receives.
Even if you pound a fool with a pestleLike crushed grain in a mortar,His foolishness will not leave him.
You should know well the appearance of your flock. Take good care of your sheep,
For wealth does not last forever,Nor a crown for all generations.
The green grass disappears, new grass appears,And the vegetation of the mountains is gathered in.
The young rams provide your clothing,And the male goats provide the price of a field.
And there will be enough goat’s milk to feed you,To feed your household, and to sustain your servant girls.
My son, if you accept my sayingsAnd treasure up my commandments,
By making your ear attentive to wisdomAnd inclining your heart to discernment;
Moreover, if you call out for understandingAnd raise your voice for discernment;
If you keep seeking for it as for silver,And you keep searching for it as for hidden treasures;
Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah,And you will find the knowledge of God.
For Jehovah himself gives wisdom;From his mouth come knowledge and discernment.
He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright;He is a shield for those walking in integrity.
He watches over the paths of justice,And he will guard the way of his loyal ones.
Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair,The entire course of what is good.
When wisdom enters your heartAnd knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,
Thinking ability will keep watch over you,And discernment will safeguard you,
To save you from the bad course,From the man speaking perverse things,
From those leaving the upright pathsTo walk in the ways of darkness,
From those who rejoice in wrongdoing,Who find joy in the perverseness of evil,
Those whose paths are crookedAnd whose entire course is devious.
It will save you from the wayward woman,From the smooth words of the immoral woman,
Who abandons the close companion of her youthAnd forgets the covenant of her God;
For her house sinks down into death,And her paths lead to those powerless in death.
None of those having relations with her will return,Nor will they regain the pathways of life.
So follow the way of good peopleAnd stay on the paths of the righteous,
For only the upright will reside in the earth,And the blameless will remain in it.
As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth,And the treacherous will be torn away from it.
Proverbs of Solʹo·mon. A wise son makes his father rejoice,But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.
The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit,But righteousness is what rescues from death.
Jehovah will not cause the righteous one to go hungry,But he will deny the wicked what they crave.
Idle hands will cause poverty,But diligent hands bring riches.
The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer,But the son acting shamefully is fast asleep during the harvest.
Blessings are on the head of the righteous one,But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
The memory of the righteous one is due for a blessing,But the name of the wicked will rot.
The wisehearted person will accept instructions,But the one speaking foolishly will be trodden down.
The one walking in integrity will walk in security,But the one making his ways crooked will be found out.
The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief,And the one who speaks foolishly will be trodden down.
The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life,But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
Hatred is what stirs up contentions,But love covers over all transgressions.
Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person,But the rod is for the back of one lacking good sense.
Those who are wise treasure up knowledge,But the mouth of the fool invites ruin.
The wealth of a rich man is his fortified city. The ruin of the poor is their poverty.
The activity of the righteous one leads to life;But the produce of the wicked one leads to sin.
The one who heeds discipline is a path to life,But the one who ignores reproof leads others astray.
The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies,And the one spreading malicious reports is stupid.
When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided,But whoever controls his lips acts discreetly.
The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver,But the heart of the wicked one is worth little.
The lips of the righteous one nourish many,But the foolish die for lack of sense.
It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich,And He adds no pain with it.
Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one,But wisdom is for the man of discernment.
What the wicked one fears will come upon him;But the desire of the righteous will be granted.
When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more,But the righteous one is a foundation forever.
Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,So the lazy person is to the one who sends him.
The fear of Jehovah prolongs life,But the years of the wicked will be cut short.
The expectation of the righteous brings joy,But the hope of the wicked will perish.
The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one,But it means ruin for evildoers.
The righteous one will never be made to fall,But the wicked will no longer inhabit the earth.
The mouth of the righteous one produces wisdom,But the perverse tongue will be cut off.
The lips of the righteous one know what is pleasing,But the mouth of the wicked is perverse.
A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,But the answer he gives is from Jehovah.
All of a man’s ways seem right to him,But Jehovah examines the motives.
Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,And your plans will succeed.
Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose,Even the wicked for the day of disaster.
Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured that he will not go unpunished.
By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for,And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.
When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways,He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Better is a little with righteousnessThan a large income without justice.
A man may plot out his course in his heart,But it is Jehovah who directs his steps.
Inspired decision should be on the lips of a king;He must never betray justice.
Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah;All the weights in the bag are his doing.
Wicked practices are detestable to kings,For the throne is firmly established by righteousness.
Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly.
The king’s rage is like a messenger of death,But the wise man appeases it.
In the light of the king’s face there is life;His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring.
How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver.
The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.
Pride is before a crash,And a haughty spirit before stumbling.
Better to be humble among the meekThan to share the spoil of the haughty.
The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah.
The wise in heart will be called understanding,And the one kind in speech adds persuasiveness.
Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it,But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness.
The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insightAnd adds persuasiveness to his speech.
Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb,Sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.
There is a way that seems right to a man,But in the end it leads to death.
The appetite of a laborer makes him work hardFor his hunger urges him on.
A worthless man digs up what is bad;His speech is like a scorching fire.
A troublemaker causes dissension,And a slanderer separates close friends.
A violent man entices his neighborAnd leads him in the wrong way.
He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief.
Gray hair is a crown of beautyWhen it is found in the way of righteousness.
The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man,And the one controlling his temper than one conquering a city.
The lot is cast into the lap,But every decision by it is from Jehovah.
My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen carefully to my discernment,
So that you may guard your thinking abilitiesAnd safeguard knowledge with your lips.
For the lips of a wayward woman drip like a honeycomb,And her mouth is smoother than oil.
But in the end she is as bitter as wormwoodAnd as sharp as a two-edged sword.
Her feet descend into death. Her steps lead straight to the Grave.
She gives no thought to the path of life. Her course wanders, but she does not know where.
Now, my sons, listen to meAnd do not turn away from what I am saying.
Stay far away from her;Do not go near the entrance of her house,
So that you may not give your dignity to othersNor reap years of what is cruel;
So that strangers may not drain your resourcesAnd what you labored for go to the house of a foreigner.
Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your lifeWhen your flesh and body waste away
And you say: “How I hated discipline! How my heart despised reproof!
I did not listen to the voice of my instructorsOr pay attention to my teachers.
I have come to the brink of complete ruinIn the midst of the entire congregation.”
Drink water from your own cisternAnd flowing water from your own well.
Should your springs be dispersed outside,Your streams of water in the public squares?
Let them be for you alone,And not for strangers with you.
May your own fountain be blessed,And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth,
A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat. Let her breasts satisfy you at all times. May you be captivated by her love constantly.
So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward womanOr embrace the bosom of an immoral woman?
For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah;He examines all his paths.
The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors,And he will be caught in the ropes of his own sin.
He will die for lack of disciplineAnd go astray because of his excessive foolishness.
The truly wise woman builds up her house,But the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.
The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah,But the one whose ways are devious despises Him.
The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool,But the lips of the wise will protect them.
Where there are no cattle the manger is clean,But the power of a bull yields an abundant harvest.
A faithful witness will not lie,But a false witness lies with every breath.
The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none,But knowledge comes easily to the person with understanding.
Stay away from the foolish man,For you will not find knowledge on his lips.
By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going,But the stupid are deceived by their foolishness.
Fools make fun of guilt,But among the upright, there is a willingness to reconcile.
The heart knows its own bitterness,And no outsider can share in its joy.
The house of the wicked will be destroyed,But the tent of the upright will flourish.
There is a way that seems right to a man,But in the end it leads to death.
Even in laughter the heart may feel pain,And rejoicing may end in grief.
The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways,But the good man reaps the reward of his dealings.
The naive person believes every word,But the shrewd one ponders each step.
The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil,But the stupid one is reckless and overconfident.
The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly,But the man who thinks things out is hated.
The naive will inherit foolishness,But the shrewd are crowned with knowledge.
Bad people will have to bow down before the good,And the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous.
The poor man is hated even by his neighbors,But many are the friends of the rich person.
The one who despises his neighbor sins,But whoever shows compassion to the lowly is happy.
Will not those who plot mischief go astray? But those intent on doing good will receive loyal love and faithfulness.
There is benefit in every kind of hard work,But mere talk leads to want.
The crown of the wise is their wealth;But the foolishness of the stupid is only foolishness.
A true witness saves lives,But a deceitful one lies with every breath.
There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah,And it will be a refuge for his children.
The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life,To turn one away from the snares of death.
A multitude of people are a king’s majesty,But a ruler without subjects is ruined.
The one who is slow to anger has great discernment,But the impatient one displays his foolishness.
A calm heart gives life to the body,But jealousy is rottenness to the bones.
The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker,But whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him.
The wicked one will be brought down by his own evil,But the righteous one will find refuge in his integrity.
Wisdom rests quietly in the heart of an understanding person,But among the stupid it must make itself known.
Righteousness exalts a nation,But sin is disgraceful to a people.
The king finds pleasure in a servant who acts with insight,But his fury is against the one who acts shamefully.
The wicked flee when no one pursues them,But the righteous are as confident as a lion.
When there is transgression in the land, it will have one prince after another,But with the help of a man of discernment and knowledge, a prince will long endure.
A poor man who defrauds the lowlyIs like a rain that sweeps away all the food.
Those who abandon the law praise the wicked one,But those who observe the law are indignant with them.
Evil men cannot understand justice,But those who seek Jehovah can understand everything.
Better is a poor man who walks in his integrityThan a rich man whose ways are corrupt.
An understanding son observes the law,But a companion of gluttons disgraces his father.
The one who increases his wealth by interest and usuryAmasses it for the one who shows favor to the poor.
The one refusing to listen to the law—Even his prayer is detestable.
The one misleading the upright into an evil course will fall into his own pit,But the blameless will inherit what is good.
A rich man is wise in his own eyes,But a poor man with discernment can see through him.
When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,But when the wicked rise to power, people go into hiding.
The one covering over his transgressions will not succeed,But whoever confesses and abandons them will be shown mercy.
Happy is the man who is always on guard,But whoever hardens his heart will fall into calamity.
Like a growling lion and a charging bearIs a wicked ruler over a helpless people.
A leader without discernment abuses his power,But the one hating dishonest profit will prolong his life.
A man burdened with bloodguilt for taking someone’s life will keep fleeing until the grave. Let no one support him.
The one walking faultlessly will be saved,But the one whose ways are crooked will suddenly fall.
The one cultivating his ground will have plenty of bread,But the one taking up worthless pursuits will have his fill of poverty.
A faithful man will receive many blessings,But the one hastening to get rich will not remain innocent.
It is not good to show partiality;But a man might do wrong for a piece of bread.
An envious man is eager for wealth,Not knowing that poverty will overtake him.
Whoever reproves a man will afterward find more favorThan someone who flatters with his tongue.
Whoever robs his father and mother and says, “It is not wrong,” Is a partner of the man who causes ruin.
The greedy person stirs up dissension,But whoever relies on Jehovah will prosper.
Whoever trusts in his own heart is stupid,But the one who walks in wisdom will escape.
Whoever gives to the poor will lack nothing,But the one who closes his eyes to them will receive many curses.
When the wicked rise to power, a man hides himself,But when they perish, the righteous increase.
A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth;To be respected is better than silver and gold.
The rich and the poor have this in common: Jehovah made them both.
The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself,But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
The result of humility and the fear of JehovahIs riches and glory and life.
Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path,But whoever values his life keeps far away from them.
Train a boy in the way he should go;Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.
The rich one rules the poor,And the borrower is a slave to the lender.
Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster,And the rod of his fury will come to its end.
The generous person will be blessed,For he shares his food with the poor.
Drive away the scornful man,And contention will disappear;Disputes and insults will cease.
The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is graciousWill have the king as his friend.
The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge,But He overturns the words of the treacherous.
The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the public square!”
The mouth of wayward women is a deep pit. The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him.
The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealthAnd the one giving gifts to the richWill end up in poverty.
Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise,In order to apply your heart to my knowledge,
For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you,So that all of them may constantly be on your lips.
For your confidence to be in Jehovah,I am giving you knowledge today.
Have I not already written you,Imparting advice and knowledge,
To teach you true and reliable words,So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you?
Do not rob the poor man because he is poor,And do not crush the lowly man in the city gate,
For Jehovah himself will plead their causeAnd he will take the life of those who defraud them.
Do not keep company with a hot-tempered manOr get involved with one disposed to rage,
So that you never learn his waysAnd ensnare yourself.
Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge,Who put up security for loans.
If you have nothing to pay,Your bed will be taken right out from under you!
Do not move an ancient boundary markerThat your forefathers put in place.
Have you seen a man skillful at his work? He will stand before kings;He will not stand before common men.
A mild answer turns away rage,But a harsh word stirs up anger.
The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge,But the mouth of the stupid blurts out foolishness.
The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere,Watching both the bad and the good.
A calm tongue is a tree of life,But twisted speech causes despair.
A fool disrespects his father’s discipline,But a shrewd person accepts correction.
In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure,But the produce of the wicked one brings him trouble.
The lips of the wise spread knowledge,But not so the heart of the stupid one.
The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah,But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.
Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one,But he loves the one who pursues righteousness.
Discipline seems bad to one forsaking the way,But whoever hates reproof will die.
The Grave and the place of destruction are in full view of Jehovah. How much more so the hearts of men!
The scoffer does not love the one correcting him. He will not consult the wise.
A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance,But heartache crushes the spirit.
The understanding heart seeks knowledge,But the mouth of the stupid feeds on foolishness.
All the days of the afflicted one are bad,But the one with a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
Better is a little in the fear of JehovahThan great wealth along with anxiety.
Better is a dish of vegetables where there is loveThan a fattened bull where there is hatred.
A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel.
The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns,But the path of the upright is like a level highway.
A wise son makes his father rejoice,But a stupid man despises his mother.
Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,But the man of discernment walks straight ahead.
Plans fail when there is no consultation,But there is accomplishment through many advisers.
A man rejoices in giving the right answer,And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is!
The path of life leads upward to one with insight,To turn him away from the Grave below.
Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty,But he will preserve the boundary of the widow.
Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one,But pleasant sayings are pure to Him.
The one making dishonest profit brings trouble on his own household,But the one hating bribes will keep living.
The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things.
Jehovah is far away from the wicked,But he hears the prayer of the righteous.
Bright eyes make the heart rejoice;A good report invigorates the bones.
The one who listens to life-giving reproofIs at home among the wise.
Anyone refusing discipline despises his life,But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.
The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom,And before glory there is humility.
Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father;Pay attention in order to gain understanding,
For I will give you good instruction;Do not forsake my teaching.
I was a true son to my fatherAnd the one especially loved by my mother.
He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words. Keep my commandments and continue living.
Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding. Do not forget, and do not turn aside from what I say.
Do not forsake it, and it will protect you. Love it, and it will safeguard you.
Wisdom is the most important thing, so acquire wisdom,And with all you acquire, acquire understanding.
Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you. It will honor you because you embrace it.
It will place an attractive wreath on your head;It will adorn you with a crown of beauty.”
Listen, my son, and accept my sayings,And the years of your life will be many.
I will instruct you in the way of wisdom;I will lead you in the tracks of uprightness.
When you walk, your steps will not be hindered;And if you run, you will not stumble.
Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life.
Do not enter the path of the wicked,And do not walk in the way of evil men.
Shun it, do not take it;Turn away from it, and pass it by.
For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad. They are robbed of sleep unless they cause someone’s downfall.
They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness,And they drink the wine of violence.
But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning lightThat grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.
The way of the wicked is like the darkness;They do not know what makes them stumble.
My son, pay attention to my words;Listen carefully to my sayings.
Do not lose sight of them;Keep them deep within your heart,
For they are life to those who find themAnd health to their whole body.
Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart,For out of it are the sources of life.
Put crooked speech away from you,And keep devious talk far away from you.
Your eyes should look straight ahead,Yes, fix your gaze straight ahead of you.
Smooth out the course of your feet,And all your ways will be sure.
Do not incline to the right or the left. Turn your feet away from what is bad.
Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly;Whoever goes astray by them is not wise.
The terror of a king is like the growling of a lion;Whoever provokes his anger risks his own life.
It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute,But every fool will become embroiled in it.
The lazy one does not plow in winter,So he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing.
The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters,But the discerning man draws them out.
Many men proclaim their loyal love,But who can find a faithful man?
The righteous one is walking in his integrity. Happy are his children who come after him.
When the king sits on the throne to judge,He sifts out all evil with his eyes.
Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart;I am pure from my sin”?
Dishonest weights and false measures—Both are detestable to Jehovah.
Even a child is known by his actions,Whether his behavior is pure and right.
The hearing ear and the seeing eye—Jehovah has made both of them.
Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty. Open your eyes, and you will be satisfied with bread.
“It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer;Then he goes away and boasts about himself.
There is gold, also much coral,But the lips of knowledge are something precious.
Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger;Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.
Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man,But afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.
By consultation, plans will succeed,And by skillful direction wage your war.
A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk;Do not associate with one who loves to gossip.
Whoever curses his father and his mother,His lamp will be extinguished when darkness comes.
An inheritance obtained first by greedWill not be a blessing in the end.
Do not say: “I will pay back evil!” Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you.
Dishonest weights are detestable to Jehovah,And deceptive scales are not good.
A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah;How can a man understand his own way?
It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed.
A wise king sifts out the wickedAnd drives the threshing wheel over them.
The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah,Searching through his innermost being.
Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king;By loyal love he sustains his throne.
The glory of young men is their strength,And the splendor of old men is their gray hair.
Bruises and wounds purge away evil,And beatings cleanse one’s innermost being.
The one who loves discipline loves knowledge,But the one who hates reproof is unreasoning.
The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval,But He condemns the man of wicked schemes.
No man is made secure by wickedness,But the righteous will never be uprooted.
A capable wife is a crown to her husband,But the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones.
The thoughts of the righteous are just,But the guidance of the wicked is deceptive.
The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,But the mouth of the upright saves them.
When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more,But the house of the righteous will keep standing.
A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth,But one with a twisted heart will be treated with contempt.
Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servantThan to glorify oneself and have no food.
The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals,But even the mercy of the wicked is cruel.
The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food,But the one pursuing worthless things is lacking good sense.
The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught,But the root of the righteous bears fruit.
The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech,But the righteous one escapes from distress.
From the fruitage of his speech a man is satisfied with good,And the work of his hands will reward him.
The way of the fool is right in his own eyes,But the wise one accepts advice.
A fool immediately shows his annoyance,But the shrewd man overlooks an insult.
The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth,But a false witness speaks deceit.
Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword,But the tongue of the wise is a healing.
Truthful lips will endure forever,But a lying tongue will last for only a moment.
Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief,But those who promote peace have joy.
No harm will befall the righteous one,But the wicked will have their fill of calamity.
Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah,But those acting faithfully bring pleasure to him.
A shrewd man conceals what he knows,But the heart of the fool blurts out his foolishness.
The hand of the diligent ones will rule,But idle hands will be put to forced labor.
Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,But a good word cheers it up.
The righteous one searches out his pastures,But the course of the wicked leads them astray.
The lazy do not chase after the prey,But diligence is a man’s precious treasure.
The path of righteousness leads to life;Along its pathway there is no death.
Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires;He rejects all practical wisdom.
A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding;He would rather disclose what is in his heart.
When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes,And along with dishonor there is disgrace.
The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters. The fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.
It is not good to show partiality to the wicked oneOr to deprive the righteous one of justice.
The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels,And his mouth invites a beating.
The mouth of the stupid is his ruin,And his lips are a snare for his life.
The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;They are gulped right down into the stomach.
Whoever is lazy in his workIs a brother to the one who causes ruin.
The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous one runs and receives protection.
The wealth of the rich is his fortified city;It is like a protective wall in his imagination.
Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty,And before glory there is humility.
When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts,It is foolish and humiliating.
A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness,But who can bear a crushed spirit?
The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge,And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge.
A man’s gift opens the way for him;It gives him access to great people.
The first to state his case seems right,Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.
Casting lots puts an end to disputesAnd decides between strong opponents.
A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city,And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress.
From the fruitage of a man’s speech his stomach will be filled;He will be satisfied with what his lips produce.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue;Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage.
The one who finds a good wife has found something good,And he receives Jehovah’s favor.
The poor man implores when speaking,But the rich man answers harshly.
There are companions ready to crush one another,But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.
When you sit down to eat with a king,Carefully consider what is before you;
Put a knife to your throatIf you have a large appetite.
Do not crave his delicacies,For it is deceptive food.
Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. Stop and show understanding.
When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there,For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.
Do not eat the food of a stingy person;Do not crave his delicacies,
For he is like one keeping accounts. “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but he does not mean it.
You will vomit up the morsels you have eatenAnd will have wasted your compliments.
Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one,For he will despise the wisdom of your words.
Do not move an ancient boundary markerOr encroach on the field of the fatherless.
For their Defender is strong;He will take up their cause against you.
Apply your heart to disciplineAnd your ear to the sayings of knowledge.
Do not hold back discipline from a boy. If you strike him with the rod, he will not die.
With the rod you should strike him,In order to save him from the Grave.
My son, if your heart becomes wise,Then my own heart will rejoice.
My innermost being will find joyWhen your lips speak what is right.
Let your heart not envy sinners,But be in the fear of Jehovah all day long,
For then you will have a futureAnd your hope will not be cut off.
Listen, my son, and become wise,And direct your heart in the right way.
Do not be among those who drink too much wine,Among those who gorge themselves on meat,
For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty,And drowsiness will clothe one with rags.
Listen to your father who caused your birth,And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.
Buy truth and never sell it,Also wisdom and discipline and understanding.
The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful;Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him.
Your father and your mother will rejoice,And she who gave birth to you will be joyful.
My son, do give your heart to me,And may your eyes take pleasure in my ways.
For a prostitute is a deep pit,And an immoral woman is a narrow well.
She lies in wait like a robber;She increases the number of unfaithful men.
Who has woe? Who has uneasiness? Who has quarrels? Who has complaints? Who has wounds for no reason? Who has bleary eyes?
Those lingering long over wine;Those searching out mixed wine.
Do not look at the wine’s red colorAs it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly,
For in the end it bites like a serpent,And it secretes poison like a viper.
Your eyes will see strange things,And your heart will speak perverse things.
And you will be like one lying down in the middle of the sea,Like one lying at the top of a ship’s mast.
You will say: “They have struck me, but I did not feel it. They beat me, but I did not know it. When will I wake up? I need another drink.”
My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor,If you have given your handshake to a stranger,
If you have been ensnared by your promise,Caught by the words of your mouth,
Do this, my son, and free yourself,For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.
Do not allow your eyes to sleep,Nor your eyelids to slumber.
Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand,Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.
Go to the ant, you lazy one;Observe its ways and become wise.
Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,
It prepares its food in the summer,And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.
How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep?
A little sleep, a little slumbering,A little folding of the hands to rest,
And your poverty will come like a bandit,And your want like an armed man.
A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech;
He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers.
With a perverted heart,He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions.
Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly;In a moment he will be broken beyond healing.
There are six things that Jehovah hates;Yes, seven things that he detests:
Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil,
A false witness who lies with every breath,And anyone sowing contentions among brothers.
Observe, my son, the commandment of your father,And do not forsake the instruction of your mother.
Always bind them around your heart;Tie them about your neck.
When you walk about, it will lead you;When you lie down, it will stand guard over you;And when you awaken, it will speak to you.
For the commandment is a lamp,And the law is a light,And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life.
They will guard you against the bad woman,Against the seductive tongue of the immoral woman.
Do not desire her beauty in your heartOr allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes,
For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread,But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.
Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments?
Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?
It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife;No one who touches her will go unpunished.
People do not despise a thiefIf he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry.
Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold;He will give up all the valuables of his house.
Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;The one who does so brings ruin on himself.
He will get only wounds and dishonor,And his disgrace will not be wiped away.
For jealousy makes a husband furious;He will show no compassion when he takes revenge.
He will accept no compensation;He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.
A man who stiffens his neck after much reproofWill suddenly be broken beyond healing.
When the righteous are many, the people rejoice,But when the wicked one rules, the people groan.
A man who loves wisdom makes his father rejoice,But the one who keeps company with prostitutes squanders his wealth.
By justice a king brings stability to a land,But a man seeking bribes brings it to ruin.
A man who flatters his neighborSpreads out a net for his feet.
A bad man’s transgression ensnares him,But the righteous one cries out joyfully and rejoices.
The righteous one is concerned about the legal rights of the poor,But the wicked one has no such concern.
Boastful men inflame a town,But those who are wise turn away anger.
When a wise man enters into a controversy with a fool,There will be ranting and ridicule, but no satisfaction.
Bloodthirsty men hate anyone innocent,And they seek to take the life of the upright.
A stupid person gives vent to all his feelings,But the wise one calmly keeps them in check.
When a ruler pays attention to lies,All his servants will be wicked.
The poor man and the oppressor have this in common: Jehovah gives light to the eyes of both.
When a king judges the poor fairly,His throne will always be secure.
The rod and reproof impart wisdom,But a child left unrestrained brings shame on his mother.
When the wicked increase, transgression increases,But the righteous will see their downfall.
Discipline your son and he will bring you rest;And he will give you great pleasure.
Where there is no vision, the people go unrestrained,But happy are those who observe the law.
A servant will not let himself be corrected by words,For though he understands, he does not obey.
Have you seen a man hasty with his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
If a servant is pampered from his youth,He will become thankless later on.
A man prone to anger stirs up strife;Anyone disposed to rage commits many transgressions.
The haughtiness of a man will humble him,But whoever is humble in spirit will obtain glory.
The partner of a thief hates himself. He may hear the call to testify, but he reports nothing.
Trembling at men is a snare,But the one trusting in Jehovah will be protected.
Many seek an audience with a ruler,But it is from Jehovah that a man gets justice.
An unjust man is detestable to the righteous,But the one whose way is upright is detestable to the wicked one.
Is not wisdom calling out? Is not discernment raising its voice?
On the heights along the road,It takes its position at the crossroads.
Next to the gates leading into the city,At the entrances of the doorways,It keeps crying out loudly:
“To you, O people, I am calling;I raise my voice to everyone.
You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness;You stupid ones, acquire an understanding heart.
Listen, for what I say is important,My lips speak what is right;
For my mouth softly utters truth,And my lips detest what is wicked.
All the sayings of my mouth are righteous. None of them are twisted or crooked.
They are all straightforward to the discerningAnd right to those who have found knowledge.
Take my discipline instead of silver,And knowledge rather than the finest gold,
For wisdom is better than corals;All other desirable things cannot compare to it.
I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness;I have found knowledge and thinking ability.
The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech.
I possess good advice and practical wisdom;Understanding and power are mine.
By me kings keep reigning,And high officials decree righteousness.
By me princes keep ruling,And nobles judge in righteousness.
I love those loving me,And those seeking me will find me.
Riches and glory are with me,Lasting wealth and righteousness.
My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold,And what I produce is better than the finest silver.
I walk in the path of righteousness,In the middle of the pathways of justice;
I give a rich inheritance to those who love me,And I fill up their storehouses.
Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way,The earliest of his achievements of long ago.
From ancient times I was installed,From the start, from times earlier than the earth.
When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,When there were no springs overflowing with water.
Before the mountains were set in place,Before the hills, I was brought forth,
When he had not yet made the earth and its fieldsOr the first clods of earth’s soil.
When he prepared the heavens, I was there;When he marked out the horizon on the surface of the waters,
When he established the clouds above,When he founded the fountains of the deep,
When he set a decree for the seaThat its waters should not pass beyond his order,When he established the foundations of the earth,
Then I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day;I rejoiced before him all the time;
I rejoiced over his habitable earth,And I was especially fond of the sons of men.
And now, my sons, listen to me;Yes, happy are those who keep my ways.
Listen to discipline and become wise,And never neglect it.
Happy is the man who listens to meBy coming early to my doors day by day,By waiting next to my doorposts;
For the one finding me will find life,And he receives approval from Jehovah.
But the one who ignores me harms himself,And those who hate me love death.”
Cast your bread on the waters, for after many days you will find it again.
Give a share to seven or even to eight, for you do not know what disaster will occur on the earth.
If the clouds are filled with water, they will pour down rain on the earth; and if a tree falls to the south or to the north, the place where the tree falls is where it will lie.
The one who watches the wind will not sow seed, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.
Just as you do not know how the spirit operates in the bones of the child inside a pregnant woman, so you do not know the work of the true God, who does all things.
Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.
Light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun.
For if a man should live many years, let him enjoy them all. But he should remember that the days of darkness may be many; all that is to come is futility.
Rejoice, young man, while you are young, and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth. Follow the ways of your heart and go where your eyes lead you; but know that the true God will bring you into judgment for all these things.
So remove troublesome things from your heart, and ward off harmful things from your body, for youth and the prime of life are futility.
The words of the congregator, the son of David, the king in Jerusalem.
“The greatest futility!” says the congregator,“The greatest futility! Everything is futile!”
What does a person gain from all his hard workAt which he toils under the sun?
A generation is going, and a generation is coming,But the earth remains forever.
The sun rises, and the sun sets;Then it hurries back to the place where it rises again.
The wind goes south and circles around to the north;Round and round it continuously circles; the wind keeps making its rounds.
All the streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is not full. To the place from which the streams flow, there they return so as to flow again.
All things are wearisome;No one can even speak of it. The eye is not satisfied at seeing;Nor is the ear filled from hearing.
What has been is what will be,And what has been done will be done again;There is nothing new under the sun.
Is there anything of which one may say, “Look at this—it is new”? It already existed from long ago;It already existed before our time.
No one remembers people of former times;Nor will anyone remember those who come later;Nor will they be remembered by those who come still later.
I, the congregator, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem.
I set my heart to study and explore with wisdom everything that has been done under the heavens—the miserable occupation that God has given to the sons of men that keeps them occupied.
I saw all the works that were done under the sun,And look! everything was futile, a chasing after the wind.
What is crooked cannot be made straight,And what is lacking cannot possibly be counted.
Then I said in my heart: “Look! I have acquired great wisdom, more than anyone who was before me in Jerusalem, and my heart gained a great deal of wisdom and knowledge.”
I applied my heart to knowing wisdom and to knowing madness and to knowing folly, and this too is a chasing after the wind.
For an abundance of wisdom brings an abundance of frustration,So that whoever increases knowledge increases pain.
A good name is better than good oil, and the day of death is better than the day of birth.
Better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for that is the end of every man, and the living should take it to heart.
Better is distress than laughter, for the sadness of the face makes the heart better.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of the stupid is in the house of rejoicing.
Better to listen to a wise man’s rebuke than to listen to the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns burning under the pot, so is the laughter of the fool; and this too is futility.
But oppression can drive the wise one into madness, and a bribe corrupts the heart.
Better is the end of a matter than its beginning. Better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit.
Do not be quick to take offense, for the taking of offense lodges in the bosom of fools.
Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.
Wisdom together with an inheritance is a good thing and an advantage to those who see the light of day.
For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.
Consider the work of the true God, for who can straighten out what he has made crooked?
On a good day, reflect this goodness, but on the day of adversity, consider that God made the one as well as the other, so that men cannot be certain of anything that will happen to them in the future.
During my futile life I have seen everything—from the righteous one who perishes in his righteousness to the wicked one who lives long despite his badness.
Do not be overly righteous, nor show yourself excessively wise. Why should you bring ruin to yourself?
Do not be excessively wicked, nor be foolish. Why should you die before your time?
It is best to grasp one warning without letting go of the other; for the one who fears God will heed them both.
Wisdom makes a wise man more powerful than ten strong men in a city.
For there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins.
Also, do not take to heart every word that people say; otherwise, you may hear your servant calling down evil on you;
for you well know in your heart that many times you yourself have called down evil on others.
All of this I tested with wisdom, and I said: “I will become wise.” But it was beyond me.
What has come to be is out of reach and exceedingly deep. Who can understand it?
I directed my heart to know and to explore and to search for wisdom and the reason behind things, and to understand the wickedness of stupidity and the folly of madness.
Then I discovered this: More bitter than death is the woman who is like a hunter’s net, whose heart is like dragnets, and whose hands are like prison chains. The one who pleases the true God will escape her, but the sinner is captured by her.
“See, this is what I found,” says the congregator. “I investigated one thing after another to reach my conclusion,
but what I continually sought, I have not found. One man out of a thousand I found, but a woman among them I have not found.
This alone I have found: The true God made mankind upright, but they have sought out many schemes.”
There is an appointed time for everything,A time for every activity under the heavens:
A time for birth and a time to die;A time to plant and a time to uproot what was planted;
A time to kill and a time to heal;A time to tear down and a time to build up;
A time to weep and a time to laugh;A time to wail and a time to dance;
A time to throw stones away and a time to gather stones together;A time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing;
A time to search and a time to give up as lost;A time to keep and a time to throw away;
A time to rip apart and a time to sew together;A time to be silent and a time to speak;
A time to love and a time to hate;A time for war and a time for peace.
What does the worker gain from all his efforts?
I have seen the occupation that God has given to the sons of men to keep them occupied.
He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.
I have concluded that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during their life,
also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.
I have come to know that everything the true God makes will endure forever. There is nothing to add to it and nothing to subtract from it. The true God has made it this way, so that people will fear him.
Whatever happens has already happened, and what is to come has already been; but the true God seeks what has been pursued.
I have also seen this under the sun: In the place of justice there was wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there was wickedness.
So I said in my heart: “The true God will judge both the righteous and the wicked, for there is a time for every activity and every action.”
I also said in my heart about the sons of men that the true God will test them and show them that they are like animals,
for there is an outcome for humans and an outcome for animals; they all have the same outcome. As the one dies, so the other dies; and they all have but one spirit. So man has no superiority over animals, for everything is futile.
All are going to the same place. They all come from the dust, and they all are returning to the dust.
Who really knows whether the spirit of humans ascends upward, and whether the spirit of animals descends down to the earth?
And I saw that there is nothing better than for a man to find enjoyment in his work, because that is his reward; for who can enable him to see what will happen after he is gone?
So I took all of this to heart and concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their works, are in the hands of the true God. Men are not aware of the love and the hate that took place prior to them.
All have the very same outcome, the righteous and the wicked, the good and the clean and the unclean, those sacrificing and those not sacrificing. The good one is the same as the sinner; the one who swears an oath is the same as the one who is cautious about swearing an oath.
This is a distressing thing that happens under the sun: Because all have the same outcome, the heart of humans is also full of bad; and there is madness in their heart during their life, and then they die!
There is hope for whoever is among the living, because a live dog is better off than a dead lion.
For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward, because all memory of them is forgotten.
Also, their love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished, and they no longer have any share in what is done under the sun.
Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found pleasure in your works.
May your clothing always be white, and do not fail to put oil on your head.
Enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of your futile life, which He has given you under the sun, all the days of your futility, for that is your lot in life and in your hard work at which you toil under the sun.
Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might, for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave, where you are going.
I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events overtake them all.
For man does not know his time. Just as fish are caught in an evil net and birds are caught in a trap, so the sons of men are ensnared in a time of disaster, when it suddenly overtakes them.
I also observed this about wisdom under the sun—and it impressed me:
There was a small city with a few men in it; and a mighty king came against it and surrounded it and built great siegeworks against it.
In it was found a poor but wise man, and he saved the city by his wisdom. But no one remembered that poor man.
And I said to myself: ‘Wisdom is better than mightiness; yet a poor man’s wisdom is despised, and his words are not heeded.’
Better to heed the calm words of the wise than the shouts of the one ruling among fools.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but just one sinner can destroy much good.
Then I said in my heart: “Come and let me try out pleasure and see what good comes.” But look! that too was futility.
I said about laughter, “It is madness!” And about pleasure, “What use is it?”
I explored with my heart by indulging myself with wine, all the while maintaining my own wisdom; I even embraced foolishness to find out what was the best thing for humans to do during their few days of life under the heavens.
I undertook great works. I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself.
I made gardens and parks for myself, and I planted in them all sorts of fruit trees.
I made pools of water for myself, to irrigate a grove of flourishing trees.
I acquired male and female servants, and I had servants born in my household. I also acquired much livestock—cattle and flocks—more than any of my predecessors in Jerusalem.
I accumulated silver and gold for myself, the treasures of kings and of provinces. I gathered male and female singers for myself, as well as what brings great pleasure to the sons of men—a woman, yes, many women.
So I grew great and surpassed anyone prior to me in Jerusalem. And my wisdom remained with me.
I did not deny myself anything that I desired. I did not withhold from my heart any sort of pleasure, for my heart was joyful because of all my hard work, and this was my reward for all my hard work.
But when I reflected on all the works that my own hands had done and on all the hard work that I had toiled to accomplish, I saw that everything was futile, a chasing after the wind; there was nothing of real value under the sun.
Then I turned my attention to wisdom and madness and folly. (For what can the man do who comes after the king? Only what has already been done.)
And I saw that there is an advantage to wisdom over folly, just as there is an advantage to light over darkness.
The wise one has his eyes in his head; but the stupid one is walking in darkness. I have also come to realize that there is one outcome that befalls all of them.
Then I said in my heart: “What happens to the stupid one will also happen to me.” What, then, did I gain by becoming excessively wise? So I said in my heart: “This too is futility.”
For there is no lasting memory either of the wise one or of the stupid one. In the days to come, everyone will be forgotten. And how will the wise one die? Along with the stupid one.
So I came to hate life, because everything being done under the sun seemed distressing to me, for everything was futile, a chasing after the wind.
I came to hate all that I had worked so hard for under the sun, because I must leave it behind for the man coming after me.
And who knows whether he will be wise or foolish? Yet he will take control over all the things I spent great effort and wisdom to acquire under the sun. This too is futility.
So I began to despair in my heart over all the hard work at which I had toiled under the sun.
For a man may work hard, guided by wisdom and knowledge and skill, but he must hand over his portion to a man who did not work for it. This too is futility and a great tragedy.
What does a man really gain from all his hard work and ambition that drives him to work hard under the sun?
For during all his days, his occupation brings pain and frustration, and even at night his heart does not rest. This too is futility.
There is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink and find enjoyment in his hard work. This too, I have realized, is from the hand of the true God,
for who eats and who drinks better than I do?
To the man who pleases him he gives wisdom and knowledge and rejoicing, but to the sinner he gives the occupation of gathering and merely collecting to give to the one who pleases the true God. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
As dead flies cause the perfumer’s oil to stink and bubble, so a little foolishness outweighs wisdom and glory.
The heart of the wise one leads him in the right way, but the heart of the stupid one leads him in the wrong way.
In whatever way the fool walks, he is lacking good sense, and he lets everyone know that he is a fool.
If the anger of a ruler should flare up against you, do not leave your place, for calmness allays great sins.
There is something distressing that I have seen under the sun, the sort of mistake made by those in power:
Foolishness is put in many high positions, but the rich remain in low positions.
I have seen servants on horseback but princes walking on foot just like servants.
The one who digs a pit may fall into it; and the one who breaks through a stone wall may be bitten by a snake.
The one who quarries stones may be hurt by them, and the one who splits logs may be endangered by them.
If an iron tool is dull and one does not sharpen its edge, he will need to exert much effort. But wisdom helps to achieve success.
If the snake bites before it is charmed, there is no advantage to the skilled charmer.
The words from the mouth of the wise one bring favor, but the lips of the stupid one are his ruin.
The first words out of his mouth are foolishness, and his last words are disastrous madness.
But the fool keeps on speaking. A man does not know what will happen; who can tell him what will come after him?
The hard work of the stupid one wears him out, for he does not even know how to find his way to the city.
How terrible for a land when the king is a boy and the princes start their feasting in the morning!
How happy for the land when the king is the son of nobles and the princes eat at the proper time for strength, not for drunkenness!
Because of extreme laziness the roof beams sag, and because of idle hands the house leaks.
Bread is made for laughter, and wine makes life enjoyable; but money answers every need.
Even in your thoughts, do not curse the king, and do not curse the rich in your bedroom; for a bird may convey the sound, or a creature with wings may repeat what was said.
Watch your step whenever you go to the house of the true God; it is better to draw near to listen than to give a sacrifice as the stupid ones do, for they are not aware that what they are doing is bad.
Do not be quick with your mouth, nor let your heart speak rashly before the true God, for the true God is in the heavens but you are on the earth. That is why your words should be few.
For a dream comes from too many preoccupations, and the chatter of the stupid one comes from too many words.
Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay.
Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay.
Do not allow your mouth to cause you to sin, and do not say before the angel that it was a mistake. Why make the true God indignant over what you say so that he has to destroy the work of your hands?
For just as many preoccupations lead to dreams, so, too, many words lead to futility. But fear the true God.
If you see any oppression of the poor and a violation of justice and righteousness in your district, do not be surprised about the matter. For that high official is being watched by one who is higher than he is, and there are others who are still higher than them.
Also, the profit of the land is divided among them all; even the king is served by the field.
A lover of silver will never be satisfied with silver, nor a lover of wealth with income. This too is futility.
When good things increase, those consuming them increase. And what advantage is it to the owner, except to look at them with his eyes?
Sweet is the sleep of the one serving, whether he eats little or much, but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.
There is a great tragedy that I have seen under the sun: riches that were hoarded by their owner to his own harm.
Those riches were lost because of a disastrous venture, and when he becomes a father to a son, he has nothing left in his possession.
Just as one came from his mother’s womb, naked he will go away, just as he came. And he cannot carry away anything for all his hard work.
This too is a great tragedy: Exactly as he came, so he will go away; and what profit is there to the one who keeps working hard for the wind?
Also, every day he eats in darkness, with a great deal of frustration and sickness and anger.
This is what I have seen to be good and proper: that one should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all the hard work at which he toils under the sun during the few days of life that the true God has given him, for that is his reward.
Also, when the true God gives a man riches and material possessions along with the ability to enjoy them, he should take his reward and rejoice in his hard work. This is the gift of God.
For he will hardly notice the passing days of his life, because the true God keeps him preoccupied with the rejoicing of his heart.
Again I turned my attention to all the acts of oppression that go on under the sun. I saw the tears of the oppressed, and there was no one to comfort them. And their oppressors had the power, and there was no one to comfort them.
And I congratulated the dead who had already died rather than the living who were still alive.
And better off than both of them is the one who has not yet been born, who has not seen the distressing deeds that are done under the sun.
And I have seen how much effort and skillful work spring from rivalry between people; this too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
The stupid one folds his hands while his flesh wastes away.
Better is a handful of rest than two handfuls of hard work and chasing after the wind.
I turned my attention to another example of futility under the sun:
There is a man who is all alone, without any companion; he has no son or brother, but there is no end to all his hard work. His eyes are never satisfied with riches. But does he ask himself, ‘For whom am I working hard and depriving myself of good things’? This too is futility and a miserable occupation.
Two are better than one because they have a good reward for their hard work.
For if one of them falls, the other can help his partner up. But what will happen to the one who falls with no one to help him up?
Moreover, if two lie down together, they will stay warm, but how can just one keep warm?
And someone may overpower one alone, but two together can take a stand against him. And a threefold cord cannot quickly be torn apart.
Better is a poor but wise child than an old but stupid king, who no longer has enough sense to heed a warning.
For he went out from prison to become king, although in that one’s kingship he was born poor.
I considered all those alive who walk about under the sun, as well as how it goes with the young successor who stands up in the other’s place.
Although there is no end to all his supporters, those who come later will not be happy with him. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
Remember, then, your Grand Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of distress come and the years arrive when you will say: “I have no pleasure in them”;
before the sun and the light and the moon and the stars grow dark, and the clouds return after the downpour;
in the day when the guards of the house become shaky, and the strong men stoop over, and the women quit grinding because they have become few, and the ladies looking out the windows find it dark;
when the doors to the street have been closed, when the sound of the grinding mill becomes low, when one gets up at the sound of a bird, and all the daughters of song grow faint.
Also, one is afraid of heights, and there are terrors in the street. And the almond tree blossoms, and the grasshopper drags itself along, and the caper berry bursts, because man is walking to his lasting house and the mourners walk about in the street;
before the silver cord is removed, and the golden bowl is crushed, and the jar at the spring is broken, and the waterwheel for the cistern is crushed.
Then the dust returns to the earth, just as it was, and the spirit returns to the true God who gave it.
“The greatest futility!” says the congregator. “Everything is futile.”
Not only had the congregator become wise but he continually taught the people what he knew, and he pondered and made a thorough search in order to compile many proverbs.
The congregator sought to find delightful words and to record accurate words of truth.
The words of the wise are like oxgoads, and their collected sayings are like firmly embedded nails; they have been given from one shepherd.
As for anything besides these, my son, be warned: To the making of many books there is no end, and much devotion to them is wearisome to the flesh.
The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole obligation of man.
For the true God will judge every deed, including every hidden thing, as to whether it is good or bad.
There is another tragedy that I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men:
The true God gives a man riches and material possessions and glory, so that he lacks nothing that he desires; yet the true God does not enable him to enjoy them, although a stranger may enjoy them. This is futility and a severe affliction.
If a man should become a father a hundred times and live for many years and reach old age, yet he does not enjoy his good things before he reaches the grave, I must say that a stillborn child is better off than he is.
For this one came in vain and went away in darkness, and his name is shrouded in darkness.
Even though he never saw the sun or knew anything, he is still better off than the former one.
What is the benefit of living a thousand years twice over but not experiencing enjoyment? Do not all go to the same place?
All the hard work of a man is to fill his mouth; yet his appetite is never satisfied.
For what advantage does the wise one have over the stupid one, or of what benefit is it that the poor man knows how to survive?
Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires. This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.
Whatever has come to be has already been named, and it is known what man is; and he is not able to dispute with the one more powerful than he.
The more words, the more futility; and what advantage do they bring to man?
Who knows what is best for a man to do in life during the few days of his futile life, which he spends like a shadow? For who can tell man what will happen under the sun after he is gone?
Who is like the wise man? Who knows the solution to a problem? A man’s wisdom lights up his face and softens his stern appearance.
I say: “Obey the king’s orders out of regard for the oath to God.
Do not rush to depart from his presence. Do not take a stand for anything bad; for he can do whatever he pleases,
because the word of the king is absolute; who can say to him, ‘What are you doing?’”
The one who observes the commandment will not experience harm, and the wise heart will know the right time and procedure.
For every matter there is a time and procedure, because the troubles of mankind are so abundant.
Since no one knows what will happen, who can tell him how it will happen?
Just as no man has power over the spirit or can restrain the spirit, so no one has power over the day of death. Just as no one is discharged during a war, so wickedness will not allow those who practice it to escape.
All of this I have seen, and I applied my heart to every work that has been done under the sun, during the time that man has dominated man to his harm.
And I saw the wicked being buried, those who used to go in and out of the holy place, but they were soon forgotten in the city where they acted that way. This too is futility.
Because sentence against a bad deed has not been executed speedily, the heart of men becomes emboldened to do bad.
Although a sinner may do bad a hundred times and still live a long time, yet I am aware that it will turn out well for those who fear the true God, because they fear him.
But it will not turn out well for the wicked one, nor will he prolong his days that are like a shadow, because he does not fear God.
There is something futile that takes place on the earth: There are righteous people who are treated as if they had acted wickedly, and there are wicked people who are treated as if they had acted righteously. I say that this too is futility.
So I recommended rejoicing, because there is nothing better for man under the sun than to eat and drink and rejoice; this should accompany him as he works hard during the days of his life, which the true God gives him under the sun.
I applied my heart to acquire wisdom and to see all the activity happening on the earth, even going without sleep day and night.
Then I considered all the work of the true God, and I realized that mankind cannot comprehend what happens under the sun. No matter how hard men try, they cannot comprehend it. Even if they claim that they are wise enough to know, they cannot really comprehend it.
The song of songs, which is Solʹo·mon’s:
“May he kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,For your expressions of affection are better than wine.
The fragrance of your oils is pleasant. Your name is like a fragrant oil poured out. That is why the young women love you.
Take me with you; let us run. The king has brought me into his interior rooms! Let us be joyful and rejoice in you. Let us praise your expressions of affection more than wine. Rightly they love you.
I am dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem,Like the tents of Keʹdar, like the tent cloths of Solʹo·mon.
Do not stare at me because I am swarthy,Because the sun has gazed upon me. The sons of my mother were angry with me;They appointed me the keeper of the vineyards,But my own vineyard I did not keep.
Tell me, you whom I love so much,Where you pasture your flock,Where you have them lie down at midday. Why should I be like a woman wrapped in a veilAmong the flocks of your companions?”
“If you do not know, O most beautiful of women,Go follow the tracks of the flockAnd pasture your young goats next to the tents of the shepherds.”
“I liken you, my beloved, to a mare among the chariots of Pharʹaoh.
Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments,Your neck with strings of beads.
We will make for you gold ornamentsStudded with silver.”
“While the king sits at his round table,My perfume gives off its fragrance.
My dear one is to me like a fragrant bag of myrrhSpending the night between my breasts.
My dear one is to me like a cluster of hennaAmong the vineyards of En-gedʹi.”
“Look! You are beautiful, my beloved. Look! You are beautiful. Your eyes are those of doves.”
“Look! You are beautiful, my dear one, and delightful. Our bed is among the foliage.
The beams of our house are cedars,Our rafters are juniper trees.
“How beautiful your feet are in your sandals,O noble daughter! The curves of your thighs are like ornaments,The work of an artisan’s hands.
Your navel is a round bowl. May it never lack mixed wine. Your belly is a heap of wheat,Encircled by lilies.
Your two breasts are like two fawns,The twins of a gazelle.
Your neck is like an ivory tower. Your eyes are like the pools in Heshʹbon,By the gate of Bath-rabʹbim. Your nose is like the tower of Lebʹa·non,Which looks toward Damascus.
Your head crowns you like Carʹmel,And the locks of your hair are like purple wool. The king is captivated by the flowing tresses.
How beautiful you are, and how pleasant you are,O beloved girl, above all exquisite delights!
Your stature is like a palm tree,And your breasts are like date clusters.
I said, ‘I will climb the palm treeTo take hold of its stalks of fruit.’ May your breasts be like clusters of grapes,Your breath as fragrant as apples,
And your mouth like the best wine.” “May it go down smoothly for my dear one,Softly flowing over the lips of those asleep.
I am my dear one’s,And his desire is for me.
Come, O my dear one,Let us go out to the fields;Let us lodge among the henna plants.
Let us rise early and go to the vineyardsTo see if the vine has sprouted,If the blossoms have opened,If the pomegranates are in bloom. There I will express my affection for you.
The mandrakes give off their fragrance;At our doors are all sorts of choice fruits. The new as well as the old,O my dear one, I have kept in store for you.
“Upon my bed during the nights,I sought the one I love. I sought him, but I did not find him.
I will arise and roam the city;In the streets and in the public squares,Let me seek the one I love. I sought him, but I did not find him.
The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me. ‘Have you seen the one I love?’
Scarcely had I passed by themWhen I found the one I love. I held on to him, I would not let him goUntil I brought him into my mother’s house,Into the interior room of her who conceived me.
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,By the gazelles and the does of the field: Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.”
“What is this coming up from the wilderness like columns of smoke,Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,With all the fragrant powders of a merchant?”
“Look! It is the couch belonging to Solʹo·mon. Sixty mighty men surround it,Of the mighty men of Israel,
All of them armed with a sword,All trained in warfare,Each with his sword at his sideTo guard against the terrors of the night.”
“It is the royal litter of King Solʹo·monThat he made for himself from the trees of Lebʹa·non.
Its pillars he made of silver,Its supports of gold. Its seat is of purple wool;Its interior was lovingly decoratedBy the daughters of Jerusalem.”
“Go out, O daughters of Zion,Gaze at King Solʹo·monWearing the wedding crown his mother made for himOn the day of his marriage,On the day of his heart’s rejoicing.”
“I am but a saffron of the coastal plain,A lily of the valleys.”
“Like a lily among thornsIs my beloved among the daughters.”
“Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,So is my dear one among the sons. I passionately desire to sit in his shade,And his fruit is sweet to my taste.
He brought me into the banquet house,And his banner over me was love.
Refresh me with raisin cakes;Sustain me with apples,For I am lovesick.
His left hand is under my head,And his right hand embraces me.
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,By the gazelles and the does of the field: Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.
The sound of my dear one! Look! Here he comes,Climbing the mountains, leaping over the hills.
My dear one is like a gazelle, like a young stag. There he is, standing behind our wall,Gazing through the windows,Looking through the lattices.
My dear one speaks, he says to me: ‘Rise up, my beloved,My beautiful one, come away with me.
Look! The winter has passed. The rains are over and gone.
Blossoms have appeared in the land,The time of pruning has arrived,And the song of the turtledove is heard in our land.
The fig tree ripens its early figs;The vines are in blossom and give off their fragrance. Rise up, my beloved, and come. My beautiful one, come away with me.
O my dove, in the retreats of the crag,In the recesses of the cliff,Let me see you and hear your voice,For your voice is pleasant and your appearance is lovely.’”
“Catch the foxes for us,The little foxes that ruin the vineyards,For our vineyards are in bloom.”
“My dear one is mine and I am his. He is shepherding among the lilies.
Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee,Return quickly, O my dear one,Like the gazelle or the young stag upon the mountains of separation.
“I have entered my garden,O my sister, my bride. I have picked my myrrh and my spice. I have eaten my honeycomb and my honey;I have drunk my wine and my milk.” “Eat, dear friends! Drink and become intoxicated with expressions of affection!”
“I am asleep, but my heart is awake. There is the sound of my dear one knocking!” “Open to me, O my sister, my beloved,My dove, my flawless one! For my head is wet with dew,The locks of my hair with the moisture of the night.”
“‘I have taken off my robe. Must I put it back on? I have washed my feet. Must I soil them again?’
My dear one withdrew his hand from the hole of the door,And my feelings for him were stirred.
I got up to open to my dear one;My hands dripped with myrrh,And my fingers with liquid myrrh,Onto the handles of the lock.
I opened to my dear one,But my dear one had turned away, he had gone. I felt despair when he departed. I sought him, but I did not find him. I called him, but he did not answer me.
The watchmen making their rounds in the city found me. They struck me, they wounded me. The watchmen of the walls took my shawl away from me.
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem: If you find my dear one,Tell him that I am lovesick.”
“How is your dear one better than any other dear one,You most beautiful of women? How is your dear one better than any other dear one,That you put us under such an oath?”
“My dear one is dazzling and ruddy;He stands out among ten thousand.
His head is gold, the finest gold. The locks of his hair are like waving palm fronds,As black as the raven.
His eyes are like doves by streams of water,Bathing themselves in milk,Sitting by a brimming pool.
His cheeks are like a bed of spices,Mounds of scented herbs. His lips are lilies, dripping with liquid myrrh.
His hands are cylinders of gold, set with chrysʹo·lite. His abdomen is polished ivory covered with sapphires.
His legs are pillars of marble set on pedestals of the finest gold. His appearance is like Lebʹa·non, as unrivaled as the cedars.
His mouth is sweetness itself,And everything about him is desirable. This is my dear one, this is my beloved, O daughters of Jerusalem.”
“Look! You are beautiful, my beloved. Look! You are beautiful. Your eyes are those of doves behind your veil. Your hair is like a flock of goatsStreaming down the mountains of Gilʹe·ad.
Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheepThat have come up from being washed,All of them bearing twins,And not one has lost her young.
Your lips are like a scarlet thread,And your speech is delightful. Like a segment of pomegranateAre your cheeks behind your veil.
Your neck is like the tower of David,Built with courses of stoneUpon which are hung a thousand shields,All the circular shields of the mighty men.
Your two breasts are like two fawns,The twins of a gazelle,That feed among the lilies.”
“Until the day grows breezy and the shadows flee,I will go my way to the mountain of myrrhAnd to the hill of frankincense.”
“You are altogether beautiful, my beloved,There is no blemish in you.
Come with me from Lebʹa·non, my bride,Come with me from Lebʹa·non. Descend from the peak of A·maʹnah,From the peak of Seʹnir, the peak of Herʹmon,From the lairs of lions, from the mountains of leopards.
You have captured my heart, my sister, my bride,You have captured my heart with one glance of your eyes,With one pendant of your necklace.
How beautiful your expressions of affection are, my sister, my bride! Your expressions of affection are far better than wine,And the fragrance of your perfume than any spice!
Your lips, my bride, drip with comb honey. Honey and milk are under your tongue,And the fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebʹa·non.
My sister, my bride, is like a locked garden,A locked garden, a spring sealed shut.
Your shoots are a paradise of pomegranatesWith the choicest fruits, with henna along with spikenard plants,
Spikenard and saffron, cane and cinnamon,With all sorts of trees of frankincense, myrrh, and aloes,Along with all the finest perfumes.
You are a garden spring, a well of fresh water,And flowing streams from Lebʹa·non.
Awake, O north wind;Come in, O south wind. Breathe upon my garden. Let its fragrance spread.” “Let my dear one come into his gardenAnd eat its choicest fruits.”
“Where has your dear one gone,O most beautiful of women? Which way did your dear one turn? Let us seek him with you.”
“My dear one has gone down to his garden,To the beds of spice plants,To shepherd among the gardensAnd to pick lilies.
I am my dear one’s,And my dear one is mine. He is shepherding among the lilies.”
“You are as beautiful as Tirʹzah, my beloved,As lovely as Jerusalem,As breathtaking as armies around their banners.
Turn your eyes away from me,For they overwhelm me. Your hair is like a flock of goatsStreaming down the slopes of Gilʹe·ad.
Your teeth are like a flock of sheepThat have come up from being washed,All of them bearing twins,And not one has lost her young.
Like a segment of pomegranateAre your cheeks behind your veil.
There may be 60 queensAnd 80 concubinesAnd young women without number.
But only one is my dove, my flawless one. The only one of her mother. She is the favorite of the one who bore her. The daughters see her, and they pronounce her happy;Queens and concubines, and they praise her.
‘Who is she who shines like the dawn,As beautiful as the full moon,As pure as the sunlight,As breathtaking as armies around their banners?’”
“I went down to the garden of nut treesTo see the new growth in the valley,To see whether the vine had sprouted,Whether the pomegranate trees had blossomed.
Before I knew it,My desire had put meAt the chariots of my noble people.”
“Return, return, O Shuʹlam·mite! Return, return,That we may look upon you!” “Why do you gaze upon the Shuʹlam·mite?” “She is like the dance of two companies!”
“If only you were like my brother,Who nursed at my mother’s breasts! Then if I found you outside, I would kiss you,And no one would despise me.
I would lead you;I would bring you into the house of my mother,She who taught me. I would give you spiced wine to drink,The fresh juice of pomegranates.
His left hand would be under my head,And his right hand would embrace me.
I put you under oath, O daughters of Jerusalem: Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me until it feels inclined.”
“Who is this coming up from the wilderness,Leaning upon her dear one?” “Under the apple tree I awakened you. There your mother was in labor with you. There she who gave birth to you was in labor.
Place me as a seal upon your heart,As a seal upon your arm,For love is as strong as death is,And exclusive devotion is as unyielding as the Grave. Its flames are a blazing fire, the flame of Jah.
Surging waters cannot extinguish love,Nor can rivers wash it away. If a man would offer all the wealth of his house for love,It would be utterly despised.”
“We have a little sister,And she has no breasts. What will we do for our sisterOn the day when she is spoken for?”
“If she is a wall,We will build upon her a battlement of silver,But if she is a door,We will board her up with a cedar plank.”
“I am a wall,And my breasts are like towers. So in his eyes I have becomeAs one who finds peace.
Solʹo·mon had a vineyard in Baʹal-haʹmon. He entrusted the vineyard to caretakers. Each one would bring in a thousand pieces of silver for its fruit.
I have my own vineyard at my disposal. The thousand pieces of silver belong to you, O Solʹo·mon,And two hundred to those who care for its fruit.”
“O you who are dwelling in the gardens,The companions listen for your voice. Let me hear it.”
“Hurry, my dear one,And be swift like a gazelleOr a young stagUpon the mountains of spices.”
Now this is what Jehovah says,Your Creator, O Jacob, the One who formed you, O Israel: “Do not be afraid, for I have repurchased you. I have called you by your name. You belong to me.
When you pass through the waters, I will be with you,And through the rivers, they will not flood over you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched,Nor will the flame singe you.
For I am Jehovah your God,The Holy One of Israel, your Savior. I have given Egypt as a ransom for you,E·thi·oʹpi·a and Seʹba in exchange for you.
For you became precious in my eyes,You were honored, and I have loved you. So I will give people in place of youAnd nations in exchange for your life.
Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bring your offspring from the eastAnd gather you together from the west.
I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’ And to the south, ‘Do not hold them back. Bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the earth,
Everyone who is called by my nameAnd whom I created for my own glory,Whom I have formed and made.’
Bring out a people who are blind, though they have eyes,And who are deaf, though they have ears.
Let all the nations assemble in one place,And let the peoples be gathered together. Who among them can tell this? Or can they cause us to hear the first things? Let them present their witnesses to prove themselves right,Or let them hear and say, ‘It is the truth!’”
“You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah,“Yes, my servant whom I have chosen,So that you may know and have faith in meAnd understand that I am the same One. Before me no God was formed,And after me there has been none.
I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.”
“I am the One who declared and saved and made knownWhen there was no foreign god among you. So you are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “and I am God.
Also, I am always the same One;And no one can snatch anything out of my hand. When I act, who can prevent it?”
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: “For your sakes I will send to Babylon and bring down all the bars of the gates,And the Chal·deʹans, in their ships, will cry out in distress.
I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.”
This is what Jehovah says,The One making a way through the seaAnd a path even through turbulent waters,
The One who draws out the war chariot and the horse,The army together with the mighty warriors: “They will lie down and not get up. They will be extinguished, snuffed out like a burning wick.”
“Do not remember the former things,And do not dwell on the past.
Look! I am doing something new;Even now it is springing up. Do you not recognize it? I will make a way through the wildernessAnd rivers through the desert.
The wild beast of the field will honor me,The jackals and the ostriches,For I provide water in the wilderness,Rivers in the desert,For my people, my chosen one, to drink,
The people whom I formed for myselfSo that they might declare my praise.
But you have not called on me, O Jacob,Because you grew weary of me, O Israel.
You have not brought me sheep for your whole burnt offeringsOr glorified me with your sacrifices. I have not compelled you to bring me a gift,Nor have I made you weary by demanding frankincense.
You did not buy me sweet cane with your money,And with the fat of your sacrifices you did not satisfy me. Instead, you have burdened me with your sinsAnd made me weary with your errors.
I, I am the One who is blotting out your transgressions for my own sake,And I will not remember your sins.
Remind me; let us bring our case against each other;Tell your side of it to prove you are in the right.
Your first forefather sinned,And your own spokesmen have rebelled against me.
So I will profane the princes of the holy place,And I will give Jacob over to destructionAnd subject Israel to insulting words.
Look! My servant, whom I support! My chosen one, whom I have approved! I have put my spirit in him;He will bring justice to the nations.
He will not cry out or raise his voice,And he will not make his voice heard in the street.
No crushed reed will he break,And no smoldering wick will he extinguish. In faithfulness he will bring justice.
He will not grow dim or be crushed until he establishes justice in the earth;And the islands keep waiting for his law.
This is what the true God, Jehovah, says,The Creator of the heavens and the Grand One who stretched them out,The One who spread out the earth and its produce,The One who gives breath to the people on itAnd spirit to those who walk on it:
“I, Jehovah, have called you in righteousness;I have taken hold of your hand. I will safeguard you and give you as a covenant for the peopleAnd as a light of the nations,
For you to open the blind eyes,To bring the prisoner out of the dungeonAnd those sitting in darkness out of the prison.
I am Jehovah. That is my name;I give my glory to no one else,Nor my praise to graven images.
See, the first things have come to pass;Now I am declaring new things. Before they spring up, I tell you about them.”
Sing to Jehovah a new song,His praise from the ends of the earth,You who go down to the sea and all that fills it,You islands and their inhabitants.
Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voice,The settlements where Keʹdar dwells. Let the inhabitants of the crag shout joyfully;Let them cry out from the top of the mountains.
Let them attribute glory to JehovahAnd declare his praise in the islands.
Jehovah will go out like a mighty man. He will awaken his zeal like a warrior. He will shout, yes, he will let out a war cry;He will show himself mightier than his enemies.
“I have kept quiet for a long time. I remained silent and restrained myself. Like a woman giving birth,I will groan, pant, and gasp all at once.
I will devastate mountains and hillsAnd dry up all their vegetation. I will turn rivers into islandsAnd dry up reedy pools of water.
I will lead the blind in a way that they do not knowAnd cause them to tread on unfamiliar paths. I will turn the darkness before them into lightAnd turn the rugged terrain into level land. This is what I will do for them, and I will not abandon them.”
They will be turned back and will be utterly put to shame,Those who trust in carved images,Those who say to metal statues: “You are our gods.”
Listen, you who are deaf;Look and see, you who are blind.
Who is blind except my servant,So deaf as the messenger I send? Who is so blind as the one rewarded,So blind as the servant of Jehovah?
You see many things, but you do not keep watch. You open your ears, but you do not listen.
For the sake of his righteousness,Jehovah has taken pleasure in magnifying the law and making it glorious.
But this is a people plundered and pillaged;All of them are trapped in the holes and hidden in the prisons. They have been plundered with no one to rescue them,And pillaged with no one to say: “Bring them back!”
Who among you will hear this? Who will pay attention and listen for the time to come?
Who has given Jacob for pillageAnd Israel to the plunderers? Is it not Jehovah, the One against whom we sinned? In His ways they refused to walk,And His law they would not obey.
So He kept pouring out on him wrath,His anger and the fury of war. It consumed everything around him, but he paid no attention. It blazed up against him, but he would not take it to heart.
“Listen to me in silence, you islands;Let the nations regain their strength. Let them approach; then let them speak. Let us come together for judgment.
Who has raised up someone from the sunrise,Calling him in righteousness to His feet,To hand over nations to himAnd to make him subdue kings? Who reduces them to dust before his sword,Like windblown stubble before his bow?
He pursues them, passing along unhinderedOver paths that his feet have not traveled.
Who has acted and done this,Summoning the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, am the First One;And with the last ones I am the same.”
The islands have seen it and have become afraid. The ends of the earth began to tremble. They draw near and come forward.
Each one helps his companionAnd says to his brother: “Be strong.”
So the craftsman strengthens the metalworker;The one who flattens with the forge hammerStrengthens the one hammering at the anvil. He says about the soldering: “It is good.” Then it is fastened with nails so that it will not topple over.
“But you, O Israel, are my servant,You, O Jacob, whom I have chosen,The offspring of Abraham my friend,
You, whom I took from the ends of the earth,And you, whom I called from its most distant parts. I said to you, ‘You are my servant;I have chosen you; I have not rejected you.
Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you,I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.’
Look! All those getting enraged against you will be put to shame and humiliated. Those who fight with you will be brought to nothing and perish.
You will search for men who struggle with you, but you will not find them;The men at war with you will become as something nonexistent, as nothing at all.
For I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand,The One saying to you, ‘Do not be afraid. I will help you.’
Do not be afraid, you worm Jacob,You men of Israel, I will help you,” declares Jehovah, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel.
“Look! I have made you a threshing sledge,A new threshing instrument with double-edged teeth. You will tread down the mountains and crush themAnd make the hills like chaff.
You will winnow them,And the wind will carry them away;A windstorm will scatter them. You will be joyful in Jehovah,And you will boast in the Holy One of Israel.”
“The needy and the poor are seeking water, but there is none. Their tongue is dry from thirst. I, Jehovah, will answer them. I, the God of Israel, will not abandon them.
I will make rivers flow on the bare hillsAnd springs in the valley plains. I will turn the wilderness into a reedy pool of waterAnd the waterless land into springs of water.
In the desert I will plant the cedar tree,The acacia and the myrtle and the pine tree. In the desert plain I will plant the juniper tree,Together with the ash and the cypress tree,
So that all people may see and knowAnd pay attention and understandThat the hand of Jehovah has done this,And the Holy One of Israel has created it.”
“Present your case,” says Jehovah. “Produce your arguments,” says the King of Jacob.
“Produce evidence and tell us the things that will happen. Do tell us about the former things,So that we may reflect on them and know their outcome. Or declare to us the things that are coming.
Tell us what will happen in the future,So that we may know that you are gods. Yes, do something, good or bad,So that we may be amazed when we see it.
Look! You are something nonexistent,And your achievement is nothing. Anyone who chooses you is detestable.
I have raised up someone from the north, and he will come,One from the rising of the sun who will call on my name. He will trample rulers as if they were clay,Like a potter who treads moist clay.
Who told about this from the beginning, so that we could know,Or from times past, so that we could say, ‘He is right’? Indeed, no one announced it! No one declared it! No one heard anything from you!”
I was the first to say to Zion: “Look! Here they are!” And to Jerusalem I will send a bearer of good news.
But I kept looking, and there was no one;There was not one among them to give advice. And I kept asking them to reply.
Look! All of them are a delusion. Their works are nothing. Their metal images are wind and unreality.
A pronouncement against Damascus: “Look! Damascus will cease to be a city,And it will become a heap of ruins.
The cities of A·roʹer will be abandoned;They will become places for flocks to lie downWith no one to make them afraid.
Fortified cities will disappear from Eʹphra·im,And the kingdom from Damascus;And those remaining of SyriaWill be like the glory of the Israelites,” declares Jehovah of armies.
“In that day the glory of Jacob will diminish,And his healthy body will grow thin.
It will be as when the harvester is gathering the standing grainAnd his arm harvests the ears of grain,Like when one gleans grain in the Valley of Rephʹa·im.
Only gleanings will be left,As when an olive tree is beaten: Only two or three ripe olives remain on the highest branch,Only four or five on its fruit-bearing branches,” declares Jehovah the God of Israel.
In that day man will look up to his Maker, and his eyes will gaze at the Holy One of Israel.
He will not look to the altars, the work of his hands; and he will not gaze at what his fingers have made, either the sacred poles or the incense stands.
In that day his fortress cities will become like an abandoned site in the woodland,Like a branch that was abandoned before the Israelites;It will become a wasteland.
For you have forgotten the God of your salvation;You have failed to remember the Rock of your fortress. That is why you plant beautiful plantationsAnd set it with the shoot of a stranger.
In the day you carefully fence in your plantation,In the morning you make your seed sprout,But the harvest will vanish in the day of disease and incurable pain.
Listen! There is a commotion of many peoples,Who are as boisterous as the seas! There is an uproar of nations,Whose sound is like the roar of mighty waters!
The nations will make a sound like the roar of many waters. He will rebuke them, and they will flee far away,Chased like the chaff of the mountains before a wind,Like a whirling thistle before a storm wind.
In the evening there is terror. Before morning they are no more. This is the share of those pillaging usAnd the lot of those plundering us.
Woe to those who go down to Egypt for assistance,Who rely on horses,Who trust in war chariots because they are numerous,And in warhorses because they are mighty. But they do not look to the Holy One of Israel,And they do not search for Jehovah.
But he is also wise and will bring calamity,And he will not take back his words. He will rise up against the house of evildoersAnd against those who help wrongdoers.
The Egyptians, though, are mere men and not God;Their horses are flesh and not spirit. When Jehovah stretches out his hand,Whoever offers help will stumbleAnd whoever is helped will fall;They will all perish at the same time.
For this is what Jehovah has said to me: “Just as the lion growls, a strong young lion, over its prey,When a whole group of shepherds is called together against it,And it is not terrified by their voiceOr daunted by their commotion,So will Jehovah of armies come down to wage warOver Mount Zion and over her hill.
Like swooping birds, so Jehovah of armies will defend Jerusalem. He will defend her and save her. He will spare her and rescue her.”
“Return to the One against whom you have blatantly revolted, O people of Israel.
For in that day each one will reject his worthless gods of silver and his valueless gods of gold, which your own hands sinfully made.
And the As·syrʹi·an will fall by the sword, not of a man;And a sword, not of a human, will devour him. He will flee because of the sword,And his young men will be put to forced labor.
His crag will pass away because of sheer fright,And his princes will be terrified because of the signal pole,” declares Jehovah,Whose light is in Zion and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
This is what Jehovah says to his anointed one, to Cyrus,Whose right hand I have taken hold ofTo subdue nations before him,To disarm kings,To open before him the double doors,So that the gates will not be shut:
“Before you I will go,And the hills I will level. The copper doors I will break in pieces,And the iron bars I will cut down.
I will give you the treasures in the darknessAnd the hidden treasures in the concealed places,So that you may know that I am Jehovah,The God of Israel, who is calling you by your name.
For the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one,I am calling you by your name. I am giving you a name of honor, although you did not know me.
I am Jehovah, and there is no one else. There is no God except me. I will strengthen you, although you did not know me,
In order that people may knowFrom the rising of the sun to its settingThat there is none besides me. I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.
I form light and create darkness,I make peace and create calamity;I, Jehovah, am doing all these things.
You heavens, rain down from above;Let the clouds pour down righteousness. Let the earth open up and be fruitful with salvation,And let it cause righteousness to spring up at the same time. I, Jehovah, have created it.”
Woe to the one who contends with his Maker,For he is just an earthenware fragmentAmong the other earthenware fragments lying on the ground! Should the clay say to the Potter: “What are you making?” Or should your work say: “He has no hands”?
Woe to the one who says to a father: “What do you become father to?” And to a woman: “What are you giving birth to?”
This is what Jehovah says, the Holy One of Israel, the One who formed him: “Would you question me about the things comingAnd command me about my sons and the works of my hands?
I made the earth and created man on it. I stretched out the heavens with my own hands,And I give orders to all their army.”
“I have raised up a man in righteousness,And I will make all his ways straight. He is the one who will build my cityAnd set my exiles free without a price or a bribe,” says Jehovah of armies.
This is what Jehovah says: “The profit of Egypt and the merchandise of E·thi·oʹpi·a and the Sa·beʹans, tall of stature,Will come over to you and become yours. They will walk behind you in chains. They will come over and bow down to you. To you they will say in prayer, ‘Surely God is with you,And there is no one else; there is no other God.’”
Truly you are a God who conceals himself,O God of Israel, the Savior.
They will all be put to shame and be humiliated;The makers of idols will all go off in disgrace.
But Israel will be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation. You will not be put to shame or disgraced for all eternity.
For this is what Jehovah says,The Creator of the heavens, the true God,The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it,Who did not create it simply for nothing, but formed it to be inhabited: “I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.
I did not speak in a concealed place, in a land of darkness;I did not say to the offspring of Jacob,‘Seek me simply for nothing.’ I am Jehovah, who speaks what is righteous and declares what is upright.
Gather together and come. Approach together, you escapees from the nations. They know nothing, those who carry around carved imagesAnd pray to a god that cannot save them.
Make your report, present your case. Let them consult together in unity. Who foretold this long agoAnd declared it from times past? Is it not I, Jehovah? There is no other God but me;A righteous God and a Savior, there is none besides me.
Turn to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth,For I am God, and there is no one else.
By myself I have sworn;The word has gone out of my mouth in righteousness,And it will not return: To me every knee will bend,Every tongue will swear loyalty
And say, ‘Surely in Jehovah are true righteousness and strength. All those enraged against him will come before him in shame.
In Jehovah all the offspring of Israel will prove to be right,And in him they will make their boast.’”
A pronouncement against Egypt: Look! Jehovah is riding on a swift cloud and is coming into Egypt. The worthless gods of Egypt will tremble before him,And the heart of Egypt will melt within it.
“I will incite Egyptians against Egyptians,And they will fight one another,Each against his brother and his neighbor,City against city, kingdom against kingdom.
And the spirit of Egypt will become bewildered within it,And I will confuse its plans. They will resort to the worthless gods,To the charmers and to the spirit mediums and to the fortune-tellers.
I will hand Egypt over to a hard master,And a harsh king will rule over them,” declares the true Lord, Jehovah of armies.
The water of the sea will be dried up,And the river will become parched and run dry.
And the rivers will stink;The Nile canals of Egypt will become low and parched. The reeds and the rushes will decay.
The plants along the Nile River, at the mouth of the Nile,And all the land sown with seed along the Nile will dry up. It will be blown away, and it will be no more.
And the fishermen will mourn,Those casting fishhooks into the Nile will lament,And those who spread their nets on the water will dwindle.
Those who work in combed flaxAnd those making white fabric on the loom will be put to shame.
Her weavers will be crushed;All the hired workers will grieve.
The princes of Zoʹan are foolish. The wisest advisers of Pharʹaoh give unreasonable advice. How can you say to Pharʹaoh: “I am a descendant of wise ones,A descendant of ancient kings”?
Where, then, are your wise men? Let them tell you if they know what Jehovah of armies has decided concerning Egypt.
The princes of Zoʹan have acted foolishly;The princes of Noph have been deceived;The chiefs of her tribes have led Egypt astray.
Jehovah has poured out on her a spirit of confusion;And they have led Egypt astray in whatever she does,Like a drunk staggering in his vomit.
And Egypt will not have any work to do,Whether for the head or the tail, the shoot or the rush.
In that day Egypt will become like women, trembling and terrified because of the threatening hand that Jehovah of armies raises against it.
And the land of Judah will become a cause for terror to Egypt. They will feel dread at the mention of it because of the decision that Jehovah of armies has made against them.
In that day there will be five cities in the land of Egypt speaking the language of Caʹnaan and swearing loyalty to Jehovah of armies. One city will be called The City of Tearing Down.
In that day there will be an altar to Jehovah in the middle of the land of Egypt and a pillar to Jehovah at its boundary.
It will be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of armies in the land of Egypt; for they will cry out to Jehovah because of the oppressors, and he will send them a savior, a grand one, who will save them.
And Jehovah will become known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will know Jehovah in that day, and they will offer sacrifices and gifts and make a vow to Jehovah and pay it.
Jehovah will strike Egypt, striking and healing it; and they will return to Jehovah, and he will respond to their entreaties and heal them.
In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to As·syrʹi·a. Then As·syrʹi·a will come into Egypt, and Egypt into As·syrʹi·a, and Egypt will serve God together with As·syrʹi·a.
In that day Israel will be the third along with Egypt and with As·syrʹi·a, a blessing in the midst of the earth,
for Jehovah of armies will have blessed it, saying: “Blessed be my people, Egypt, and the work of my hands, As·syrʹi·a, and my inheritance, Israel.”
Woe to you, you destroyer who has not been destroyed;You betrayer who has not been betrayed! When you finish destroying, you will be destroyed. When you finish betraying, you will be betrayed.
O Jehovah, show us favor. Our hope is in you. Become our arm every morning,Yes, our salvation in the time of distress.
At the sound of turmoil peoples flee. When you rise up, nations scatter.
As the voracious locusts gather, so your spoil will be gathered;People will rush on it like swarms of locusts.
Jehovah will be exalted,For he resides in the heights above. He will fill Zion with justice and righteousness.
He is the stability of your times;An abundance of salvation, wisdom, knowledge, and the fear of Jehovah—This is his treasure.
Look! Their heroes cry out in the street;The messengers of peace weep bitterly.
The highways are deserted;There is no one traveling on the pathways. He has broken the covenant;He has rejected the cities;He shows no regard for mortal man.
The land mourns and withers away. Lebʹa·non is ashamed; it has decayed. Sharʹon has become like the desert,And Baʹshan and Carʹmel shake off their leaves.
“Now I will rise up,” says Jehovah,“Now I will exalt myself;Now I will magnify myself.
You conceive dried grass and give birth to stubble. Your own spirit will consume you like a fire.
And peoples will become as the burnings of lime. As thorns cut down, they will be set ablaze with fire.
You who are far away, listen to what I will do! And you who are nearby, acknowledge my might!
The sinners in Zion are in dread;Trembling has seized the apostates: ‘Who of us can live where there is a consuming fire? Who of us can live with unquenchable flames?’
The one who walks in continual righteousness,Who speaks what is upright,Who rejects dishonest, fraudulent gain,Whose hands refuse a bribe rather than grabbing it,Who closes his ear to talk of bloodshed,And who shuts his eyes to avoid seeing what is bad
—He will reside in the heights;His secure refuge will be in rocky strongholds,His bread will be provided,And his water supply will never fail.”
Your eyes will behold a king in his splendor;They will see a land far away.
In your heart you will recall the terror: “Where is the secretary? Where is the one who weighed out the tribute? Where is the one who counted the towers?”
You will no more see the insolent people,A people whose language is too obscure to comprehend,Whose stammering tongue you cannot understand.
Behold Zion, the city of our festivals! Your eyes will see Jerusalem as a tranquil dwelling place,A tent that will not be moved. Never will its tent pins be pulled out,And none of its ropes will be torn apart.
But there the Majestic One, Jehovah,Will be for us a region of rivers, of wide canals,Where no galley fleet will goAnd no majestic ships will pass by.
For Jehovah is our Judge,Jehovah is our Lawgiver,Jehovah is our King;He is the One who will save us.
Your ropes will hang loose;They cannot hold up the mast nor spread the sail. At that time an abundance of spoil will be divided up;Even the lame will take much plunder.
And no resident will say: “I am sick.” The people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error.
Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength, O Zion! Put on your beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city! For no more will the uncircumcised and unclean one enter into you.
Shake off the dust, rise and take a seat, O Jerusalem. Loosen the bonds on your neck, O captive daughter of Zion.
For this is what Jehovah says: “You were sold for nothing,And without money you will be repurchased.”
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “At first my people went down to Egypt to live there as foreigners;Then As·syrʹi·a oppressed them without cause.”
“What, then, should I do here?” declares Jehovah. “For my people were taken for nothing. Those ruling over them keep howling in triumph,” declares Jehovah,“And constantly, all day long, my name is treated with disrespect.
For that reason my people will know my name;For that reason they will know in that day that I am the One speaking. Look, it is I!”
How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news,The one proclaiming peace,The one bringing good news of something better,The one proclaiming salvation,The one saying to Zion: “Your God has become King!”
Listen! Your watchmen raise their voice. In unison they shout joyfully,For they will see it clearly when Jehovah gathers back Zion.
Become cheerful, shout joyfully in unison, you ruins of Jerusalem,For Jehovah has comforted his people; he has repurchased Jerusalem.
Jehovah has bared his holy arm before the eyes of all the nations;All the ends of the earth will see the acts of salvation of our God.
Turn away, turn away, get out of there, touch nothing unclean! Get out from the midst of her, keep yourselves clean,You who are carrying the utensils of Jehovah.
For you will not depart in panic,Nor will you have to flee,For Jehovah will go ahead of you,And the God of Israel will be your rear guard.
Look! My servant will act with insight. He will be raised up high,He will be elevated and greatly exalted.
Just as there were many who stared at him in amazement—For his appearance was disfigured more than that of any other manAnd his stately form more than that of mankind—
So he will startle many nations. Kings will shut their mouths before him,Because they will see what they had not been toldAnd give consideration to what they had not heard.
A twig will grow out of the stump of Jesʹse,And a sprout from his roots will bear fruit.
And the spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him,The spirit of wisdom and of understanding,The spirit of counsel and of mightiness,The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.
And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah. He will not judge by what appears to his eyes,Nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear.
He will judge the lowly with fairness,And with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouthAnd put the wicked to death with the breath of his lips.
Righteousness will be the belt around his waist,And faithfulness the belt of his hips.
The wolf will reside for a while with the lamb,And with the young goat the leopard will lie down,And the calf and the lion and the fattened animal will all be together;And a little boy will lead them.
The cow and the bear will feed together,And their young will lie down together. The lion will eat straw like the bull.
The nursing child will play over the lair of a cobra,And a weaned child will put his hand over the den of a poisonous snake.
They will not cause any harmOr any ruin in all my holy mountain,Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of JehovahAs the waters cover the sea.
In that day the root of Jesʹse will stand up as a signal for the peoples. To him the nations will turn for guidance,And his resting-place will become glorious.
In that day Jehovah will again offer his hand, a second time, to reclaim the remnant of his people who are left from As·syrʹi·a, from Egypt, from Pathʹros, from Cush, from Eʹlam, from Shiʹnar, from Haʹmath, and from the islands of the sea.
He will raise up a signal for the nations and gather the dispersed ones of Israel, and he will gather together the scattered ones of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
The jealousy of Eʹphra·im will be gone,And those who show hostility to Judah will be done away with. Eʹphra·im will not be jealous of Judah,Nor will Judah show hostility toward Eʹphra·im.
And they will swoop down on the slopes of the Phi·lisʹtines to the west;Together they will plunder the people of the East. They will thrust out their hand against Eʹdom and Moʹab,And the Amʹmon·ites will become their subjects.
Jehovah will divide the gulf of the Egyptian seaAnd wave his hand over the River. With his scorching breath he will strike it in its seven torrents,And he will cause people to walk across in their sandals.
And there will be a highway out of As·syrʹi·a for the remnant of his people who are left,As there was for Israel in the day he came out of the land of Egypt.
As soon as King Hez·e·kiʹah heard this, he ripped his garments apart and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of Jehovah.
Then he sent E·liʹa·kim, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah, the son of Aʹmoz.
They said to him: “This is what Hez·e·kiʹah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for the children are ready to be born, but there is no strength to give birth.
Perhaps Jehovah your God will hear the words of the Rabʹsha·keh, whom the king of As·syrʹi·a his lord sent to taunt the living God, and he will call him to account for the words that Jehovah your God has heard. So offer up a prayer in behalf of the remnant who have survived.’”
So the servants of King Hez·e·kiʹah went in to Isaiah,
and Isaiah said to them: “This is what you should say to your lord, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Do not be afraid because of the words that you heard, the words with which the attendants of the king of As·syrʹi·a blasphemed me.
Here I am putting a thought in his mind, and he will hear a report and return to his own land; and I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
After the Rabʹsha·keh heard that the king of As·syrʹi·a had pulled away from Laʹchish, he returned to him and found him fighting against Libʹnah.
Now the king heard it said about King Tir·haʹkah of E·thi·oʹpi·a: “He has come out to fight against you.” When he heard this, he sent messengers again to Hez·e·kiʹah, saying:
“This is what you should say to King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you by saying: “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Look! You have heard what the kings of As·syrʹi·a did to all the lands by devoting them to destruction. Will you alone be rescued?
Did the gods of the nations that my forefathers destroyed rescue them? Where are Goʹzan, Haʹran, Reʹzeph, and the people of Eʹden who were in Tel-asʹsar?
Where is the king of Haʹmath, the king of Arʹpad, and the king of the cities of Seph·ar·vaʹim, and of Heʹna, and of Ivʹvah?’”
Hez·e·kiʹah took the letters out of the hand of the messengers and read them. Hez·e·kiʹah then went up to the house of Jehovah and spread them out before Jehovah.
And Hez·e·kiʹah began to pray to Jehovah and say:
“O Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, sitting enthroned above the cherubs, you alone are the true God of all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
Incline your ear, O Jehovah, and hear! Open your eyes, O Jehovah, and see! Hear all the words that Sen·nachʹer·ib has sent to taunt the living God.
It is a fact, O Jehovah, that the kings of As·syrʹi·a have devastated all the lands, as well as their own land.
And they have thrown their gods into the fire, because they were not gods but the work of human hands, wood and stone. That is why they could destroy them.
But now, O Jehovah our God, save us out of his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you alone are God, O Jehovah.”
Isaiah son of Aʹmoz then sent this message to Hez·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Because you prayed to me concerning King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a,
this is the word that Jehovah has spoken against him: “The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scoffs at you. The daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head at you.
Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voiceAnd lifted your arrogant eyes? It is against the Holy One of Israel!
Through your servants you have taunted Jehovah and said,‘With the multitude of my war chariotsI will ascend the heights of mountains,The remotest parts of Lebʹa·non. I will cut down its lofty cedars, its choice juniper trees. I will enter its highest retreats, its densest forests.
I will dig wells and drink waters;I will dry up the streams of Egypt with the soles of my feet.’
Have you not heard? From long ago it was determined. From days gone by I have prepared it. Now I will bring it about. You will turn fortified cities into desolate piles of ruins.
Their inhabitants will be helpless;They will be terrified and put to shame. They will become as vegetation of the field and green grass,As grass of the roofs that is scorched by the east wind.
But I well know when you sit, when you go out, when you come in,And when you are enraged against me,
Because your rage against me and your roaring have reached my ears. So I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle between your lips,And I will lead you back the way you came.”
“‘And this will be the sign for you: This year you will eat what grows on its own; and in the second year, you will eat grain that sprouts from that; but in the third year you will sow seed and reap, and you will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
Those of the house of Judah who escape, those who are left, will take root downward and produce fruit upward.
For a remnant will go out of Jerusalem and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
“‘Therefore this is what Jehovah says about the king of As·syrʹi·a: “He will not come into this cityOr shoot an arrow thereOr confront it with a shieldOr cast up a siege rampart against it.”’
‘By the way he came he will return;He will not come into this city,’ declares Jehovah.
‘I will defend this city and save it for my own sakeAnd for the sake of my servant David.’”
And the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the As·syrʹi·ans. When people rose up early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
So King Sen·nachʹer·ib of As·syrʹi·a departed and returned to Ninʹe·veh and stayed there.
And as he was bowing down at the house of his god Nisʹroch, his own sons A·dramʹme·lech and Shar·eʹzer struck him down with the sword and then escaped to the land of Arʹa·rat. And his son Eʹsar-hadʹdon became king in his place.
In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city. He makes salvation its walls and its ramparts.
Open up the gates so that the righteous nation may enter,A nation that is keeping faithful conduct.
You will safeguard those who fully lean on you;You will give them continuous peace,Because it is in you that they trust.
Trust in Jehovah forever,For Jah Jehovah is the eternal Rock.
For he has brought low those inhabiting the height, the lofty city. He brings it down,He brings it down to the earth;He casts it down to the dust.
The foot will trample it,The feet of the afflicted, the steps of the lowly.”
The path of the righteous one is upright. Because you are upright,You will smooth out the course of the righteous.
As we follow the path of your judgments, O Jehovah,Our hope is in you. We long for your name and your memorial.
In the night I long for you with my whole being,Yes, my spirit keeps looking for you;For when there are judgments from you for the earth,The inhabitants of the land learn about righteousness.
Even if the wicked is shown favor,He will not learn righteousness. Even in the land of uprightness he will act wickedly,And he will not see the majesty of Jehovah.
O Jehovah, your hand is raised, but they do not see it. They will see your zeal for your people and be put to shame. Yes, the fire for your adversaries will consume them.
O Jehovah, you will grant us peace,Because everything we have doneYou have accomplished for us.
O Jehovah our God, other masters besides you have ruled over us,But we make mention of your name alone.
They are dead; they will not live. Powerless in death, they will not rise up. For you have turned your attention to themTo annihilate them and destroy all mention of them.
You have enlarged the nation, O Jehovah,You have enlarged the nation;You have glorified yourself. You have greatly extended all the borders of the land.
O Jehovah, during distress they turned to you;They poured out their prayer in a whisper when you disciplined them.
Just as a pregnant woman about to give birthHas labor pains and cries out in pain,So we have been because of you, O Jehovah.
We became pregnant, we had labor pains,But it is as if we have given birth to wind. We have not brought salvation to the land,And no one is born to inhabit the land.
“Your dead will live. My corpses will rise up. Awake and shout joyfully,You residents in the dust! For your dew is as the dew of the morning,And the earth will let those powerless in death come to life.
Go, my people, enter your inner rooms,And shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for a brief momentUntil the wrath has passed by.
For look! Jehovah is coming from his placeTo call the inhabitants of the land to account for their error,And the land will expose her bloodshedAnd will no longer cover over her slain.”
The vision that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah:
Hear, O heavens, and pay attention, O earth,For Jehovah has spoken: “Sons I have brought up and raised,But they have revolted against me.
A bull well knows its buyer,And a donkey the manger of its owner;But Israel does not know me,My own people do not behave with understanding.”
Woe to the sinful nation,The people weighed down with error,A brood of wicked men, corrupt children! They have abandoned Jehovah;They have treated the Holy One of Israel with disrespect;They have turned their backs on him.
Where will you be struck next as you add to your rebellion? The whole head is sick,And the whole heart is diseased.
From the sole of the foot to the head, nothing is healthy. There are wounds and bruises and open sores—They have not been treated or bound up or softened with oil.
Your land is desolate. Your cities are burned with fire. Foreigners devour your land right in front of you. It is like a wasteland overthrown by foreigners.
The daughter of Zion has been left like a shelter in a vineyard,Like a hut in a cucumber field,Like a city under siege.
Unless Jehovah of armies had left us a few survivors,We should have become just like Sodʹom,And we should have resembled Go·morʹrah.
Hear the word of Jehovah, you dictators of Sodʹom. Pay attention to the law of our God, you people of Go·morʹrah.
“Of what benefit to me are your many sacrifices?” says Jehovah. “I have had enough of your burnt offerings of rams and the fat of well-fed animals,And I have no delight in the blood of young bulls and lambs and goats.
When you come to appear before me,Who has required this from you,This trampling of my courtyards?
Stop bringing in any more worthless grain offerings. Your incense is detestable to me. New moons, sabbaths, the calling of conventions—I cannot put up with the use of magical power along with your solemn assembly.
I have hated your new moons and your festivals. They have become a burden to me;I am tired of bearing them.
And when you spread out your palms,I hide my eyes from you. Although you offer many prayers,I am not listening;Your hands are filled with blood.
Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean;Remove your evil deeds from my sight;Stop doing bad.
Learn to do good, seek justice,Correct the oppressor,Defend the rights of the fatherless child,And plead the cause of the widow.”
“Come, now, and let us set matters straight between us,” says Jehovah. “Though your sins are like scarlet,They will be made as white as snow;Though they are as red as crimson cloth,They will become like wool.
If you show willingness and listen,You will eat the good things of the land.
But if you refuse and rebel,You will be devoured by the sword,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.”
How the faithful city has become a prostitute! She was full of justice;Righteousness used to lodge in her,But now murderers.
Your silver has become dross,And your beer is diluted with water.
Your princes are stubborn and partners with thieves. Every one of them loves a bribe and chases after gifts. They do not grant justice to the fatherless,And the legal case of the widow never reaches them.
Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,The Powerful One of Israel, declares: “Ah! I will rid myself of my adversaries,And I will take revenge on my enemies.
I will turn my hand against you,I will smelt away your dross as with lye,And I will remove all your impurities.
I will restore your judges as in the beginningAnd your advisers as at the start. After this you will be called City of Righteousness, Faithful Town.
With justice Zion will be redeemed,And her people who return, with righteousness.
The rebels and the sinners will be broken together,And those leaving Jehovah will come to their finish.
For they will be ashamed of the mighty trees that you desired,And you will be disgraced because of the gardens that you chose.
For you will become like a big tree with withering leaves,And like a garden without water.
The strong man will become tow,And his work a spark;Both of them will go up in flames together,With no one to extinguish them.”
This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice, and do what is righteous,For my salvation will soon comeAnd my righteousness will be revealed.
Happy is the man who does thisAnd the son of man who holds fast to it,Who keeps the Sabbath and does not profane itAnd who holds his hand back from any kind of evil.
The foreigner who joins himself to Jehovah should not say,‘Jehovah will surely separate me from his people.’ And the eunuch should not say, ‘Look! I am a dried-up tree.’”
For this is what Jehovah says to the eunuchs who keep my sabbaths and who choose what I delight in and who hold fast to my covenant:
“I will give to them in my house and within my walls a monument and a name,Something better than sons and daughters. An everlasting name I will give them,One that will not perish.
As for the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah to minister to him,To love the name of JehovahAnd to be his servants,All those who keep the Sabbath and do not profane itAnd who hold fast to my covenant,
I will also bring them to my holy mountainAnd make them rejoice inside my house of prayer. Their whole burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar. For my house will be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.”
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah, who is gathering the dispersed ones of Israel, declares: “I will gather to him others besides those already gathered.”
All you wild animals of the field, come to eat,All you wild animals in the forest.
His watchmen are blind, none of them have taken note. All of them are speechless dogs, unable to bark. They are panting and lying down; they love to slumber.
They are dogs with a voracious appetite;They are never satisfied. They are shepherds who have no understanding. They have all gone their own way;Every last one of them seeks his own dishonest gain and says:
“Come, let me take some wine,And let us drink our fill of alcohol. And tomorrow will be like today, only far better!”
In the 14th year of King Hez·e·kiʹah, Sen·nachʹer·ib the king of As·syrʹi·a came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
The king of As·syrʹi·a then sent the Rabʹsha·keh with a vast army from Laʹchish to King Hez·e·kiʹah in Jerusalem. They took up a position by the conduit of the upper pool, which is at the highway of the laundryman’s field.
Then E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came out to him.
So the Rabʹsha·keh said to them: “Please, say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a, says: “What is the basis for your confidence?
You are saying, ‘I have a strategy and the power to wage war,’ but these are empty words. In whom have you put trust, so that you dare to rebel against me?
Look! You trust in the support of this crushed reed, Egypt, which if a man should lean on it would enter into his palm and pierce it. That is the way Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is to all those who trust in him.
And if you should say to me, ‘We trust in Jehovah our God,’ is he not the one whose high places and altars Hez·e·kiʹah has removed, while he says to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You should bow down before this altar’?”’
So now make this wager, please, with my lord the king of As·syrʹi·a: I will give you 2,000 horses if you are able to find enough riders for them.
How, then, could you drive back even one governor who is the least of my lord’s servants, while you put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
Now is it without authorization from Jehovah that I have come up against this land to destroy it? Jehovah himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
At this E·liʹa·kim and Shebʹna and Joʹah said to the Rabʹsha·keh: “Speak to your servants, please, in the Ar·a·maʹic language, for we can understand it; do not speak to us in the language of the Jews in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
But the Rabʹsha·keh said: “Is it just to your lord and to you that my lord sent me to speak these words? Is it not also to the men who sit on the wall, those who will eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”
Then the Rabʹsha·keh stood and called out loudly in the language of the Jews, saying: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of As·syrʹi·a.
This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah deceive you, for he is not able to rescue you.
And do not let Hez·e·kiʹah cause you to trust in Jehovah by saying: “Jehovah will surely rescue us, and this city will not be given into the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Do not listen to Hez·e·kiʹah, for this is what the king of As·syrʹi·a says: “Make peace with me and surrender, and each of you will eat from his own vine and from his own fig tree and will drink the water of his own cistern,
until I come and take you to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
Do not let Hez·e·kiʹah mislead you by saying, ‘Jehovah will rescue us.’ Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a?
Where are the gods of Haʹmath and Arʹpad? Where are the gods of Seph·ar·vaʹim? And have they rescued Sa·marʹi·a out of my hand?
Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their land out of my hand, so that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?”’”
But they kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for the order of the king was, “You must not answer him.”
But E·liʹa·kim son of Hil·kiʹah, who was in charge of the household, Shebʹna the secretary, and Joʹah son of Aʹsaph the recorder came to Hez·e·kiʹah with their garments ripped apart and told him the words of the Rabʹsha·keh.
Now in the days of Aʹhaz son of Joʹtham son of Uz·ziʹah, the king of Judah, King Reʹzin of Syria and Peʹkah son of Rem·a·liʹah, the king of Israel, came up to wage war against Jerusalem, but he could not capture it.
A report was made to the house of David: “Syria has joined forces with Eʹphra·im.” And the heart of Aʹhaz and the heart of his people began to tremble, like the trees of the forest shaking in the wind.
Jehovah then said to Isaiah: “Go out, please, to meet Aʹhaz, you and your son Sheʹar-jaʹshub, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool by the highway of the laundryman’s field.
You must say to him, ‘Take care to stay calm. Do not be afraid, and do not lose heart because of these two stumps of smoldering logs, because of the hot anger of Reʹzin and Syria and the son of Rem·a·liʹah.
For Syria with Eʹphra·im and the son of Rem·a·liʹah have plotted harm against you, saying:
“Let us go up against Judah and tear it apart and conquer it for ourselves, and let us appoint the son of Tabʹe·el as its king.”
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “It will not succeed,Nor will it take place.
For the head of Syria is Damascus,And the head of Damascus is Reʹzin. Within just 65 yearsEʹphra·im will be completely shattered and cease to be a people.
The head of Eʹphra·im is Sa·marʹi·a,And the head of Sa·marʹi·a is the son of Rem·a·liʹah. Unless you have firm faith,You will not be firmly established.”’”
Jehovah continued speaking to Aʹhaz:
“Ask for a sign from Jehovah your God; it may be as deep as the Grave or as high as the sky.”
But Aʹhaz said: “I will not ask, nor will I put Jehovah to the test.”
Isaiah then said: “Listen, please, O house of David. Is it not enough that you try the patience of men? Must you also try the patience of God?
Therefore, Jehovah himself will give you a sign: Look! The young woman will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and she will name him Im·manʹu·el.
He will eat butter and honey by the time that he knows how to reject the bad and choose the good.
For before the boy knows how to reject the bad and choose the good, the land of the two kings whom you dread will be completely abandoned.
Jehovah will bring against you and against your people and against the house of your father a time such as has not come since the day Eʹphra·im broke away from Judah, for He will bring the king of As·syrʹi·a.
“In that day Jehovah will whistle for the flies from the distant streams of the Nile of Egypt and for the bees in the land of As·syrʹi·a,
and they will all come and settle down on the steep valleys, on the rocky clefts, on all the thornbushes, and on all the watering places.
“In that day by means of a hired razor from the region of the River, by means of the king of As·syrʹi·a, Jehovah will shave the head and the hair of the legs, and it will sweep away the beard as well.
“In that day a man will keep alive a young cow of the herd and two sheep.
And because of the abundance of milk, he will eat butter, for everyone remaining in the land will eat butter and honey.
“In that day wherever there used to be 1,000 vines worth 1,000 pieces of silver, there will be only thornbushes and weeds.
Men will go there with bow and arrow, because all the land will become thornbushes and weeds.
And all the mountains that used to be cleared with a hoe, you will not go near for fear of thornbushes and weeds; they will become a grazing place for bulls and a trampling ground of sheep.”
O Jehovah, you are my God. I exalt you, I praise your name,For you have done wonderful things,Things purposed from ancient times,In faithfulness, in trustworthiness.
For you have turned a city into a pile of stones,A fortified town into a crumbling ruin. The foreigner’s tower is a city no more;It will never be rebuilt.
That is why a strong people will glorify you;The city of tyrannical nations will fear you.
For you have become a stronghold to the lowly,A stronghold to the poor in his distress,A refuge from the rainstorm,And a shade from the heat. When the blast of the tyrants is like a rainstorm against a wall,
As the heat in a parched land,You subdue the uproar of strangers. Like heat is subdued by the shadow of a cloud,So the song of the tyrants is silenced.
In this mountain Jehovah of armies will make for all the peoplesA banquet of rich dishes,A banquet of fine wine,Of rich dishes filled with marrow,Of fine, filtered wine.
In this mountain he will do away with the shroud that is enveloping all the peoplesAnd the covering that is woven over all the nations.
He will swallow up death forever,And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces. The reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth,For Jehovah himself has spoken it.
In that day they will say: “Look! This is our God! We have hoped in him,And he will save us. This is Jehovah! We have hoped in him. Let us be joyful and rejoice in the salvation by him.”
For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain,And Moʹab will be trampled on in its placeLike straw trampled into a pile of manure.
He will slap out his hands into itLike a swimmer slapping out his hands to swim,And he will bring down its haughtinessWith the skillful movements of his hands.
And the fortified city, with your high walls of security,He will bring down;He will knock it down to the ground, to the very dust.
A pronouncement against Babylon that Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw in vision:
“Raise up a signal on a mountain of bare rocks. Call out to them, wave your hand,So that they may come into the entrances of the nobles.
I have issued the command to those whom I have appointed. I have summoned my warriors to express my anger,My proudly exultant ones.
Listen! A crowd in the mountains;It sounds like a numerous people! Listen! The uproar of kingdoms,Of nations gathered together! Jehovah of armies is mustering the army for war.
They are coming from a distant land,From the extremity of the heavens,Jehovah and the weapons of his wrath,To bring ruin to all the earth.
Wail, for the day of Jehovah is near! It will come as a destruction from the Almighty.
That is why all hands will go limp,And every man’s heart will melt with fear.
The people are panic-stricken. They are seized with convulsions and pain,Like a woman in labor. They look at one another in horror,With faces inflamed by anguish.
Look! The day of Jehovah is coming,Cruel both with fury and with burning anger,To make the land an object of horror,And to annihilate the land’s sinners from it.
For the stars of the heavens and their constellationsWill not give off their light;The sun will be dark when it rises,And the moon will not shed its light.
I will call the inhabited earth to account for its badness,And the wicked for their error. I will put an end to the pride of the presumptuous,And I will humble the haughtiness of tyrants.
I will make mortal man scarcer than refined gold,And humans scarcer than the gold of Oʹphir.
That is why I will make the heavens tremble,And the earth will be shaken out of its placeAt the fury of Jehovah of armies in the day of his burning anger.
Like a hunted gazelle and like a flock with no one to gather them,Each will return to his own people;Each will flee to his own land.
Whoever is found will be pierced through,And whoever is caught will fall by the sword.
Their children will be dashed to pieces before their eyes,Their houses will be looted,And their wives will be raped.
Here I am raising up against them the Medes,Who regard silver as nothingAnd who take no delight in gold.
Their bows will shatter young men;They will show no pity on the fruit of the wombNor mercy to children.
And Babylon, the most glorious of kingdoms,The beauty and the pride of the Chal·deʹans,Will be like Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah when God overthrew them.
She will never be inhabited,Nor will she be a place to reside in throughout all generations. No Arab will pitch his tent there,And no shepherds will rest their flocks there.
The desert creatures will lie down there;Their houses will be filled with eagle owls. The ostriches will reside there,And wild goats will skip about there.
Howling creatures will cry out in her towers,And jackals in her luxurious palaces. Her time is near, and her days will not be prolonged.”
“Listen to me, you who are pursuing righteousness,You who are seeking Jehovah. Look to the rock from which you were hewnAnd to the quarry from which you were dug.
Look to Abraham your fatherAnd to Sarah who gave birth to you. For he was only one when I called him,And I blessed him and made him many.
For Jehovah will comfort Zion. He will bring comfort to all her ruins,And he will make her wilderness like EʹdenAnd her desert plain like the garden of Jehovah. Exultation and rejoicing will be found in her,Thanksgiving and melodious song.
Pay attention to me, O my people,And give ear to me, my nation. For a law will go out from me,And my justice I will establish as a light to the peoples.
My righteousness draws near. My salvation will go out,And my arms will judge the peoples. In me the islands will hope,And for my arm they will wait.
Raise your eyes to the heavens,And look at the earth below. For the heavens will disperse in fragments like smoke;The earth will wear out like a garment,And its inhabitants will die like gnats. But my salvation will be eternal,And my righteousness will never fail.
Listen to me, you who know righteousness,The people with my law in their heart. Do not be afraid of the taunts of mortal men,And do not be terrified because of their insults.
For a moth will eat them up just like a garment;The clothes moth will devour them like wool. But my righteousness will last forever,And my salvation for all generations.”
Awake! Awake! Clothe yourself with strength,O arm of Jehovah! Awake as in the days of long ago, as in past generations. Was it not you who broke Raʹhab to pieces,Who pierced the sea monster?
Are you not the one who dried up the sea, the waters of the vast deep? The one who made the depths of the sea a roadway for the repurchased ones to cross?
The redeemed ones of Jehovah will return. They will come to Zion with a joyful cry,And unending joy will crown them. Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs,And grief and sighing will flee away.
“I myself am the One comforting you. Why should you be afraid of a mortal man who will dieAnd of a son of man who will wither like green grass?
Why do you forget Jehovah your Maker,The One who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundation of the earth? And all day long you were in constant fear of the rage of the oppressor,As though he were in a position to bring you to ruin. Where, now, is the rage of the oppressor?
The one bent over in chains will soon be set free;He will not die and go into the pit,Nor will his bread be lacking.
But I am Jehovah your God,Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous—Jehovah of armies is his name.
I will put my words in your mouth,And with the shadow of my hand I will cover you,In order to plant the heavens and to lay the foundation of the earthAnd to say to Zion, ‘You are my people.’
Awake! Awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem,You who have drunk from the hand of Jehovah his cup of wrath. You have drunk the goblet;You have drained out the cup causing staggering.
Not one of all the sons whom she bore is there to guide her,And not one of all the sons whom she raised has taken hold of her hand.
These two things have befallen you. Who will sympathize with you? Destruction and devastation, hunger and sword! Who will comfort you?
Your sons have fainted. They lie down at every street cornerLike wild sheep in the net. They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, the rebuke of your God.”
So please listen to this,O woman afflicted and drunk, though not with wine.
This is what your Lord Jehovah says, your God who defends his people: “Look! I will take from your hand the cup causing staggering,The goblet, my cup of wrath;You will never drink it again.
I will put it into the hand of your tormentors,Those who said to you, ‘Bow down so that we may walk over you!’ So you made your back like the ground,Like a street for them to walk on.”
“Shout joyfully, you barren woman who has not given birth! Become cheerful and cry out for joy, you who never had birth pains,For the sons of the desolate one are more numerousThan the sons of the woman with a husband,” says Jehovah.
“Make the place of your tent more spacious. Stretch out the tent cloths of your grand tabernacle. Do not hold back, lengthen your tent cords,And make your tent pins strong.
For you will spread out to the right and to the left. Your offspring will take possession of nations,And they will inhabit the desolated cities.
Do not be afraid, for you will not be put to shame;And do not feel humiliated, for you will not be disappointed. For you will forget the shame of your youth,And the disgrace of your widowhood you will remember no more.”
“For your Grand Maker is as your husband,Jehovah of armies is his name,And the Holy One of Israel is your Repurchaser. He will be called the God of the whole earth.
For Jehovah called you as if you were an abandoned wife and grief-stricken,Like a wife married in youth and then rejected,” says your God.
“For a brief moment I abandoned you,But with great mercy I will gather you back.
In a flood of indignation I hid my face from you for a moment,But with everlasting loyal love I will have mercy on you,” says your Repurchaser, Jehovah.
“This is like the days of Noah to me. Just as I have sworn that the waters of Noah will no more cover the earth,So I swear that I will no more become indignant toward you or rebuke you.
For the mountains may be removedAnd the hills may be shaken,But my loyal love will not be removed from you,Nor will my covenant of peace be shaken,” says Jehovah, the One having mercy on you.
“O afflicted woman, storm-tossed, uncomforted,I am laying your stones with hard mortarAnd your foundation with sapphires.
I will make your battlements of rubies,Your gates of sparkling stones,And all your boundaries of precious stones.
And all your sons will be taught by Jehovah,And the peace of your sons will be abundant.
You will be firmly established in righteousness. You will be far removed from oppression,You will fear nothing and have no cause for terror,For it will not come near you.
If anyone should attack you,It will not be at my orders. Whoever makes an attack on you will fall because of you.”
“Look! I myself created the craftsman,Who blows on the charcoal fire,And his work produces a weapon. I myself also created the destructive man to bring ruin.
No weapon formed against you will have any success,And you will condemn any tongue that rises up against you in the judgment. This is the heritage of the servants of Jehovah,And their righteousness is from me,” declares Jehovah.
Who is this coming from Eʹdom,From Bozʹrah with bright-colored garments,This one with splendid clothing,Marching in his great power? “It is I, the One speaking in righteousness,The One with great power to save.”
Why is your clothing red,And why are your garments like those of one treading the winepress?
“I have trodden the wine trough alone. No one from the peoples was with me. I kept treading them in my anger,And I kept trampling them in my wrath. My garments were spattered with their blood,And I have stained all my clothing.
For the day of vengeance is in my heart,And the year of my repurchased ones has come.
I looked, but there was no one to help;I was appalled that no one offered support. So my arm brought me salvation,And my own wrath supported me.
I trampled peoples in my anger,I made them drunk with my wrathAnd poured out their blood on the ground.”
I will mention Jehovah’s acts of loyal love,The praiseworthy acts of Jehovah,Because of all that Jehovah has done for us,The many good things he has done for the house of Israel,According to his mercy and his great loyal love.
For he said: “Surely they are my people, sons who will not be disloyal.” So he became their Savior.
During all their distress it was distressing to him. And his own personal messenger saved them. In his love and compassion he repurchased them,And he lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.
But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit. He then turned into their enemy,And he fought against them.
And they remembered the days of old,The days of Moses his servant: “Where is the One who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is the One who put within him His holy spirit,
The One who made His glorious arm go with the right hand of Moses,The One who split the waters before themTo make an everlasting name for himself,
The One who made them walk through the surging waters,So that they walked without stumbling,Like a horse in the open country?
Just like livestock when they go down into the valley plain,The spirit of Jehovah made them rest.” This is how you led your people,To make a majestic name for yourself.
Look down from heaven and seeFrom your lofty abode of holiness and glory. Where are your zeal and your mightiness,The stirring of your compassions and your mercy? They are withheld from me.
For you are our Father;Although Abraham may not know usAnd Israel may not recognize us,You, O Jehovah, are our Father. Our Repurchaser of long ago is your name.
Why do you, O Jehovah, let us wander from your ways? Why do you let our hearts become hard, so that we do not fear you? Return, for the sake of your servants,The tribes of your inheritance.
Your holy people possessed it for a short time. Our adversaries have trampled on your sanctuary.
For too long we have become like those you never ruled over,Like those never called by your name.
Come, all you thirsty ones, come to the water! You with no money, come, buy and eat! Yes, come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost.
Why do you keep paying out money for what is not bread,And why spend your earnings for what brings no satisfaction? Listen intently to me, and eat what is good,And you will find great delight in what is truly rich.
Incline your ear and come to me. Listen, and you will keep alive,And I will readily make with you an everlasting covenantIn harmony with the expressions of loyal love to David, which are faithful.
Look! I made him a witness to the nations,A leader and commander to the nations.
Look! You will call a nation that you do not know,And those of a nation who have not known you will run to youFor the sake of Jehovah your God, the Holy One of Israel,Because he will glorify you.
Search for Jehovah while he may be found. Call to him while he is near.
Let the wicked man leave his wayAnd the evil man his thoughts;Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him,To our God, for he will forgive in a large way.
“For my thoughts are not your thoughts,And your ways are not my ways,” declares Jehovah.
“For as the heavens are higher than the earth,So my ways are higher than your waysAnd my thoughts than your thoughts.
For just as the rain and the snow pour down from heavenAnd do not return there until they saturate the earth, making it produce and sprout,Giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
So my word that goes out of my mouth will be. It will not return to me without results,But it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight,And it will have sure success in what I send it to do.
For you will go out with rejoicing,And in peace you will be brought back. The mountains and the hills will become cheerful before you with a joyful cry,And the trees of the field will all clap their hands.
Instead of thornbushes the juniper tree will grow,And instead of the stinging nettle the myrtle tree will grow. And it will bring fame to Jehovah,An everlasting sign that will never perish.”
A pronouncement against the wilderness of the sea: It is coming like storm winds that sweep through in the south,From the wilderness, from a fearsome land.
A harsh vision has been told to me: The treacherous one is acting treacherously,And the destroyer is destroying. Go up, O Eʹlam! Lay siege, O Meʹdi·a! I will put an end to all the sighing she caused.
That is why I am in great anguish. Convulsions have seized me,Like those of a woman giving birth. I am too distressed to hear;I am too disturbed to see.
My heart falters; I shudder in terror. The twilight I longed for makes me tremble.
Set the table and arrange the seats! Eat and drink! Get up, you princes, anoint the shield!
For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Go, post a lookout and have him report what he sees.”
And he saw a war chariot with a team of horses,A war chariot of donkeys,A war chariot of camels. He watched carefully, with great attentiveness.
Then he called out like a lion: “Upon the watchtower, O Jehovah, I am standing constantly by day,And I am stationed at my guardpost every night.
Look at what is coming: Men in a war chariot with a team of horses!” Then he spoke up and said: “She has fallen! Babylon has fallen! All the graven images of her gods he has shattered to the ground!”
O my people who have been threshed,The product of my threshing floor,I have reported to you what I have heard from Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel.
A pronouncement against Duʹmah: Someone is calling out to me from Seʹir: “Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?”
The watchman said: “The morning is coming, and also the night. If you would inquire, inquire. Come again!”
A pronouncement against the desert plain: In the forest in the desert plain you will spend the night,O caravans of Deʹdan.
Bring water to meet the thirsty one,You inhabitants of the land of Teʹma,And bring bread for the one fleeing.
For they have fled from the swords, from the drawn sword,From the bent bow, and from the cruelty of the war.
For this is what Jehovah said to me: “Within one year, like the years of a hired worker, all the glory of Keʹdar will come to an end.
The remaining bowmen of the warriors of Keʹdar will be few, for Jehovah the God of Israel has spoken.”
For look! the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Is removing from Jerusalem and Judah every kind of support and supply,All support of bread and water,
Mighty man and warrior,Judge and prophet, diviner and elder,
Chief of 50, dignitary, and adviser,The expert magician and the skilled charmer.
I will make boys their princes,And the unstable will rule over them.
The people will oppress one another,Each one his fellow man. The boy will assault the old man,And the lightly esteemed one will defy the respected one.
Each one will take hold of his brother in his father’s house and say: “You have a cloak—you be our commander. Take charge of this overthrown pile of ruins.”
But he will protest in that day: “I will not be your wound dresser;I have no food or clothing in my house. Do not make me commander over the people.”
For Jerusalem has stumbled,And Judah has fallen,Because in word and deed they are against Jehovah;They behave defiantly in his glorious presence.
The expression of their faces testifies against them,And they proclaim their sin like Sodʹom;They do not try to hide it. Woe to them, for they are bringing disaster on themselves!
Tell the righteous that it will go well for them;They will be rewarded for what they do.
Woe to the wicked one! Disaster will befall him,For what his hands have done will be done to him!
As for my people, their taskmasters are abusive,And women rule over them. My people, your leaders are causing you to wander,And they confuse the direction of your paths.
Jehovah is taking his position to accuse;He is standing up to pass sentence on peoples.
Jehovah will enter into judgment with the elders and princes of his people. “You have burned down the vineyard,And what you have stolen from the poor is in your houses.
How dare you crush my peopleAnd grind the faces of the poor in the dirt?” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.
Jehovah says: “Because the daughters of Zion are haughty,Walking with their heads high,Flirting with their eyes, skipping along,Making a tinkling sound with their anklets,
Jehovah will also strike the head of the daughters of Zion with scabs,And Jehovah will make their forehead bare.
In that day Jehovah will take away the beauty of their bangles,The headbands and the crescent-shaped ornaments,
The earrings, the bracelets, and the veils,
The headdresses, the ankle chains, and the breastbands,The perfume receptacles and the charms,
The finger rings and the nose rings,
The ceremonial robes, the overtunics, the cloaks, and the purses,
The hand mirrors and the linen garments,The turbans and the veils.
Instead of balsam oil, there will be a rotten smell;Instead of a belt, a rope;Instead of a beautiful hairstyle, baldness;Instead of a rich garment, a garment of sackcloth;And a brand mark instead of beauty.
By the sword your men will fall,And your mighty men in battle.
Her entrances will mourn and grieve,And she will sit on the ground desolate.”
“Woe to the stubborn sons,” declares Jehovah,“Who carry out plans that are not mine,Who make alliances, but not by my spirit,In order to add sin to sin.
They go down to Egypt without consulting me,To take shelter under Pharʹaoh’s protectionAnd to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt!
But the protection of Pharʹaoh will become for you a reason for shame,And refuge in Egypt’s shadow a cause for humiliation.
For his princes are in Zoʹan,And his envoys have reached Haʹnes.
They will all be put to shameBy a people who can bring no benefit to them,Who offer no help and no benefit,Only shame and disgrace.”
A pronouncement against the beasts of the south: Through the land of distress and hardship,Of the lion, the roaring lion,Of the viper and the flying fiery snake,They carry their wealth on the backs of donkeysAnd their supplies on the humps of camels. But these things will not benefit the people.
For Egypt’s help is completely useless. So I have called this one: “Raʹhab, who sits still.”
“Now go, write it on a tablet in their presence,And inscribe it in a book,So that it may serve for a future dayAs a permanent witness.
For they are a rebellious people, deceitful sons,Sons who are unwilling to hear the law of Jehovah.
They say to the seers, ‘Do not see,’ And to the visionaries, ‘Do not tell us truthful visions. Tell us flattering things; envision deceptive illusions.
Turn aside from the way; deviate from the path. Quit putting before us the Holy One of Israel.’”
Therefore this is what the Holy One of Israel says: “Since you reject this wordAnd you trust in fraud and deceitAnd you rely on these,
So this error will be for you like a broken wall,Like a bulging high wall ready to fall. It will crash suddenly, in an instant.
It will be broken like a large potter’s jar,So completely smashed that no fragment among its pieces will be leftTo rake the fire from the fireplaceOr to scoop water from a puddle.”
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, says: “By returning to me and resting, you will be saved;Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust.” But you were unwilling.
Instead, you said: “No, we will flee on horses!” So flee you will.“And on swift horses we will ride!” So those pursuing you will be swift.
A thousand will tremble at the threat of one;At the threat of five you will fleeUntil what is left of you is like a mast on the top of a mountain,Like a signal pole on a hill.
But Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor,And he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice. Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.
When the people dwell in Zion, in Jerusalem, you will by no means weep. He will surely show you favor at the sound of your cry for help; he will answer you as soon as he hears it.
Though Jehovah will give you bread in the form of distress and water in the form of oppression, your Grand Instructor will no longer hide himself, and you will see your Grand Instructor with your own eyes.
And your own ears will hear a word behind you saying, “This is the way. Walk in it,” in case you should go to the right or in case you should go to the left.
And you will defile the silver overlay of your graven images and the golden plating of your metal statues. You will cast them away like a menstrual cloth and say to them, “Be gone!”
And he will give the rain for the seed you sow in the ground, and the bread that the ground produces will be abundant and rich. In that day your livestock will graze in spacious pastures.
And the cattle and the donkeys that work the ground will eat fodder seasoned with sorrel, which was winnowed with the shovel and the pitchfork.
And on every tall mountain and on every high hill will be streams and watercourses, in the day of the great slaughter when the towers fall.
And the light of the full moon will become like the light of the sun; and the light of the sun will become seven times stronger, like the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the breakdown of his people and heals the severe wound from the blow he inflicted.
Look! The name of Jehovah is coming from far away,Burning with his anger and with heavy clouds. His lips are full of indignation,And his tongue is like a consuming fire.
His spirit is like a flooding torrent that reaches clear to the neck,To shake the nations in a sieve of destruction;And the peoples will have a bridle in their jaws that leads them astray.
But your song will be like the one sung in the nightWhen you prepare for a festival,And your heart will rejoice like oneWho walks with a fluteOn his way to the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.
Jehovah will make his majestic voice heardAnd reveal his arm as it descends in the heat of anger,With the flame of a consuming fire,A cloudburst and a thunderstorm and hailstones.
For because of the voice of Jehovah, As·syrʹi·a will be struck with terror;He will strike it with a rod.
And every swing of his rod of punishmentThat Jehovah will bring down on As·syrʹi·aWill be accompanied by tambourines and harpsAs he brandishes his arm against them in battle.
For his Toʹpheth is already prepared;It is also made ready for the king. He has made the woodpile deep and wide,With an abundance of fire and wood. The breath of Jehovah, like a torrent of sulfur,Will set fire to it.
However, the gloom will not be as when the land had distress, as in former times when the land of Zebʹu·lun and the land of Naphʹta·li were treated with contempt. But at a later time He will cause it to be honored—the way by the sea, in the region of the Jordan, Galilee of the nations.
The people who were walking in the darknessHave seen a great light. As for those dwelling in the land of deep shadow,Light has shone on them.
You have made the nation populous;You have made its rejoicing great. They rejoice before youAs people rejoice in the harvesttime,As those who joyfully divide up the spoil.
For you have shattered to pieces the yoke of their load,The rod on their shoulders, the staff of the taskmaster,As in the day of Midʹi·an.
Every boot that shakes the earth as it marchesAnd every garment soaked in bloodWill become fuel for the fire.
For a child has been born to us,A son has been given to us;And the rulership will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.
To the increase of his rulershipAnd to peace, there will be no end,On the throne of David and on his kingdomIn order to establish it firmly and to sustain itThrough justice and righteousness,From now on and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.
Jehovah sent a word against Jacob,And it has come against Israel.
And all the people will know it—Eʹphra·im and the inhabitants of Sa·marʹi·a—Who say in their haughtiness and in their insolence of heart:
“Bricks have fallen,But we will build with hewn stone. Sycamore trees have been cut down,But we will replace them with cedars.”
Jehovah will raise up Reʹzin’s adversaries against himAnd will stir his enemies to action,
Syria from the east and the Phi·lisʹtines from the west,They will devour Israel with open mouths. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
For the people have not returned to the One who strikes them;They have not sought Jehovah of armies.
Jehovah will cut off from IsraelHead and tail, shoot and rush, in one day.
The elder and highly respected one is the head,And the prophet giving false instruction is the tail.
Those leading this people are causing them to wander,And those who are being led are confused.
That is why Jehovah will not rejoice over their young men,And he will have no mercy on their fatherless children and their widowsBecause all of them are apostates and evildoersAnd every mouth is speaking senselessness. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
For wickedness burns like a fire,Consuming thornbushes and weeds. It will set fire to the thickets of the forest,And they will go up in clouds of smoke.
In the fury of Jehovah of armiesThe land has been set on fire,And the people will become fuel for the fire. No one will spare even his brother.
One will cut down on the rightBut still be hungry;And one will eat on the leftBut will not be satisfied. Each will devour the flesh of his own arm,
Ma·nasʹseh will devour Eʹphra·im,And Eʹphra·im Ma·nasʹseh. Together they will be against Judah. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
In those days Hez·e·kiʹah became sick and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz came and said to him, “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Give instructions to your household, for you will die; you will not recover.’”
At that Hez·e·kiʹah turned his face to the wall and began to pray to Jehovah:
“I beg you, O Jehovah, remember, please, how I have walked before you faithfully and with a complete heart, and I have done what was good in your eyes.” And Hez·e·kiʹah began to weep profusely.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying:
“Go back and say to Hez·e·kiʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of David your forefather says: “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Here I am adding 15 years to your life,
and I will rescue you and this city out of the hand of the king of As·syrʹi·a, and I will defend this city.
This is the sign from Jehovah to show you that Jehovah will carry out the word that he has spoken:
Here I will make the declining shadow of the sun on the stairway of Aʹhaz go back ten steps.”’” So the sun went back ten steps on the stairway that it had already descended.
A writing of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah when he became sick and recovered from his sickness.
I said: “In the middle of my lifeI must go into the gates of the Grave. I will be deprived of my remaining years.”
I said: “I will not see Jah, Jah in the land of the living. I will look no more on mankindWhen I am with the inhabitants of the place where everything ceases.
My own dwelling has been pulled out and removed from meLike the tent of a shepherd. I have rolled up my life like a loom worker;He cuts me off like the threads of the warp. From daylight to nightfall you keep bringing me to an end.
I calm myself until the morning. Like a lion, he keeps breaking all my bones;From daylight to nightfall you keep bringing me to an end.
Like the swift or the thrush, so I keep chirping;I keep cooing like the dove. My eyes look wearily to the height: ‘O Jehovah, I am in great distress;Be my support!’
What can I say? He has spoken to me and acted. I will walk humbly all my yearsBecause of my bitter distress.
‘O Jehovah, by these things every man lives,And in them is the life of my spirit. You will restore me to health and preserve me alive.
Look! Instead of peace, I had great bitterness;But in your fondness for me,You preserved me from the pit of destruction. You have thrown all my sins behind your back.
For the Grave cannot glorify you,Death cannot praise you. Those who go down into the pit cannot hope for your faithfulness.
The living, the living can praise you,Just as I can this day. A father can give his sons knowledge about your faithfulness.
O Jehovah, save me,And we will play my songs on stringed instrumentsAll the days of our life at the house of Jehovah.’”
Isaiah then said: “Bring a cake of pressed dried figs and apply it to the boil, so that he may recover.”
Hez·e·kiʹah had asked: “What is the sign that I will go up to the house of Jehovah?”
This is what Jehovah says: “Where is the divorce certificate of your mother, whom I sent away? Or to which of my creditors did I sell you? Look! It was because of your own errors you were sold,And because of your own transgressions your mother was sent away.
Why, then, was no one here when I came? Why did no one answer when I called? Is my hand too short to redeem,Or is there no power in me to rescue? Look! With my rebuke I dry up the sea;I make rivers a desert. Their fish rot for lack of water,And they die because of thirst.
I clothe the heavens with gloom,And I make sackcloth their covering.”
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught,So that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word. He awakens me morning by morning;He awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones.
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear,And I was not rebellious. I did not turn in the opposite direction.
I offered my back to those striking meAnd my cheeks to those who plucked them bare. I did not hide my face from humiliating things and from spit.
But the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me. That is why I will not feel humiliated. That is why I have set my face like a flint,And I know that I will not be put to shame.
The One who declares me righteous is near. Who can accuse me? Let us stand up together. Who has a case against me? Let him approach me.
Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will help me. Who will pronounce me guilty? Look! They will all wear out like a garment. A moth will eat them up.
Who among you fears JehovahAnd listens to the voice of his servant? Who has walked in deep darkness, without any brightness? Let him trust in the name of Jehovah and support himself on his God.
“Look! All of you who are igniting a fire,Making sparks fly,Walk in the light of your fire,Among the sparks you have set ablaze. This is what you will have from my hand: In sheer pain you will lie down.
Look! Jehovah is emptying the land and making it desolate. He turns it upside down and scatters its inhabitants.
It will be the same for everyone: The people as well as the priest,The servant and his master,The servant and her mistress,The buyer and the seller,The lender and the borrower,The creditor and the debtor.
The land will be completely emptied;It will be completely plundered,For Jehovah has spoken this word.
The land mourns; it is wasting away. The productive land withers; it is fading away. The prominent people of the land wither.
The land has been polluted by its inhabitants,For they have bypassed the laws,Changed the regulation,And broken the lasting covenant.
That is why the curse devours the land,And those inhabiting it are held guilty. That is why the inhabitants of the land have dwindled,And very few men are left.
The new wine mourns, the vine withers,And all those cheerful at heart are sighing.
The joy of the tambourines has ceased;The noise of the revelers has ended;The happy sound of the harp has ceased.
They drink wine without song,And alcohol tastes bitter to those drinking it.
The deserted town is broken down;Every house is shut up so that no one can enter.
They cry out for wine in the streets. All rejoicing has disappeared;The joy of the land has gone.
The city is left in ruins;The gate has been crushed to a heap of rubble.
For this is how it will be in the land, among the peoples: As when an olive tree is beaten,Like the gleaning when the grape harvest comes to an end.
They will raise their voice,They will shout joyfully. From the sea they will proclaim the majesty of Jehovah.
That is why they will glorify Jehovah in the region of light;In the islands of the sea they will glorify the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.
From the ends of the earth we hear songs: “Glory to the Righteous One!” But I say: “I am wasting away, I am wasting away! Woe to me! The treacherous have acted treacherously;With treachery the treacherous have acted treacherously.”
Terror and pits and traps await you, inhabitant of the land.
Anyone fleeing from the sound of terror will fall into the pit,And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap. For the floodgates above will be opened,And the foundations of the land will quake.
The land has burst apart;The land has been shaken up;The land convulses violently.
The land staggers like a drunken man,And it sways back and forth like a hut in the wind. Its transgression weighs heavily on it,And it will fall, so that it will not rise up again.
In that day Jehovah will turn his attention to the army of the heights aboveAnd to the kings of the earth upon the earth.
And they will be gathered togetherLike prisoners gathered into a pit,And they will be shut up in the dungeon;After many days they will be given attention.
The full moon will be abashed,And the shining sun will be ashamed,For Jehovah of armies has become King in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,Glorious before the elders of his people.
Come down and sit in the dust,O virgin daughter of Babylon. Sit down on the ground where there is no throne,O daughter of the Chal·deʹans,For never again will people call you delicate and pampered.
Take a hand mill and grind flour. Remove your veil. Strip off your skirt, uncover your legs. Cross over the rivers.
Your nakedness will be uncovered. Your shame will be exposed. I will take vengeance, and no man will stand in my way.
“The One repurchasing us—Jehovah of armies is his name—Is the Holy One of Israel.”
Sit there silently and go into darkness,O daughter of the Chal·deʹans;No more will they call you Mistress of Kingdoms.
I grew indignant at my people. I profaned my inheritance,And I gave them into your hand. But you showed them no mercy. Even on the elderly you placed a heavy yoke.
You said: “I will always be the Mistress, forever.” You did not take these things to heart;You did not consider how the matter would end.
Now hear this, O lover of pleasure,Who sits in security, who says in her heart: “I am the one, and there is no one else. I will not become a widow. I will never know the loss of children.”
But these two things will come upon you suddenly, in one day: Loss of children and widowhood. In full measure they will come upon youBecause of your many sorceries and all your powerful spells.
You trusted in your wickedness. You said: “No one sees me.” Your wisdom and knowledge are what led you astray,And you say in your heart: “I am the one, and there is no one else.”
But calamity will come upon you,And none of your charms will stop it. Adversity will befall you; you will not be able to avert it. Sudden ruin will come upon you like you have never known.
Go ahead, then, with your spells and your many sorceries,With which you have toiled from your youth. Perhaps you may be able to benefit;Perhaps you may strike people with awe.
You have grown weary with the multitude of your advisers. Let them stand up now and save you,Those who worship the heavens, who gaze at the stars,Those giving out knowledge at the new moonsAbout the things that will come upon you.
Look! They are like stubble. A fire will burn them up. They cannot save themselves from the power of the flame. These are not charcoals for keeping warm,And this is not a fire to sit in front of.
So your charmers will become to you,Those with whom you toiled from your youth. They will wander, each one in his own direction. There will be no one to save you.
In that day Jehovah, with his harsh and great and strong sword,Will turn his attention to Le·viʹa·than, the gliding serpent,To Le·viʹa·than, the twisting serpent,And he will kill the monster that is in the sea.
In that day sing to her: “A vineyard of foaming wine!
I, Jehovah, am safeguarding her. Every moment I water her. I safeguard her night and day,So that no one may harm her.
There is no wrath in me. Who will confront me with thornbushes and weeds in the battle? I will trample them and set them on fire all together.
Otherwise, let him hold fast to my stronghold. Let him make peace with me;Peace let him make with me.”
In the coming days Jacob will take root,Israel will blossom and sprout,And they will fill the land with produce.
Must he be struck with the stroke of the one striking him? Or must he be killed as with the slaughter of his slain?
With a startling cry you will contend with her when sending her away. He will expel her with his fierce blast in the day of the east wind.
So in this way the error of Jacob will be atoned for,And this will be the full fruitage when his sin is taken away: He will make all the stones of the altarLike chalkstones that have been pulverized,And no sacred poles or incense stands will be left.
For the fortified city will be deserted;The pastures will be forsaken and abandoned like a wilderness. There the calf will graze and lie downAnd will consume her branches.
When her twigs have dried up,Women will come and break them off,Making fires with them. For this people is without understanding. That is why their Maker will show them no mercy,And the One who formed them will show them no favor.
In that day Jehovah will beat out the fruit from the flowing stream of the River to the Wadi of Egypt, and you will be gathered up one after the other, O people of Israel.
In that day a great horn will be blown, and those who are perishing in the land of As·syrʹi·a and those dispersed in the land of Egypt will come and bow down to Jehovah in the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
This is what Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem:
In the final part of the days,The mountain of the house of JehovahWill become firmly established above the top of the mountains,And it will be raised up above the hills,And to it all the nations will stream.
And many peoples will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah,To the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways,And we will walk in his paths.” For law will go out of Zion,And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.
He will render judgment among the nationsAnd set matters straight respecting many peoples. They will beat their swords into plowsharesAnd their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation,Nor will they learn war anymore.
O house of Jacob, come,Let us walk in the light of Jehovah.
For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob,Because they have become full of things from the East;They practice magic like the Phi·lisʹtines,And they abound with the children of foreigners.
Their land is filled with silver and gold,And there is no limit to their treasures. Their land is filled with horses,And there is no limit to their chariots.
Their land is filled with worthless gods. They bow down to the work of their own hands,To what their own fingers have made.
So man bows down, he becomes low,And you cannot possibly pardon them.
Enter into the rock and hide yourself in the dustBecause of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor.
The haughty eyes of man will be brought low,And the arrogance of men will bow down. Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.
For it is the day belonging to Jehovah of armies. It is coming upon everyone who is haughty and lofty,Upon everyone, whether exalted or lowly,
Upon all the cedars of Lebʹa·non that are lofty and exaltedAnd upon all the oaks of Baʹshan,
Upon all the lofty mountainsAnd upon all the high hills,
Upon every high tower and every fortified wall,
Upon all the ships of TarʹshishAnd upon all desirable boats.
Man’s haughtiness will be brought down,And the arrogance of men will bow low. Jehovah alone will be exalted in that day.
The worthless gods will completely disappear.
And people will enter into the caves of the rocksAnd into the holes in the ground,Because of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor,When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.
In that day men will take their worthless gods of silver and of goldThat they had made for themselves to bow down toAnd throw them away to the shrewmice and to the bats,
In order to enter into the holes in the rocksAnd into the clefts of the crags,Because of the terrifying presence of JehovahAnd his majestic splendor,When he arises to make the earth tremble in terror.
For your own sakes, quit trusting in mere man,Who is only the breath in his nostrils. Why should he be taken into account?
“Now listen, O Jacob my servant,And you, O Israel, whom I have chosen.
This is what Jehovah says,Your Maker and the One who formed you,Who has helped you from the womb: ‘Do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,And you, Jeshʹu·run, whom I have chosen.
For I will pour out water on the thirsty oneAnd flowing streams on the dry ground. I will pour out my spirit on your offspringAnd my blessing on your descendants.
And they will spring up as among the green grass,Like poplars by the streams of water.
One will say: “I belong to Jehovah.” Another will call himself by the name of Jacob,And yet another will write on his hand: “Belonging to Jehovah.” And he will adopt the name of Israel.’
This is what Jehovah says,The King of Israel and his Repurchaser, Jehovah of armies: ‘I am the first and I am the last. There is no God but me.
Who is there like me? Let him call out and tell it and prove it to me! From the time I established the people of long ago,Let them tell both the things to comeAnd what will yet happen.
Do not be in dread,And do not become paralyzed with fear. Have I not told each of you beforehand and declared it? You are my witnesses. Is there any God but me? No, there is no other Rock; I know of none.’”
All who form carved images amount to nothing,And their cherished objects will be of no benefit. As their witnesses, they see nothing and know nothing,So those who made them will be put to shame.
Who would form a god or cast a metal imageThat can bring no benefit?
Look! All his associates will be put to shame! The craftsmen are mere humans. Let them all assemble and take their stand. They will be terrified and be put to shame together.
The metalsmith works the iron over the coals with his tool. He forms it with hammers,Working it with his powerful arm. Then he grows hungry and his strength fails;He drinks no water and grows tired.
The wood-carver stretches the measuring line, tracing out the pattern with red chalk. He works it with a wood scraper and traces it with a compass. He patterns it after a man,With the beauty of a man,To sit in a house.
There is one whose work is to cut down cedars. He selects a certain type of tree, an oak,And he lets it grow strong among the trees of the forest. He plants a laurel tree, and the rain makes it grow.
Then it becomes fuel for a man to make fires. He takes part of it to warm himself;He builds a fire and bakes bread. But he also makes a god and worships it. He makes it into a carved image, and he bows down before it.
Half of it he burns up in a fire;With that half he roasts the meat that he eats, and he is satisfied. He also warms himself and says: “Ah! I am warm as I watch the fire.”
But the rest of it he makes into a god, into his carved image. He bows down to it and worships it. He prays to it and says: “Save me, for you are my god.”
They know nothing, they understand nothing,Because their eyes are sealed shut and they cannot see,And their heart has no insight.
No one reflects in his heartOr has knowledge or understanding, saying: “Half of it I burned up in a fire,And on its coals I baked bread and roasted meat to eat. Should I, then, make the rest of it into a detestable thing? Should I worship a block of wood from a tree?”
He feeds on ashes. His own deluded heart has led him astray. He cannot save himself, nor does he say: “Is there not a lie in my right hand?”
“Remember these things, O Jacob, and you, O Israel,For you are my servant. I formed you, and you are my servant. O Israel, I will not forget you.
I will blot out your transgressions as with a cloudAnd your sins as with a thick cloud. Return to me, for I will repurchase you.
Shout joyfully, you heavens,For Jehovah has acted! Shout in triumph, you depths of the earth! Shout for joy, you mountains,You forest, and all your trees! For Jehovah has repurchased Jacob,And on Israel he displays his splendor.”
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser,Who formed you since you were in the womb: “I am Jehovah, who made everything. I stretched out the heavens by myself,And I spread out the earth. Who was with me?
I am frustrating the signs of the empty talkers,And I am the One who makes diviners act like fools;The One confounding the wise menAnd turning their knowledge into foolishness;
The One making the word of his servant come trueAnd completely fulfilling the predictions of his messengers;The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’ And of the cities of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt,And I will restore her ruins’;
The One saying to the deep waters, ‘Be evaporated,And I will dry up all your rivers’;
The One saying of Cyrus, ‘He is my shepherd,And he will completely carry out all my will’;The One saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’ And of the temple, ‘Your foundation will be laid.’”
For the sake of Zion I will not keep silent,And for the sake of Jerusalem I will not keep stillUntil her righteousness shines like a bright lightAnd her salvation burns like a torch.
“The nations will see your righteousness, O woman,And all kings your glory. And you will be called by a new name,Which Jehovah’s own mouth will designate.
You will become a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah,A royal turban in the palm of your God.
No more will you be called an abandoned woman,And your land will no longer be called desolate. But you will be called My Delight Is in Her,And your land will be called the Married One. For Jehovah will take delight in you,And your land will be as one married.
For just as a young man marries a virgin,Your sons will marry you. With the rejoicing of a bridegroom over a bride,Your God will rejoice over you.
Upon your walls, O Jerusalem, I have commissioned watchmen. Continuously, all day long and all night long, they should not be silent. You who make mention of Jehovah,Do not rest,
And do not give him any rest until he firmly establishes Jerusalem,Yes, until he makes her the praise of the earth.”
Jehovah has sworn an oath with his right hand, with his strong arm: “I will no longer give your grain as food to your enemies,Nor will foreigners drink your new wine, for which you have toiled.
But those gathering it will eat it and they will praise Jehovah;And those collecting it will drink it in my holy courtyards.”
Pass through, pass through the gates. Clear the way for the people. Build up, build up the highway. Rid it of stones. Raise up a signal for the peoples.
Look! Jehovah has proclaimed to the ends of the earth: “Say to the daughter of Zion,‘Look! Your salvation is coming. Look! His reward is with him,And the wage he pays is before him.’”
They will be called the holy people, those repurchased by Jehovah,And you will be called Sought After, a City Not Abandoned.
Woe to those who enact harmful regulations,Who constantly draft oppressive decrees,
To deny the legal claim of the poor,To deprive the lowly among my people of justice,Making widows their spoilAnd fatherless children their plunder!
What will you do on the day of reckoning,When destruction comes from afar? To whom will you flee for assistance,And where will you leave your wealth?
Nothing remains except to crouch among the prisonersOr to fall among the slain. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
“Aha! the As·syrʹi·an,The rod to express my angerAnd the staff in their hand for my denunciation!
I will send him against an apostate nation,Against the people who infuriated me;I will command him to take much spoil and much plunderAnd to trample them like mud in the streets.
But he will not be inclined this wayAnd his heart will not scheme this way;For it is in his heart to annihilate,To cut off many nations, not a few.
For he says,‘Are not my princes all kings?
Is not Calʹno just like Carʹche·mish? Is not Haʹmath like Arʹpad? Is not Sa·marʹi·a like Damascus?
My hand has seized the kingdoms of the worthless gods,Whose graven images were more than those of Jerusalem and Sa·marʹi·a!
Will I not also do to Jerusalem and her idolsJust as I have done to Sa·marʹi·a and to her worthless gods?’
“When Jehovah finishes all his work on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, He will punish the king of As·syrʹi·a for his insolent heart and his proud, arrogant gaze.
For he says,‘I will do this by the strength of my handAnd with my wisdom, for I am wise. I will remove the boundaries of peoplesAnd pillage their treasures,And I will subdue the inhabitants like a mighty one.
Like a man reaching into a nest,My hand will seize the resources of the peoples;And like one gathering abandoned eggs,I will gather the whole earth! No one will flutter his wings or open his mouth or chirp.’”
Will the ax exalt itself over the one who chops with it? Will the saw exalt itself over the one who saws with it? Could a staff wave the one who lifts it? Or could a rod lift up the one who is not made of wood?
Therefore the true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will inflict emaciation on his fat ones,And beneath his glory he will kindle a blazing fire.
Israel’s Light will become a fire,And his Holy One a flame;It will blaze up and consume his weeds and his thornbushes in one day.
He will utterly do away with the glory of his forest and his orchard;It will be as when a sick man wastes away.
The rest of the trees of his forestWill be so few that a boy could list them.
In that day those remaining of IsraelAnd the survivors of the house of JacobWill no longer support themselves on the one who struck them;But they will support themselves on Jehovah,The Holy One of Israel, with faithfulness.
Only a remnant will return,The remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God.
For though your people, O Israel,Are as the grains of sand of the sea,Only a remnant of them will return. An extermination has been decided on,And justice will engulf them.
Yes, the extermination decided on by the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will be carried out in the entire land.
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Do not be afraid, my people who are dwelling in Zion, because of the As·syrʹi·an, who used to strike you with the rod and to lift up his staff against you as Egypt did.
For in a very little while the denunciation will come to an end; my anger will be directed to their destruction.
Jehovah of armies will brandish a whip against him, as when he defeated Midʹi·an by the rock Oʹreb. And his staff will be over the sea, and he will raise it as he did with Egypt.
In that day his load will depart from on your shoulder,And his yoke from on your neck,And the yoke will be broken because of the oil.”
He has come to Aiʹath;He has passed through Migʹron;At Michʹmash he deposits his baggage.
They have passed over the ford;They spend the night at Geʹba;Raʹmah trembles, Gibʹe·ah of Saul has fled.
Cry out and scream, O daughter of Galʹlim! Pay attention, O Laʹi·shah! O poor Anʹa·thoth!
Mad·meʹnah has run away. The inhabitants of Geʹbim have sought shelter.
This very day he will halt in Nob. He shakes his fist at the mountain of the daughter of Zion,The hill of Jerusalem.
Look! The true Lord, Jehovah of armies,Is chopping off branches with a terrible crash;The tallest trees are being cut down,And the lofty are brought low.
He strikes down the thickets of the forest with an iron tool,And Lebʹa·non will fall by a mighty one.
“Call out full-throated; do not hold back! Raise your voice like a horn. Proclaim to my people their revolt,To the house of Jacob their sins.
They seek me day after day,And they express delight to know my ways,As if they were a nation that had practiced righteousnessAnd had not abandoned the justice of their God. They ask me for righteous judgments,Delighting to draw close to God:
‘Why do you not see when we fast? And why do you not notice when we afflict ourselves?’ Because on the day of your fast, you pursue your own interests,And you oppress your laborers.
Your fasting ends in quarrels and fights,And you strike with the fist of wickedness. You cannot fast as you do today and have your voice heard in heaven.
Should the fast that I choose be like this,As a day for someone to afflict himself,To bow down his head like a rush,To make his bed on sackcloth and ashes? Is this what you call a fast and a day pleasing to Jehovah?
No, this is the fast that I choose: To remove the fetters of wickedness,To untie the bands of the yoke bar,To let the oppressed go free,And to break in half every yoke bar;
It is to share your bread with the hungry,To bring the poor and homeless into your house,To clothe someone naked when you see him,And not to turn your back on your own flesh.
Then your light will shine through like the dawn,And your healing will spring up quickly. Your righteousness will go before you,And the glory of Jehovah will be your rear guard.
Then you will call, and Jehovah will answer;You will cry for help, and he will say, ‘Here I am!’ If you remove from among you the yoke barAnd stop pointing your finger and speaking maliciously,
If you grant to the hungry what you yourself desireAnd satisfy those who are afflicted,Then your light will shine even in the darkness,And your gloom will be like midday.
Jehovah will always lead youAnd satisfy you even in a parched land;He will invigorate your bones,And you will become like a well-watered garden,Like a spring whose waters never fail.
They will rebuild ancient ruins on your account,And you will restore the foundations of past generations. You will be called the repairer of the broken walls,The restorer of roadways by which to dwell.
If because of the Sabbath you refrain from pursuing your own interests on my holy dayAnd you call the Sabbath an exquisite delight, a holy day of Jehovah, a day to be glorified,And you glorify it rather than pursuing your own interests and speaking idle words,
Then you will find your exquisite delight in Jehovah,And I will make you ride on the high places of the earth. I will cause you to eat from the inheritance of Jacob your forefather,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.”
Send a ram to the ruler of the land,From Seʹla through the wildernessTo the mountain of the daughter of Zion.
Like a bird chased away from its nest,So the daughters of Moʹab will be at the fords of Arʹnon.
“Offer counsel, carry out the decision. Make your shadow at high noon like the night. Conceal the dispersed and do not betray those fleeing.
May my dispersed ones reside in you, O Moʹab. Become a place of concealment to them because of the destroyer. The oppressor will reach his end,The destruction will come to an end,And those trampling others down will perish from the earth.
Then a throne will be firmly established in loyal love. The one who sits on it in the tent of David will be faithful;He will judge fairly and will swiftly execute righteousness.”
We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very proud—His haughtiness and his pride and his fury;But his empty talk will come to nothing.
So Moʹab will wail for Moʹab;They will all wail. Those who are stricken will moan for the raisin cakes of Kir-harʹe·seth.
For the terraces of Heshʹbon have withered,The vine of Sibʹmah,The rulers of the nations have trampled its bright-red branches;They had reached as far as Jaʹzer;They had extended into the wilderness. Its shoots had spread out and gone as far as the sea.
That is why I will weep over the vine of Sibʹmah as I weep for Jaʹzer. With my tears I will drench you, O Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh,Because the shouting over your summer fruit and your harvest has ended.
Rejoicing and joyfulness have been taken away from the orchard,And there are no songs of joy or shouting in the vineyards. The treader no longer treads out wine in the presses,For I have caused the shouting to cease.
That is why deep within me I am boisterous over Moʹab,Like the strumming of a harp,And my innermost being over Kir-harʹe·seth.
Even when Moʹab wears himself out on the high place and goes to pray in his sanctuary, he will accomplish nothing.
This is the word that Jehovah previously spoke concerning Moʹab.
And now Jehovah says: “Within three years, like the years of a hired worker, the glory of Moʹab will be disgraced with much tumult of every sort, and those who remain will be very few and insignificant.”
Let me sing, please, to my belovedA song about my loved one and his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a fruitful hillside.
He dug it up and rid it of stones. He planted it with a choice red vine,Built a tower in the middle of it,And hewed out a winepress in it. Then he kept hoping for it to produce grapes,But it produced only wild grapes.
“And now, you inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,Please judge between me and my vineyard.
What more could I have done for my vineyardThat I have not already done? Why, when I hoped for grapes,Did it produce only wild grapes?
Now, please, let me tell youWhat I will do to my vineyard: I will remove its hedge,And it will be burned down. I will break down its stone wall,And it will be trampled on.
I will make it a wasteland;It will not be pruned or hoed. It will be overgrown with thornbushes and weeds,And I will command the clouds not to send any rain on it.
For the vineyard of Jehovah of armies is the house of Israel;The men of Judah are the plantation he was fond of. He kept hoping for justice,But look! there was injustice;For righteousness,But look! a cry of distress.”
Woe to those who join one house to another houseAnd who annex one field to another fieldUntil there is no more roomAnd you live by yourselves on the land!
Jehovah of armies has sworn in my earsThat many houses, though great and beautiful,Will become an object of horror,Without an inhabitant.
For ten acres of vineyard will produce but one bath measure,And a hoʹmer measure of seed will produce only an eʹphah.
Woe to those who get up early in the morning to drink alcohol,Who linger late into the evening darkness until wine inflames them!
They have harp and stringed instrument,Tambourine, flute, and wine at their feasts;But they do not consider the activity of Jehovah,And they do not see the work of his hands.
So my people will go into exileFor lack of knowledge;Their glorious men will go hungry,And all their people will be parched with thirst.
So the Grave has enlarged itselfAnd has opened its mouth wide without limit;And her splendor, her noisy multitudes, and her revelersWill certainly go down into it.
And man will bow down,Man will be brought low,And the eyes of the haughty will be brought low.
Jehovah of armies will be exalted by his judgment;The true God, the Holy One, will sanctify himself through righteousness.
And the lambs will graze as in their pasture;Foreign residents will feed on the desolate places of well-fed animals.
Woe to those who drag along their guilt with ropes of deceptionAnd their sin with wagon cords;
Those who say: “Let Him speed up his work;Let it come quickly that we may see it. Let the purpose of the Holy One of Israel take placeThat we may know it!”
Woe to those who say that good is bad and bad is good,Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness,Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter!
Woe to those wise in their own eyesAnd discreet in their own sight!
Woe to those who are mighty in drinking wineAnd to the men who are masters at mixing alcoholic drinks,
Those who acquit the wicked for a bribeAnd who deny justice to the righteous!
Therefore, just as the tongue of fire consumes the stubbleAnd dry grass shrivels in the flames,Their very roots will rot,And their blossoms will scatter like powder,Because they rejected the law of Jehovah of armiesAnd disrespected the word of the Holy One of Israel.
That is why the anger of Jehovah burns against his people,And he will stretch out his hand against them and strike them. The mountains will quake,And their corpses will be like refuse in the streets. In view of all this, his anger has not turned back,But his hand is still stretched out to strike.
He has raised up a signal to a distant nation;He has whistled for them to come from the ends of the earth;And look! they are coming very swiftly.
None among them are tired or stumbling. No one is drowsy or sleeps. The belt around their waist is not loosened,Nor are their sandal laces broken.
All their arrows are sharp,And all their bows are bent. The hooves of their horses are like flint,And their wheels like a storm wind.
Their roaring is like that of a lion;They roar like young lions. They will growl and seize the preyAnd carry it off with no one to rescue it.
In that day they will growl over itLike the growling of the sea. Anyone who gazes at the land will see distressing darkness;Even the light has grown dark because of the clouds.
Bel bends down, Neʹbo stoops over. Their idols are loaded on animals, on beasts of burden,Like baggage that burdens the weary animals.
They stoop and bend down together;They cannot rescue the loads,And they themselves go into captivity.
“Listen to me, O house of Jacob, and all you who remain of the house of Israel,You whom I have supported from birth and carried from the womb.
Until you grow old I will be the same;Until your hair is gray I will keep bearing you. As I have done, I will carry you and bear you and rescue you.
To whom will you liken me or make me equal or compare me,So that we should resemble each other?
There are those who lavish gold from their purse;They weigh out the silver on the scale. They hire a metalworker, and he makes it into a god. Then they prostrate themselves, yes, they worship it.
They lift it to their shoulders;They carry it and put it in its place, and it just stands there. It does not move from its place. They cry out to it, but it does not answer;It cannot rescue anyone from distress.
Remember this, and take courage. Take it to heart, you transgressors.
Remember the former things of long ago,That I am God, and there is no other. I am God, and there is no one like me.
From the beginning I foretell the outcome,And from long ago the things that have not yet been done. I say, ‘My decision will stand,And I will do whatever I please.’
I am calling a bird of prey from the sunrise,From a distant land the man to carry out my decision. I have spoken, and I will bring it about. I have purposed it, and I will also carry it out.
Listen to me, you who are stubborn of heart,You who are far away from righteousness.
I have brought my righteousness near;It is not far away,And my salvation will not delay. I will grant salvation in Zion, my splendor to Israel.”
For Jehovah will show mercy to Jacob, and he will again choose Israel. He will settle them in their land, and the foreign residents will join them and attach themselves to the house of Jacob.
And peoples will take them and bring them to their own place, and the house of Israel will possess them as male and female servants in Jehovah’s land; and they will be the captors of those who held them captive, and they will have in subjection those who were forcing them to work.
In the day when Jehovah gives you rest from your pain and from your turmoil and from the hard slavery imposed on you,
you will recite this proverb against the king of Babylon: “How the one forcing others to work has met his end! How the oppression has ended!
Jehovah has broken the rod of the wicked,The staff of the rulers,
The one furiously striking peoples with unceasing blows,The one angrily subduing nations with relentless persecution.
The whole earth now rests, free of disturbance. People cry out for joy.
Even the juniper trees rejoice over you,Along with the cedars of Lebʹa·non. They say, ‘Ever since you have fallen,No woodcutter comes up against us.’
Even the Grave underneath is stirred upTo meet you when you come. Because of you, it awakens those powerless in death,All the oppressive leaders of the earth. It makes all the kings of the nations rise from their thrones.
All of them speak up and say to you,‘Have you also become weak like us? Have you become like us?
Down to the Grave your pride has been brought,The sound of your stringed instruments. Maggots are spread beneath you as a bed,And worms are your covering.’
How you have fallen from heaven,O shining one, son of the dawn! How you have been cut down to the earth,You who vanquished nations!
You said in your heart, ‘I will ascend to the heavens. Above the stars of God I will lift up my throne,And I will sit down on the mountain of meeting,In the remotest parts of the north.
I will go up above the tops of the clouds;I will make myself resemble the Most High.’
Instead, you will be brought down to the Grave,To the remotest parts of the pit.
Those seeing you will stare at you;They will closely examine you, saying,‘Is this the man who was shaking the earth,Who made kingdoms tremble,
Who made the inhabited earth like the wildernessAnd overthrew its cities,Who refused to let his prisoners go home?’
All other kings of the nations,Yes, all of them, lie down in glory,Each one in his own tomb.
But you are discarded without a grave,Like a detested sprout,Clothed with the slain who were stabbed with the sword,Who go down to the stones of a pit,Like a carcass trampled underfoot.
You will not join them in a grave,For you destroyed your own land,You killed your own people. The offspring of evildoers will never again be named.
Prepare a slaughtering block for his sonsBecause of the guilt of their forefathers,So that they will not rise up and take over the earthAnd fill the land with their cities.”
“I will rise up against them,” declares Jehovah of armies. “And I will wipe out from Babylon name and remnant and descendants and posterity,” declares Jehovah.
“And I will make her a possession of porcupines and a region of marshes, and I will sweep her with the broom of annihilation,” declares Jehovah of armies.
Jehovah of armies has sworn: “Just as I have intended, so it will occur,And just as I have decided, that is what will come true.
I will crush the As·syrʹi·an in my land,And I will trample him on my mountains. His yoke will be removed from them,And his load will be removed from their shoulder.”
This is what has been decided against all the earth,And this is the hand that is stretched out against all the nations.
For Jehovah of armies has decided,And who can thwart it? His hand is stretched out,And who can turn it back?
In the year that King Aʹhaz died, this pronouncement was made:
“Do not rejoice, Phi·lisʹti·a, any of you,Just because the staff of the one striking you has been broken. For from the root of the serpent will come a poisonous snake,And its offspring will be a flying fiery snake.
While the firstborn of the lowly feedAnd the poor lie down in security,I will put your root to death with famine,And what is left of you will be killed.
Wail, O gate! Cry out, O city! All of you will lose heart, O Phi·lisʹti·a! For a smoke is coming from the north,And there are no stragglers in his ranks.”
How should they answer the messengers of the nation? That Jehovah has laid the foundation of Zion,And that the lowly ones of his people will take refuge in her.
Woe to the showy crown of the drunkards of Eʹphra·imAnd the fading blossom of its glorious beauty,Which is on the head of the fertile valley of those overcome with wine!
Look! Jehovah has someone strong and mighty. Like a thundering hailstorm, a destructive windstorm,Like a thunderstorm of powerful floodwaters,He will forcefully hurl it down to the earth.
The showy crowns of the drunkards of Eʹphra·imWill be trampled underfoot.
And the fading flower of its glorious beauty,Which is on the head of the fertile valley,Will become like the early fig before summer. When someone sees it, he swallows it as soon as it is in his hand.
In that day Jehovah of armies will become a glorious crown and a beautiful garland to those left of his people.
And he will become a spirit of justice to the one who sits in judgment and a source of mightiness to those who repel the attack at the gate.
And these also go astray because of wine;Their alcoholic beverages make them stagger. Priest and prophet go astray because of alcohol;The wine confuses them,And they stagger from their alcohol;Their vision makes them go astray,And they stumble in judgment.
For their tables are full of filthy vomit—There is no place without it.
To whom will one impart knowledge,And to whom will one explain the message? To those who have just been weaned from milk,Those just taken away from the breasts?
For it is “command after command, command after command,Line by line, line by line,A little here, a little there.”
So by means of those with stammering speech and a foreign language, he will speak to this people.
He once told them: “This is the resting-place. Let the weary one rest; this is the place of refreshment,” but they refused to listen.
So to them the word of Jehovah will be: “Command after command, command after command,Line by line, line by line,A little here, a little there,” So that when they walk,They will stumble and fall backwardAnd be broken and ensnared and caught.
So hear the word of Jehovah, you boasters,You rulers of this people in Jerusalem,
For you men say: “We have made a covenant with Death,And with the Grave we have made an agreement. When the raging flash flood passes through,It will not reach us,For we have made a lie our refugeAnd we have hidden ourselves in falsehood.”
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am laying as a foundation in Zion a tested stone,The precious cornerstone of a sure foundation. No one exercising faith will panic.
And I will make justice the measuring lineAnd righteousness the leveling tool. The hail will sweep away the refuge of lies,And the waters will flood out the hiding place.
Your covenant with Death will be dissolved,And your agreement with the Grave will not stand. When the raging flash flood passes through,You will be crushed by it.
As often as it passes through,It will sweep you away;For it will pass through morning after morning,During the day and during the night. Only terror will make them understand what was heard.”
For the bed is too short to stretch out on,And the woven sheet is too narrow to wrap up in.
For Jehovah will rise up as at Mount Pe·raʹzim;He will rouse himself as in the valley near Gibʹe·on,That he may do his deed—his strange deed—And that he may carry out his work—his unusual work.
Now do not scoff,So that your bonds may not be further tightened,For I have heard from the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,That an extermination has been determined for all the land.
Give ear and listen to my voice;Pay attention and listen to what I say.
Does the plower keep plowing all day before he sows seed? Does he continually break up and harrow his ground?
When he has smoothed out its surface,Does he not then scatter black cumin and sow cumin,And does he not plant wheat, millet, and barley in their placesAnd spelt around the edges?
For He teaches him the right way;His God instructs him.
For black cumin is not crushed with a threshing sledge,And a wagon wheel is not driven over cumin. Rather, black cumin is beaten out with a rod,And cumin with a staff.
Does a person crush grain for bread? No, he does not thresh it incessantly;And when he drives the roller of his wagon over it with his horses,He does not crush it.
This also comes from Jehovah of armies,Whose counsel is wonderfulAnd whose achievements are great.
A pronouncement about the Valley of Vision: What is the matter with you that you have all gone up to the roofs?
You were full of turmoil,A boisterous city, an exultant town. Your slain were not slain with the sword,Nor did they die in battle.
All your dictators have fled together. They were taken prisoner without need of a bow. All who were found were taken prisoner,Even though they had fled far away.
That is why I said: “Turn your eyes away from me,And I will weep bitterly. Do not insist on comforting meOver the destruction of the daughter of my people.
For it is a day of confusion and of defeat and of panic,From the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,In the Valley of Vision. There is a demolishing of the wallAnd a cry to the mountain.
Eʹlam picks up the quiverWith manned chariots and horses,And Kir uncovers the shield.
Your choicest valleysWill become full of war chariots,And the horses will take their positions at the gate,
And the screen of Judah will be removed. “In that day you will look toward the armory of the House of the Forest,
and you will see the many breaches of the City of David. And you will collect the waters of the lower pool.
You will count the houses of Jerusalem, and you will pull down the houses to reinforce the wall.
And you will make a basin between the two walls for the water of the old pool, but you will not look to its Grand Maker, and you will not see the One who formed it long ago.
In that day the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,Will call for weeping and mourning,For shaved heads and the wearing of sackcloth.
But instead, there is celebration and rejoicing,The killing of cattle and the slaughtering of sheep,The eating of meat and the drinking of wine. ‘Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.’”
Then Jehovah of armies revealed himself in my ears: “‘This error will not be atoned in your behalf until you people die,’ says the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.”
This is what the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, says: “Go in to this steward, to Shebʹna, who is in charge of the house, and say,
‘What is your interest here, and who is there of interest to you here, that you hewed out a burial place here for yourself?’ He is hewing out his burial place in a high place; he is cutting out a resting-place for himself in a crag.
‘Look! Jehovah will hurl you down violently, O man, and seize you forcibly.
He will certainly wrap you up tightly and hurl you like a ball into a wide land. There you will die, and there your glorious chariots will be, a disgrace to your master’s house.
And I will depose you from your position and throw you out of your office.
“‘In that day I will call my servant E·liʹa·kim the son of Hil·kiʹah,
and I will clothe him with your robe and firmly bind your sash around him, and I will give your authority into his hand. And he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah.
And I will put the key of the house of David on his shoulder. He will open and no one will shut; and he will shut and no one will open.
I will drive him in as a peg in a lasting place, and he will become as a throne of glory to the house of his father.
And they will hang on him all the glory of the house of his father, the descendants and the offspring, all the small vessels, the bowl-shaped vessels, as well as all the large jars.
“‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘the peg that is driven in a lasting place will be removed, and it will be cut down and fall, and the load that it supported will fall to ruin, for Jehovah himself has spoken.’”
A pronouncement against Moʹab: Because it has been devastated in a night,Ar of Moʹab has been silenced. Because it has been devastated in a night,Kir of Moʹab has been silenced.
He has gone up to the House and to Diʹbon,To the high places to weep. Moʹab wails over Neʹbo and over Medʹe·ba. Every head is shaved bald, every beard is clipped.
In its streets they have put on sackcloth. On their roofs and in their public squares they all wail;They go down weeping.
Heshʹbon and E·le·aʹleh cry out;Their voice is heard as far as Jaʹhaz. That is why the armed men of Moʹab keep shouting. He is trembling.
My heart cries out over Moʹab. Its fugitives have fled as far as Zoʹar and Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah. On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep as they go up;On the way to Hor·o·naʹim they cry out over the catastrophe.
For the waters of Nimʹrim are desolate;The green grass has dried up,The grass is gone and nothing green is left.
That is why they are carrying away what is left of their stores and their riches;They are crossing the valley of poplars.
For the outcry echoes throughout the territory of Moʹab. The wailing reaches to Eg·laʹim;The wailing reaches to Beʹer-eʹlim.
For the waters of Diʹmon are full of blood,And I have more in store for Diʹmon: A lion for those of Moʹab who escapeAnd for those remaining in the land.
Listen to me, you islands,And pay attention, you faraway nations. Jehovah has called me before I was born. From the time I was in my mother’s womb he has made mention of my name.
He made my mouth like a sharp sword;He has hidden me in the shadow of his hand. He made me a polished arrow;He concealed me in his quiver.
He said to me: “You are my servant, O Israel,Through whom I will show my splendor.”
But I said: “I have toiled for nothing. I used up my strength for an unreality, in vain. But surely my judgment is with Jehovah,And my wages with my God.”
And now Jehovah, the One who formed me from the womb as his servant,Has said for me to bring Jacob back to him,So that Israel may be gathered to him. I will be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah,And my God will have become my strength.
And he said: “It is not enough that you are my servantTo raise up the tribes of JacobAnd to bring back those who were preserved of Israel. I have also given you as a light of nations,So that my salvation may reach the ends of the earth.”
This is what Jehovah, the Repurchaser of Israel, his Holy One, says to the one who is despised, to the one who is detested by the nation, to the servant of rulers: “Kings will see and rise up,And princes will bow downBecause of Jehovah, who is faithful,The Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.”
This is what Jehovah says: “In a time of favor I answered you,And in a day of salvation I helped you;I kept safeguarding you to give you as a covenant for the people,To rehabilitate the land,To cause them to possess their desolate inheritances,
To say to the prisoners, ‘Come out!’ And to those in the darkness, ‘Show yourselves!’ By the roadways they will feed,Along all the worn paths will be their pastures.
They will not go hungry, nor will they thirst,Nor will scorching heat or the sun beat down on them. For the One who has mercy on them will lead them,And he will guide them by the springs of water.
I will make all my mountains into a road,And my highways will be raised up.
Look! These are coming from far away,And look! these from the north and from the west,And these from the land of Siʹnim.”
Shout for joy, you heavens, and rejoice, you earth. Let the mountains become cheerful with a joyful cry. For Jehovah has comforted his people,And he shows mercy to his own afflicted ones.
But Zion kept saying: “Jehovah has abandoned me, and Jehovah has forgotten me.”
Can a woman forget her nursing childOr have no compassion for the son of her womb? Even if these women forget, I would never forget you.
Look! On my palms I have engraved you. Your walls are always before me.
Your sons hurry back. Those who tore you down and devastated you will depart from you.
Raise your eyes and look all around. They are all gathering together. They are coming to you. “As surely as I am living,” declares Jehovah,“You will clothe yourself with all of them as with ornaments,And you will fasten them on yourself as a bride does.
Although your places were devastated and desolate and your land was in ruins,Now it will become too cramped for those dwelling there,And those who swallowed you down will be far away.
The sons born when you were bereaved will say in your hearing,‘This place is too cramped for me. Make room for me to dwell here.’
And you will say in your heart,‘Who has fathered these for me,Since I am a woman bereaved of children and barren,Exiled and taken prisoner? Who has raised these? Look! I was left all alone,So where have these come from?’”
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! I will raise up my hand to the nations,And I will lift up my signal to the peoples. They will bring your sons in their armsAnd carry your daughters on their shoulders.
Kings will become caretakers for you,And their princesses will be your nurses. They will bow down to you with their faces to the groundAnd lick the dust of your feet,And you will have to know that I am Jehovah;Those hoping in me will not be put to shame.”
Can those already captured be taken from a mighty man,Or can the captives of the tyrant be rescued?
But this is what Jehovah says: “Even the captives of a mighty man will be taken away,And those captured by the tyrant will be rescued. I will oppose those who oppose you,And I will save your own sons.
I will make those who mistreat you eat their own flesh,And as with sweet wine, they will become drunk with their own blood. And all people will have to know that I am Jehovah,Your Savior and your Repurchaser,The Powerful One of Jacob.”
Look! A king will reign for righteousness,And princes will rule for justice.
And each one will be like a hiding place from the wind,A place of concealment from the rainstorm,Like streams of water in a waterless land,Like the shadow of a massive crag in a parched land.
Then the eyes of those seeing will no longer be pasted shut,And the ears of those hearing will pay attention.
The heart of those who are impetuous will ponder over knowledge,And the stammering tongue will speak fluently and clearly.
The senseless one will no longer be called generous,And the unprincipled man will not be called noble;
For the senseless one will speak nonsense,And his heart will devise harmful things,To promote apostasy and to speak what is wayward against Jehovah,To cause the hungry one to go unfedAnd to deprive the thirsty one of something to drink.
The devices of the unprincipled man are bad;He promotes shameful conductTo ruin the afflicted one with lies,Even when the poor speaks what is right.
But the generous one has generous intentions,And in generous endeavors he perseveres.
“You complacent women, get up and listen to my voice! You carefree daughters, pay attention to what I say!
In a little over a year, you who are carefree will shudder,Because no fruit will have been gathered when the grape harvest ends.
Tremble, you complacent women! Shudder, you who are carefree! Strip yourselves bare,And put sackcloth around your hips.
Beat your breasts in lamentationOver the desirable fields and the fruitful vine.
For the ground of my people will be covered with thorns and briars;They will cover all the houses of rejoicing,Yes, the city of exultation.
For the fortified tower has been forsaken;The noisy city has been abandoned. Oʹphel and the watchtower have become a permanent wasteland,A delight for wild donkeys,A pasture for the flocks,
Until the spirit is poured out on us from above,And the wilderness becomes an orchard,And the orchard is regarded as a forest.
Then justice will reside in the wilderness,And righteousness will dwell in the orchard.
The result of true righteousness will be peace,And the fruitage of true righteousness will be lasting tranquillity and security.
My people will dwell in a peaceful abiding place,In secure dwellings and in tranquil resting-places.
But the hail will flatten the forest,And the city will be completely leveled.
Happy are you who sow seed alongside all waters,Who send out the bull and the donkey.”
And seven women will grab hold of one man in that day, saying: “We will eat our own breadAnd wear our own clothing;Only let us be called by your nameTo take away our disgrace.”
In that day what Jehovah makes sprout will be splendid and glorious, and the fruitage of the land will be the pride and beauty of the survivors of Israel.
Whoever remains in Zion and is left over in Jerusalem will be called holy, all of those in Jerusalem written down for life.
When Jehovah washes away the filth of the daughters of Zion and rinses away the bloodshed of Jerusalem from her midst by the spirit of judgment and by a spirit of burning,
Jehovah will also create over the whole site of Mount Zion and over the place of her conventions a cloud and smoke by day and a bright flaming fire by night; for over all the glory there will be a shelter.
And there will be a booth for shade by day from the heat, and for refuge and protection from storms and the rain.
Look! The hand of Jehovah is not too short to save,Nor is his ear too dull to hear.
No, your own errors have separated you from your God. Your sins have made him hide his face from you,And he refuses to hear you.
For your palms are polluted with bloodAnd your fingers with error. Your lips speak lies, and your tongue mutters unrighteousness.
No one calls out for righteousness,And no one goes to court in truthfulness. They trust in unreality and speak what is worthless. They conceive trouble and give birth to what is harmful.
They hatch the eggs of a poisonous snake,And they weave the cobweb of a spider. Anyone who eats their eggs would die,And the egg that is crushed hatches a viper.
Their cobweb will not serve as a garment,Nor will they cover themselves with what they make. Their works are harmful,And deeds of violence are in their hands.
Their feet run to do evil,And they hurry to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are harmful thoughts;Ruin and misery are in their ways.
They have not known the way of peace,And there is no justice in their tracks. They make their roadways crooked;No one treading on them will know peace.
That is why justice is far away from us,And righteousness does not overtake us. We keep hoping for light, but look! there is darkness;For brightness, but we keep walking in gloom.
We grope for the wall like blind men;Like those without eyes we keep groping. We stumble at high noon as in evening darkness;Among the strong we are just like the dead.
We all keep growling like bearsAnd cooing mournfully like doves. We hope for justice, but there is none;For salvation, but it is far away from us.
For our revolts are many before you;Each of our sins testifies against us. For our revolts are with us;We well know our errors.
We have transgressed and denied Jehovah;We have turned our backs on our God. We have spoken of oppression and revolt;We have conceived lies and muttered false words from the heart.
Justice is driven back,And righteousness stands far off;For truth has stumbled in the public square,And what is upright is unable to enter.
Truth has vanished,And anyone who turns away from bad is plundered. Jehovah saw this and was displeased,For there was no justice.
He saw that there was no man,And he was astonished that no one interceded,So his own arm brought about salvation,And his own righteousness supported him.
Then he put on righteousness like a coat of mailAnd the helmet of salvation on his head. He put on the garments of vengeance as his clothingAnd wrapped himself with zeal like a coat.
He will reward them for what they have done: Wrath to his adversaries, retribution to his enemies. And to the islands he will repay their due.
From the sunset they will fear the name of JehovahAnd from the sunrise his glory,For he will come in like a rushing river,Which the spirit of Jehovah drives along.
“To Zion the Repurchaser will come,To those in Jacob who turn from transgression,” declares Jehovah.
“As for me, this is my covenant with them,” says Jehovah. “My spirit that is on you and my words that I have placed in your mouth—they will not be removed from your mouth, from the mouth of your children, or from the mouth of your grandchildren,” says Jehovah, “from now on and forever.”
The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me,Because Jehovah anointed me to declare good news to the meek. He sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,To proclaim liberty to the captivesAnd the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners,
To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwillAnd the day of vengeance of our God,To comfort all who mourn,
To provide for those mourning over Zion,To give them a headdress instead of ashes,The oil of exultation instead of mourning,The garment of praise instead of a despondent spirit. And they will be called big trees of righteousness,The planting of Jehovah, in order to glorify him.
They will rebuild the ancient ruins;They will raise up the desolated places of the past,And they will restore the devastated cities,The places that lay desolate for generation after generation.
“Strangers will stand and shepherd your flocks,And foreigners will be your farmers and your vinedressers.
As for you, you will be called the priests of Jehovah;They will call you the ministers of our God. You will eat the resources of the nations,And about their glory you will boast.
Instead of shame you will have a double portion,And instead of humiliation they will shout joyfully over their share. Yes, they will possess a double portion in their land. Everlasting rejoicing will be theirs.
For I, Jehovah, love justice;I hate robbery and unrighteousness. I will faithfully give them their wages,And I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
Their offspring will be known among the nationsAnd their descendants among the peoples. All who see them will recognize them,That they are the offspring whom Jehovah has blessed.”
I will greatly exult in Jehovah. My whole being will rejoice in my God. For he has clothed me with the garments of salvation;He has wrapped me with the robe of righteousness,Just like a bridegroom who wears a turban like that of a priest,And like a bride who adorns herself with her ornaments.
For as the earth brings forth its sproutsAnd as the garden makes what is sown in it sprout,So will the Sovereign Lord JehovahCause righteousness and praise to sprout before all the nations.
At that time the king of Babylon, Merʹo·dach-balʹa·dan son of Balʹa·dan, sent letters and a gift to Hez·e·kiʹah, for he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered.
Hez·e·kiʹah gladly welcomed them and showed them his treasure-house—the silver, the gold, the balsam oil and other precious oil, his whole armory, and everything that was to be found in his treasuries. There was nothing that Hez·e·kiʹah did not show them in his own house and in all his dominion.
After that Isaiah the prophet came in to King Hez·e·kiʹah and asked him: “What did these men say, and where did they come from?” So Hez·e·kiʹah said: “They came from a distant land, from Babylon.”
Next he asked: “What did they see in your house?” Hez·e·kiʹah replied: “They saw everything in my house. There was nothing that I did not show them in my treasuries.”
Isaiah now said to Hez·e·kiʹah: “Hear the word of Jehovah of armies,
‘Look! Days are coming, and all that is in your house and all that your forefathers have stored up to this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Jehovah.
‘And some of your own sons to whom you will become father will be taken and will become court officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’”
At that Hez·e·kiʹah said to Isaiah: “The word of Jehovah that you have spoken is good.” Then he added: “Because there will be peace and stability during my lifetime.”
In the year that King Sarʹgon of As·syrʹi·a sent the Tarʹtan to Ashʹdod, he fought against Ashʹdod and captured it.
At that time Jehovah spoke through Isaiah the son of Aʹmoz, saying: “Go, remove the sackcloth from your hips, and take your sandals off your feet.” And he did so, walking about naked and barefoot.
Jehovah then said: “Just as my servant Isaiah has walked about naked and barefoot for three years as a sign and a portent against Egypt and E·thi·oʹpi·a,
so the king of As·syrʹi·a will lead the captives of Egypt and the exiles of E·thi·oʹpi·a, boys and old men, naked and barefoot and with exposed buttocks, the nakedness of Egypt.
And they will be terrified and will be ashamed of E·thi·oʹpi·a their hope and of Egypt their pride.
The inhabitants of this coastland will say in that day, ‘Look at what happened to our hope, to which we fled for help and rescue from the king of As·syrʹi·a! How will we escape now?’”
In that day you will certainly say: “I thank you, O Jehovah,For although you were angry with me,Your anger gradually subsided, and you comforted me.
Look! God is my salvation. I will trust and feel no dread;For Jah Jehovah is my strength and my might,And he has become my salvation.”
With rejoicing you will draw waterFrom the springs of salvation.
And in that day you will say: “Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name,Make his deeds known among the peoples! Declare that his name is exalted.
Sing praises to Jehovah, for he has done magnificent things. Let this be made known in all the earth.
Cry out and shout for joy, you inhabitant of Zion,For great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.”
Who has put faith in the thing heard from us? And as for the arm of Jehovah, to whom has it been revealed?
He will come up like a twig before him, like a root out of parched land. No stately form does he have, nor any splendor;And when we see him, his appearance does not draw us to him.
He was despised and was avoided by men,A man who was meant for pains and was familiar with sickness. It was as if his face were hidden from us. He was despised, and we held him as of no account.
Truly he himself carried our sicknesses,And he bore our pains. But we considered him as plagued, stricken by God and afflicted.
But he was pierced for our transgression;He was crushed for our errors. He bore the punishment for our peace,And because of his wounds we were healed.
Like sheep we have all wandered about,Each has turned his own way,And Jehovah has caused the error of us all to meet up with him.
He was oppressed and he let himself be afflicted,But he would not open his mouth. He was brought like a sheep to the slaughter,Like a ewe that is silent before its shearers,And he would not open his mouth.
Because of restraint and judgment he was taken away;And who will concern himself with the details of his generation? For he was cut off from the land of the living;Because of the transgression of my people he received the stroke.
And he was given a burial place with the wicked,And with the rich in his death,Although he had done no wrongAnd there was no deception in his mouth.
But it was Jehovah’s will to crush him, and he let him become sick. If you will present his life as a guilt offering,He will see his offspring, he will prolong his days,And through him the delight of Jehovah will have success.
Because of his anguish, he will see and be satisfied. By means of his knowledge the righteous one, my servant,Will bring a righteous standing to many people,And their errors he will bear.
For that reason I will assign him a portion among the many,And he will apportion the spoil with the mighty,Because he poured out his life even to deathAnd was counted among the transgressors;He carried the sin of many people,And he interceded for the transgressors.
Hear this, O house of Jacob,You who call yourselves by the name of IsraelAnd who have come from the waters of Judah,You who swear by the name of JehovahAnd who call on the God of Israel,Though not in truth and righteousness.
For they call themselves after the holy cityAnd seek the support of the God of Israel,Whose name is Jehovah of armies.
“The former things I told you long ago. From my own mouth they went out,And I made them known. Suddenly I took action, and they came about.
Because I knew how stubborn you are—That your neck is an iron sinew and your forehead is copper—
I told you long ago. Before it came about, I caused you to hear it,So that you could not say, ‘My idol did this;My carved image and my metal image commanded this.’
You have heard and seen all of this. Will you not declare it? From now on I am announcing new things to you,Guarded secrets that you have not known.
Only now are they being created, and not long ago,Things that you never heard before today,So that you cannot say, ‘Look! I already know them.’
No, you have not heard, you have not known,And in the past your ears were not opened. For I know that you are very treacherous,And you have been called a transgressor from birth.
But for the sake of my name I will hold back my anger;For my own praise I will restrain myself toward you,And I will not do away with you.
Look! I have refined you, but not in the form of silver. I have tested you in the smelting furnace of affliction.
For my own sake, for my own sake I will act,For how could I let myself be profaned? I give my glory to no one else.
Listen to me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I have called. I am the same One. I am the first; I am also the last.
My own hand laid the foundation of the earth,And my right hand spread out the heavens. When I call to them, they stand up together.
Gather together, all of you, and listen. Who among them has announced these things? Jehovah has loved him. He will carry out his delight against Babylon,And his arm will come against the Chal·deʹans.
I myself have spoken, and I have called him. I have brought him, and his way will be successful.
Come near to me, and hear this. From the very start I have not spoken in secret. From the time it happened I was there.” And now the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sent me, and his spirit.
This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: “I, Jehovah, am your God,The One teaching you to benefit yourself,The One guiding you in the way you should walk.
If only you would pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a riverAnd your righteousness like the waves of the sea.
Your offspring would be as many as the sandAnd your descendants as its grains. Their name would never be cut off or annihilated from before me.”
Go out from Babylon! Flee from the Chal·deʹans! Announce it with a joyful cry! Proclaim it! Make it known to the ends of the earth. Say: “Jehovah has repurchased his servant Jacob.
They did not become thirsty when he led them through devastated places. He caused water to flow out of the rock for them;He split a rock and made water gush out.”
“There is no peace,” says Jehovah, “for the wicked.”
Woe to the land of whirring insect wingsIn the region of the rivers of E·thi·oʹpi·a!
It sends envoys by sea,Across the waters in papyrus vessels, saying: “Go, you swift messengers,To a tall and smooth-skinned nation,To a people feared everywhere,To a strong, conquering nation,Whose land is washed away by rivers.”
All you inhabitants of the land and you residents of the earth,What you see will be like a signal raised on the mountains,And you will hear a sound like the blowing of a horn.
For this is what Jehovah said to me: “I will remain undisturbed and look on my established place,Like the shimmering heat along with the sunlight,Like the cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For before the harvest,When the blossom is finished and the bloom becomes a ripening grape,The shoots will be cut off with pruning shearsAnd the tendrils will be lopped off and removed.
They will all be left for the birds of prey of the mountainsAnd for the beasts of the earth. The birds of prey will spend the summer on them,And all the beasts of the earth will spend the harvesttime on them.
At that time a gift will be brought to Jehovah of armies,From a tall and smooth-skinned nation,From a people feared everywhere,From a strong, conquering nation,Whose land is washed away by riversTo the place that bears the name of Jehovah of armies, Mount Zion.”
The righteous one has perished,But no one takes it to heart. Loyal men are taken away,With no one discerning that the righteous one has been taken awayBecause of the calamity.
He enters into peace. They rest on their beds, all who walk uprightly.
“But as for you, come closer,You sons of a sorceress,You children of an adulterer and a prostitute:
Whom are you making fun of? Against whom do you open your mouth wide and stick out your tongue? Are you not the children of transgression,The children of deceit,
Those who are inflamed with passion among big trees,Under every luxuriant tree,Who slaughter the children in the valleys,Under the clefts of the crags?
With the smooth stones of the valley is your portion. Yes, these are your lot. Even to them you pour out drink offerings and offer gifts. Should I be satisfied with these things?
On a mountain high and lofty you prepared your bed,And you went up there to offer sacrifice.
Behind the door and the doorpost you set up your memorial. You left me and uncovered yourself;You went up and made your bed spacious. And you made a covenant with them. You loved sharing their bed,And you gazed at the male organ.
You went down to Melʹech with oilAnd with an abundance of perfume. You sent your envoys far off,So that you descended to the Grave.
You have toiled in following your many ways,But you did not say, ‘It is hopeless!’ You found renewed strength. That is why you do not give up.
Whom did you dread and fearSo that you started to lie? You did not remember me. You took nothing to heart. Have I not kept silent and withdrawn? So you showed no fear of me.
I will make known your ‘righteousness’ and your works,And they will not benefit you.
When you cry for help,Your collection of idols will not rescue you. A wind will carry all of them away,A mere breath will blow them away,But the one who takes refuge in me will inherit the landAnd will take possession of my holy mountain.
It will be said, ‘Build up, build up a road! Prepare the way! Remove any obstacle from the way of my people.’”
For this is what the High and Lofty One says,Who lives forever and whose name is holy: “I reside in the high and holy place,But also with those crushed and lowly in spirit,To revive the spirit of the lowlyAnd to revive the heart of those being crushed.
For I will not oppose them foreverOr always remain indignant;For a man’s spirit would grow feeble because of me,Even the breathing creatures that I have made.
I was indignant at his sinful pursuit of dishonest gain,So I struck him, I hid my face, and I was indignant. But he kept walking as a renegade, following the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways,But I will heal him and lead himAnd restore comfort to him and to his mourning ones.”
“I am creating the fruit of the lips. Continuous peace will be given to the one who is far away and the one who is near,” says Jehovah,“And I will heal him.”
“But the wicked are like the restless sea that cannot calm down,And its waters keep tossing up seaweed and mire.
There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
This is what Jehovah says: “The heavens are my throne, and the earth is my footstool. Where, then, is the house that you could build for me,And where is my resting-place?”
“My own hand has made all these things,And this is how they all came to be,” declares Jehovah. “To this one, then, I will look,To the one humble and broken in spirit who trembles at my word.
The one slaughtering the bull is like one striking down a man. The one sacrificing a sheep is like one breaking the neck of a dog. The one offering a gift—like the blood of a pig! The one presenting a memorial offering of frankincense is like one saying a blessing with magical words. They have chosen their own ways,And they take delight in what is disgusting.
So I will choose ways to punish them,And the very things they dread I will bring upon them. Because when I called, no one answered;When I spoke, there were none who listened. They kept doing what was bad in my eyes,And they chose to do what displeased me.”
Hear the word of Jehovah, you who tremble at his word: “Your brothers who hate you and exclude you because of my name said, ‘May Jehovah be glorified!’ But He will appear and bring you joy,And they are the ones who will be put to shame.”
There is a sound of uproar from the city, a sound from the temple! It is the sound of Jehovah repaying his enemies what they deserve.
Before she went into labor, she gave birth. Before birth pangs came to her, she delivered a male child.
Who has ever heard of such a thing? Who has seen such things? Will a land be brought to birth in one day? Or will a nation be born all at once? Yet, as soon as Zion went into labor, she gave birth to her sons.
“Will I bring it to the point of birth and then not bring it forth?” says Jehovah. “Or would I cause the birth and then shut the womb?” says your God.
Rejoice with Jerusalem and be joyful with her, all you who love her. Exult greatly with her, all you who are in mourning over her,
For you will nurse and be fully satisfied from her breast of consolation,And you will drink deeply and find delight in the abundance of her glory.
For this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am extending to her peace just like a riverAnd the glory of nations like a flooding torrent. You will nurse and be carried on the hip,And you will be bounced on the knees.
As a mother comforts her son,So I will keep comforting you;And over Jerusalem you will be comforted.
You will see this, and your heart will rejoice,Your bones will flourish just like new grass. And the hand of Jehovah will become known to his servants,But he will denounce his enemies.”
“For Jehovah will come as a fire,And his chariots are like a storm wind,To repay in furious anger,To rebuke with flames of fire.
For with fire Jehovah will execute judgment,Yes, with his sword, against all flesh;And the slain of Jehovah will be many.
“Those sanctifying themselves and cleansing themselves to enter the gardens following one who is in the center, those eating the flesh of pigs and loathsome things and mice, they will all come to their end together,” declares Jehovah.
“Since I know about their works and their thoughts, I am coming to gather people of all nations and languages, and they will come and see my glory.”
“I will set a sign among them, and I will send some of those who escape to the nations—to Tarʹshish, Pul, and Lud, those who draw the bow, to Tuʹbal and Jaʹvan, and to the faraway islands—who have not heard a report about me or seen my glory; and they will proclaim my glory among the nations.
They will bring all your brothers out of all the nations as a gift to Jehovah, on horses, in chariots, in covered wagons, on mules, and on swift camels, up to my holy mountain, Jerusalem,” says Jehovah, “just as when the people of Israel bring their gift in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.”
“I will also take some for the priests and for the Levites,” says Jehovah.
“For just as the new heavens and the new earth that I am making will remain standing before me,” declares Jehovah, “so your offspring and your name will remain.”
“And from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath,All flesh will come in to bow down before me,” says Jehovah.
“And they will go out and look on the carcasses of the men who rebelled against me;For the worms on them will not die,And their fire will not be extinguished,And they will become something repulsive to all people.”
A pronouncement about Tyre: Wail, you ships of Tarʹshish! For the port has been destroyed; it cannot be entered. From the land of Kitʹtim it has been revealed to them.
Be silent, you inhabitants of the coastland. The merchants from Siʹdon who cross the sea have filled you.
Over many waters went the grain of Shiʹhor,The harvest of the Nile, her revenue,Bringing the profit of the nations.
Be ashamed, O Siʹdon, you stronghold of the sea,Because the sea has said: “I have not had birth pains, and I have not given birth,Nor have I brought up young men or raised young women.”
As when they heard the report about Egypt,People will be in anguish over the report about Tyre.
Cross over to Tarʹshish! Wail, you inhabitants of the coastland!
Is this your city that was exultant from long ago, from her early times? Her feet used to take her to distant lands to reside.
Who has decided this against Tyre,The bestower of crowns,Whose merchants were princes,Whose tradesmen were honored in all the earth?
Jehovah of armies himself has decided this,To profane her pride over all her beauty,To humiliate all those who were honored throughout the earth.
Cross over your land like the Nile River, O daughter of Tarʹshish. There is no longer any shipyard.
He has stretched his hand out over the sea;He has shaken kingdoms. Jehovah has ordered the annihilation of Phoe·niʹcia’s strongholds.
And he says: “You will exult no more,O oppressed one, the virgin daughter of Siʹdon. Get up, cross over to Kitʹtim. Even there you will find no rest.”
Look! The land of the Chal·deʹans. This is the people—As·syrʹi·a was not the one—They made her a place for those haunting the desert. They have erected their siege towers;They have stripped bare her fortified towers,Reducing her to a crumbling ruin.
Wail, you ships of Tarʹshish,For your stronghold has been destroyed.
In that day Tyre will be forgotten for 70 years, the same as the lifetime of one king. At the end of 70 years, it will happen to Tyre as in the song of a prostitute:
“Take a harp, go around the city, O forgotten prostitute. Play your harp skillfully;Sing many songs,So that they will remember you.”
At the end of 70 years, Jehovah will turn his attention to Tyre, and she will return to her hire and prostitute herself with all the world’s kingdoms on the face of the earth.
But her profit and her hire will become something holy to Jehovah. It will not be stored or laid away, because her hire will be for those dwelling before Jehovah, so that they may eat to satisfaction and wear elegant clothing.
The wilderness and the parched land will exult,And the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron.
Without fail it will blossom;It will rejoice and shout for joy. The glory of Lebʹa·non will be given to it,The splendor of Carʹmel and of Sharʹon. They will see the glory of Jehovah, the splendor of our God.
Strengthen the weak hands,And make firm the knees that are shaking.
Say to those who are anxious at heart: “Be strong. Do not be afraid. Look! Your own God will come with vengeance,God will come with retribution. He will come and save you.”
At that time the eyes of the blind will be opened,And the ears of the deaf will be unstopped.
At that time the lame will leap like the deer,And the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy. For waters will burst forth in the wilderness,And streams in the desert plain.
The heat-parched ground will become a reedy pool,And the thirsty ground springs of water. In the lairs where jackals rested,There will be green grass and reeds and papyrus.
And a highway will be there,Yes, a way called the Way of Holiness. The unclean one will not travel on it. It is reserved for the one walking on the way;No one foolish will stray onto it.
No lion will be there,And no vicious wild beasts will come on it. They will not be found there;Only the repurchased ones will walk there.
Those redeemed by Jehovah will return and come to Zion with a joyful cry. Unending joy will crown their heads. Exultation and rejoicing will be theirs,And grief and sighing will flee away.
“Arise, O woman, shed light, for your light has come. The glory of Jehovah shines on you.
For look! darkness will cover the earthAnd thick gloom the nations;But on you Jehovah will shine,And on you his glory will be seen.
Nations will go to your lightAnd kings to your shining splendor.
Raise your eyes and look all around you! They have all been assembled; they are coming to you. From far away your sons keep coming,And your daughters being supported on the hip.
At that time you will see and become radiant,And your heart will throb and overflow,Because the wealth of the sea will be directed to you;The resources of the nations will come to you.
Throngs of camels will cover your land,Young male camels of Midʹi·an and Eʹphah. All those from Sheʹba—they will come;Gold and frankincense they will carry. They will proclaim the praises of Jehovah.
All the flocks of Keʹdar will be gathered to you. The rams of Ne·baʹioth will serve you. They will come on my altar with approval,And I will beautify my glorious house.
Who are these that fly along like clouds,Like doves to their dovecotes?
For in me the islands will hope;The ships of Tarʹshish are in the lead,To bring your sons from far away,Along with their silver and their gold,To the name of Jehovah your God and to the Holy One of Israel,For he will glorify you.
Foreigners will build your walls,And their kings will minister to you,For in my indignation I struck you,But in my favor I will have mercy on you.
Your gates will be kept open constantly;They will not be closed by day or by night,To bring to you the resources of the nations,And their kings will take the lead.
For any nation and any kingdom that will not serve you will perish,And the nations will be utterly devastated.
To you the glory of Lebʹa·non will come,The juniper tree, the ash tree, and the cypress together,To beautify the place of my sanctuary;I will glorify the place for my feet.
The sons of those who oppressed you will come and bow down before you;All those treating you disrespectfully must bow down at your feet,And they will have to call you the city of Jehovah,Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
Instead of your being abandoned and hated, with nobody passing through,I will make you a source of everlasting pride,A cause for rejoicing throughout all generations.
And you will actually drink the milk of nations,At the breast of kings you will nurse;And you will certainly know that I, Jehovah, am your Savior,And the Powerful One of Jacob is your Repurchaser.
Instead of the copper I will bring in gold,And instead of the iron I will bring in silver,Instead of the wood, copper,And instead of the stones, iron;And I will appoint peace as your overseersAnd righteousness as your task assigners.
No more will violence be heard in your landOr destruction and ruin within your boundaries. And you will call your walls Salvation and your gates Praise.
For you the sun will no longer be a light by day,Nor will the shining of the moon give you light,For Jehovah will become to you an eternal light,And your God will be your beauty.
No more will your sun set,Nor will your moon wane,For Jehovah will become for you an eternal light,And the days of your mourning will have ended.
And all your people will be righteous;They will possess the land forever. They are the sprout that I planted,The work of my hands, for me to be beautified.
The little one will become a thousandAnd the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”
Come close to hear, you nations,And pay attention, you peoples. Let the earth and that which fills it listen,The land and all its produce.
For Jehovah’s indignation is against all the nations,And his wrath is against all their army. He will devote them to destruction;He will give them to the slaughter.
Their slain will be thrown out,And the stench of their carcasses will ascend;The mountains will melt because of their blood.
All the army of the heavens will rot away,And the heavens will be rolled up like a scroll. All their army will wither away,As a withered leaf falls from the vineAnd a shriveled fig from the fig tree.
“For in the heavens my sword will be drenched. It will descend on Eʹdom in judgment,On the people whom I devoted to destruction.
Jehovah has a sword; it will be covered with blood. It will be covered with the fat,With the blood of young rams and goats,With the kidney fat of rams. For Jehovah has a sacrifice in Bozʹrah,A great slaughter in the land of Eʹdom.
The wild bulls will go down with them,The young bulls with the powerful ones. Their land will be drenched in blood,And their dust will be soaked with fat.”
For Jehovah has a day of vengeance,A year of retribution for the legal case over Zion.
Her streams will be changed into pitch,And her dust into sulfur,And her land will become like burning pitch.
By night or by day it will not be extinguished;Its smoke will keep ascending forever. From generation to generation she will remain devastated;No one will pass through her forever and ever.
The pelican and the porcupine will possess her,And long-eared owls and ravens will reside in her. He will stretch out over her the measuring line of emptinessAnd the plumb line of desolation.
None of her nobles will be called to the kingship,And all her princes will come to nothing.
Thorns will grow in her fortified towers,Nettles and thorny weeds in her fortresses. She will become a lair of jackals,An enclosure for ostriches.
Desert creatures will meet up with howling animals,And the wild goat will call to its companion. Yes, there the nightjar will settle and find a place of rest.
There the arrow snake will make its nest and lay eggs,And it will hatch them and gather them in its shadow. Yes, there the kites will gather, each one with her mate.
Search in the book of Jehovah and read it out loud: Not one of them will be missing;None of them will be lacking a mate,For it is the mouth of Jehovah that has given the order,And it is his spirit that has gathered them together.
He is the One who has cast the lot for them,And his own hand has measured out their assigned place. They will possess it for all time;They will reside in it throughout all generations.
In the year that King Uz·ziʹah died, I saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne, and the skirts of his robe filled the temple.
Seraphs were standing above him; each had six wings. Each covered his face with two and covered his feet with two, and each of them would fly about with two.
And one called to the other: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah of armies. The whole earth is filled with his glory.”
And the pivots of the thresholds quivered at the sound of the shouting, and the house was filled with smoke.
Then I said: “Woe to me! I am as good as dead,For I am a man of unclean lips,And I live among a people of unclean lips;For my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of armies himself!”
At that, one of the seraphs flew to me, and in his hand was a glowing coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar.
He touched my mouth and said: “Look! This has touched your lips. Your guilt is removed,And your sin is atoned for.”
Then I heard the voice of Jehovah saying: “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” And I said: “Here I am! Send me!”
And he replied, “Go, and say to this people: ‘You will hear again and again,But you will not understand;You will see again and again,But you will not get any knowledge.’
Make the heart of this people unreceptive,Make their ears unresponsive,And paste their eyes together,So that they may not see with their eyesAnd hear with their ears,So that their heart may not understandAnd they may not turn back and be healed.”
At this I said: “How long, O Jehovah?” Then he said: “Until the cities crash in ruins without an inhabitantAnd the houses are without peopleAnd the land is ruined and desolate;
Until Jehovah removes men far awayAnd the deserted condition of the land becomes very extensive.
“But there will still be a tenth in it, and it will again be burned, like a big tree and like an oak, which after they are cut down leave a stump; a holy seed will be its stump.”
“I have let myself be searched for by those who did not ask for me;I have let myself be found by those who did not look for me. I said, ‘Here I am, here I am!’ to a nation that was not calling on my name.
I have spread out my hands all day long to a stubborn people,To those walking in the way that is not good,Following their own thoughts;
A people who constantly offend me to my face,Sacrificing in gardens and making sacrificial smoke on bricks.
They sit among graves,And they pass the night in hidden places,Eating the flesh of pigs,And the broth of foul things is in their vessels.
They say, ‘Keep to yourself; do not approach me,For I am holier than you.’ These are a smoke in my nostrils, a fire burning all day long.
Look! It is written before me;I will not stand still,But I will repay them,I will repay them in full measure
For their errors and for the errors of their forefathers as well,” says Jehovah. “Because they have made sacrificial smoke on the mountainsAnd have reproached me on the hills,I will first measure out their wages in full.”
This is what Jehovah says: “Just as when new wine is found in a cluster of grapesAnd someone says, ‘Do not destroy it, for there is some good in it,’ So I will do for the sake of my servants;I will not destroy them all.
I will bring out of Jacob an offspringAnd out of Judah the one to inherit my mountains;My chosen ones will take possession of it,And my servants will reside there.
Sharʹon will become a pasture for sheepAnd the Valley of Aʹchor a resting-place for cattle,For my people who search for me.
But you are among those forsaking Jehovah,Those forgetting my holy mountain,Those setting a table for the god of Good Luck,And those filling up cups of mixed wine for the god of Destiny.
So I will destine you for the sword,And all of you will bow down to be slaughtered,Because I called, but you did not answer,I spoke, but you did not listen;You kept doing what was bad in my eyes,And you chose what displeased me.”
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! My servants will eat, but you will go hungry. Look! My servants will drink, but you will go thirsty. Look! My servants will rejoice, but you will suffer shame.
Look! My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart,But you will cry out because of the pain of heartAnd you will wail because of a broken spirit.
You will leave behind a name that my chosen ones will use as a curse,And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will put each of you to death,But his own servants he will call by another name;
So that anyone who seeks a blessing for himself in the earthWill be blessed by the God of truth,And anyone who swears an oath in the earthWill swear by the God of truth. For the former distresses will be forgotten;They will be concealed from my eyes.
For look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth;And the former things will not be called to mind,Nor will they come up into the heart.
So exult and be joyful forever in what I am creating. For look! I am creating Jerusalem a cause for joyAnd her people a cause for exultation.
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and exult in my people;No more will there be heard in her the sound of weeping or a cry of distress.”
“No more will there be an infant from that place who lives but a few days,Nor an old man who fails to live out his days. For anyone who dies at a hundred will be considered a mere boy,And the sinner will be cursed, even though he is a hundred years of age.
They will build houses and live in them,And they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.
They will not build for someone else to inhabit,Nor will they plant for others to eat. For the days of my people will be like the days of a tree,And the work of their hands my chosen ones will enjoy to the full.
They will not toil for nothing,Nor will they bear children for distress,Because they are the offspring made up of those blessed by Jehovah,And their descendants with them.
Even before they call out, I will answer;While they are yet speaking, I will hear.
The wolf and the lamb will feed together,The lion will eat straw just like the bull,And the serpent’s food will be dust. They will do no harm nor cause any ruin in all my holy mountain,” says Jehovah.
If only you had ripped the heavens apart and come down,So that the mountains would quake because of you,
As when a fire ignites the brushwood,And the fire makes the water boil,Then your name would be known to your adversaries,And the nations would tremble before you!
When you did awe-inspiring things that we dared not hope for,You came down, and the mountains quaked before you.
From of old no one has heard or given ear,Nor has any eye seen a God except you,Who acts in behalf of those who keep in expectation of him.
You have met up with those who joyfully do what is right,Those who remember you and follow your ways. Look! You became indignant, while we kept sinning,We did so for a long time. Should we now be saved?
And we have all become like someone unclean,And all our acts of righteousness are like a menstrual cloth. We will all wither like a leaf,And our errors will carry us off like the wind.
There is no one calling on your name,No one who stirs himself to take hold of you,For you have hidden your face from us,And you cause us to waste away because of our error.
But now, O Jehovah, you are our Father. We are the clay, and you are our Potter;We are all the work of your hand.
Do not become too indignant, O Jehovah,And do not remember our error forever. Look at us, please, for we are all your people.
Your holy cities have become a wilderness. Zion has become a wilderness,Jerusalem a wasteland.
Our house of holiness and glory,Where our forefathers praised you,Has been burned with fire,And all the things we cherished lie in ruins.
In view of this, will you still restrain yourself, O Jehovah? Will you remain silent and let us be afflicted so severely?
“Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God.
“Speak to the heart of Jerusalem,And proclaim to her that her compulsory service has been fulfilled,That her guilt has been paid off. From the hand of Jehovah she has received a full amount for all her sins.”
A voice of one calling out in the wilderness: “Clear up the way of Jehovah! Make a straight highway through the desert for our God.
Let every valley be raised up,And every mountain and hill be made low. The rough ground must become level,And the rugged ground a valley plain.
The glory of Jehovah will be revealed,And all flesh will see it together,For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken.”
Listen! Someone is saying: “Call out!” Another asks: “What should I call out?” “All flesh is green grass. All their loyal love is like the blossom of the field.
The green grass dries up,The blossom withers,Because the breath of Jehovah blows upon it. Surely the people are but green grass.
The green grass dries up,The blossom withers,But the word of our God endures forever.”
Go up onto a high mountain,You woman bringing good news for Zion. Raise your voice with power,You woman bringing good news for Jerusalem. Raise it, do not be afraid. Announce to the cities of Judah: “Here is your God.”
Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will come with power,And his arm will rule for him. Look! His reward is with him,And the wage he pays is before him.
Like a shepherd he will care for his flock. With his arm he will gather together the lambs,And in his bosom he will carry them. He will gently lead those nursing their young.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his handAnd taken the measurements of the heavens with a span of his hand? Who has gathered in a measure the dust of the earthOr weighed the mountains in the balancesAnd the hills in the scales?
Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah,And who can instruct him as his adviser?
With whom did he consult to gain understanding,Or who teaches him in the path of justice,Or teaches him knowledge,Or shows him the way of true understanding?
Look! The nations are like a drop from a bucket,And as the film of dust on the scales they are regarded. Look! He lifts up the islands like fine dust.
Even Lebʹa·non is not sufficient to keep a fire burning,And its wild animals are not sufficient for a burnt offering.
All the nations are as something nonexistent in front of him;He regards them as nothing, as an unreality.
To whom can you compare God? What likeness can you put next to him?
The craftsman casts an idol,The metalworker overlays it with gold,And he forges silver chains.
He chooses a tree for his contribution,A tree that will not rot. He searches for a skilled craftsmanTo prepare a carved image that will not topple over.
Do you not know? Have you not heard? Has it not been told to you from the beginning? Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth?
There is One who dwells above the circle of the earth,And its inhabitants are like grasshoppers. He is stretching out the heavens like a fine gauze,And he spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.
He reduces high officials to nothingAnd makes the judges of the earth an unreality.
They are hardly planted,They are hardly sown,Their stem has hardly taken root in the earth,And they are blown on and dry up,And the wind carries them away like stubble.
“To whom can you liken me to make me his equal?” says the Holy One.
“Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number;He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power,Not one of them is missing.
Why do you say, O Jacob, and why do you declare, O Israel,‘My way is hidden from Jehovah,And I receive no justice from God’?
Do you not know? Have you not heard? Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, is a God for all eternity. He never tires out or grows weary. His understanding is unsearchable.
He gives power to the tired oneAnd full might to those lacking strength.
Boys will tire out and grow weary,And young men will stumble and fall,
But those hoping in Jehovah will regain power. They will soar on wings like eagles. They will run and not grow weary;They will walk and not tire out.”
“Woe to Arʹi·el, Arʹi·el, the city where David encamped! Continue year after year;Let the cycle of festivals continue.
But I will bring distress on Arʹi·el,And there will be mourning and lamentation,And she will become to me like an altar hearth of God.
I will encamp on all sides against you,And I will besiege you with a palisadeAnd raise up siegeworks against you.
You will be brought low;From the ground you will speak,And what you say will be muffled by dust. Your voice will come from the groundLike the voice of a spirit medium,And your words will chirp from the dust.
The crowd of your enemies will be like fine powder,The crowd of the tyrants just like the blowing chaff. And it will happen in an instant, suddenly.
Jehovah of armies will give you his attentionWith thunder and earthquake and a great noise,With storm wind and tempest and the flames of a consuming fire.”
Then the crowd of all the nations waging war against Arʹi·el—All those waging war against her,The siege towers against her,And those bringing distress on her—Will become like a dream, a vision of the night.
Yes, it will be just as when someone hungry dreams that he is eating,But he wakes up hungry,And as when someone thirsty dreams that he is drinking,But he wakes up tired and thirsty. So it will happen with the crowd of all the nationsThat wage war against Mount Zion.
Be stunned and amazed;Blind yourselves and be blinded. They are drunk, but not with wine;They are staggering, but not from alcohol.
For Jehovah has poured a spirit of deep sleep on you;He has closed your eyes, the prophets,And he has covered your heads, the visionaries.
Every vision becomes for you like the words of a sealed book. When they give it to someone who can read, saying: “Read this out loud, please,” he will say: “I cannot, for it is sealed up.”
And when they give the book to someone who cannot read, saying: “Read this, please,” he will say: “I cannot read at all.”
Jehovah says: “This people approaches me with their mouthAnd they honor me with their lips,But their heart is far removed from me;And their fear of me is based on commands of men that they have been taught.
Therefore, I am the One who will again do wonderful things with this people,With wonder upon wonder;And the wisdom of their wise men will perish,And the understanding of their discreet men will be hidden.”
Woe to those who go to great lengths to conceal their plans from Jehovah. Their deeds are done in a dark place,While they say: “Who sees us? Who knows about us?”
How you twist things! Should the potter be regarded the same as the clay? Should what is made say about its maker: “He did not make me”? And does what is formed say about its former: “He shows no understanding”?
In just a short time, Lebʹa·non will be turned into an orchard,And the orchard will be regarded as a forest.
In that day the deaf will hear the words of the book,And out of the gloom and darkness the eyes of the blind will see.
The meek will rejoice greatly in Jehovah,And the poor among men will be joyful in the Holy One of Israel.
For the tyrant will be no more,The boaster will come to his finish,And all those keeping alert to do harm will be destroyed,
Those who with a false word make others guilty,Who lay traps for the defender in the city gate,And who with empty arguments deny justice to the righteous one.
So this is what Jehovah, who redeemed Abraham, says to the house of Jacob: “Jacob will no longer be ashamed,And no more will his face grow pale.
For when he sees his children,Who are the work of my hands, in his midst,They will sanctify my name;Yes, they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob,And they will stand in awe of the God of Israel.
Those who are wayward in spirit will acquire understanding,And those who complain will accept instruction.”
Jehovah said to me: “Take a large tablet and write on it with an ordinary stylus, ‘Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz.’
And let me have it confirmed in writing by faithful witnesses, U·riʹah the priest and Zekariah the son of Je·ber·e·chiʹah.”
Then I had relations with the prophetess, and she became pregnant and in time gave birth to a son. Jehovah then said to me: “Name him Maʹher-shalʹal-hash-baz,
for before the boy knows how to call out, ‘My father!’ and ‘My mother!’ the resources of Damascus and the spoil of Sa·marʹi·a will be carried away before the king of As·syrʹi·a.”
Jehovah spoke to me again:
“Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of the Shi·loʹahAnd they rejoice over Reʹzin and the son of Rem·a·liʹah,
Therefore look! Jehovah will bring against themThe mighty and vast waters of the River,The king of As·syrʹi·a and all his glory. He will come up over all his streambedsAnd overflow all his banks
And sweep through Judah. He will flood and pass through, reaching to the neck;His outspread wings will fill the breadth of your land,O Im·manʹu·el!”
Cause harm, you peoples, but you will be shattered to pieces. Listen, all you from distant parts of the earth! Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces! Prepare for battle, but you will be shattered to pieces!
Devise a plan, but it will be thwarted! Say what you like, but it will not succeed,For God is with us!
With his strong hand on me, this is what Jehovah said to me to warn me away from following the course of this people:
“You should not call a conspiracy what this people calls a conspiracy! Do not fear what they fear;Do not tremble at it.
Jehovah of armies—he is the One you should regard as holy,He is the One you should fear,And he is the One who should cause you to tremble.”
He will become as a sanctuary,But as a stone to strike againstAnd as a rock to stumble overTo both houses of Israel,As a trap and a snareTo the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Many of them will stumble and fall and be broken;They will be ensnared and caught.
Wrap up the written confirmation;Seal up the law among my disciples!
I will keep in expectation of Jehovah, who is hiding his face from the house of Jacob, and I will hope in him.
Look! I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are as signs and as miracles in Israel from Jehovah of armies, who resides on Mount Zion.
And if they say to you: “Inquire of the spirit mediums or of the fortune-tellers who chirp and mutter,” is it not of their God that a people should inquire? Should they inquire of the dead in behalf of the living?
Instead, they should inquire of the law and of the written confirmation! When they do not speak according to this word, they have no light.
And each one will pass through the land afflicted and hungry; and because he is hungry and indignant, he will curse his king and his God as he looks upward.
Then he will look to the earth and see only distress and darkness, obscurity and hard times, gloom and no brightness.
When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all these words from Jehovah their God, every single word that Jehovah their God had sent him to tell them,
Az·a·riʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, and all the presumptuous men said to Jeremiah: “What you are saying is a lie! Jehovah our God has not sent you to say, ‘Do not go to Egypt to reside there.’
But Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah is inciting you against us to hand us over to the Chal·deʹans, to put us to death or to take us into exile in Babylon.”
So Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs and all the people disobeyed the voice of Jehovah to remain in the land of Judah.
Instead, Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs took with them all the remnant of Judah who had returned to reside in the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been dispersed.
They took the men, the women, the children, the daughters of the king, and everyone whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had left with Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, as well as Jeremiah the prophet and Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah.
And they went into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah, and they went as far as Tahʹpan·hes.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahʹpan·hes, saying:
“Take in your hand large stones, and hide them in the mortar in the brick terrace at the entrance of the house of Pharʹaoh in Tahʹpan·hes, with the Jewish men looking on.
Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am sending for Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will place his throne right above these stones that I have hidden, and he will extend his royal tent over them.
And he will come in and strike the land of Egypt. Whoever is meant for deadly plague will be for deadly plague, and whoever is meant for captivity will be for captivity, and whoever is meant for the sword will be for the sword.
And I will set the houses of the gods of Egypt on fire, and he will burn them and lead them captive. He will wrap the land of Egypt around himself just as a shepherd wraps himself in his garment, and he will depart from there in peace.
And he will break to pieces the pillars of Beth-sheʹmesh in the land of Egypt, and he will burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.”’”
Then all the army chiefs, and Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah, Jez·a·niʹah the son of Ho·shaiʹah, and all the people, from the least to the greatest, approached
and said to Jeremiah the prophet: “Hear, please, our request for favor, and pray in our behalf to Jehovah your God, in behalf of all this remnant, for just a few of many are left, as you can see.
May Jehovah your God tell us the way we should walk and what we should do.”
Jeremiah the prophet replied to them: “I have heard you, and I am praying to Jehovah your God according to your request; and every word that Jehovah answers you, I will tell you. I will not hold back a word from you.”
They replied to Jeremiah: “May Jehovah be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not do exactly as Jehovah your God instructs us through you.
Whether good or bad, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we are sending you, so that it may go well with us because we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.”
Now ten days later the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
So he called for Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and for all the army chiefs who were with him and for all the people, from the least to the greatest.
He said to them: “This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, to whom you sent me to present your request for favor before him:
‘If you will indeed remain in this land, then I will build you up and not tear you down, and I will plant you and not uproot you, for I will feel regret over the calamity I have caused you.
Do not be afraid because of the king of Babylon, whom you fear.’ “‘Do not be afraid because of him,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you, to save you and to rescue you out of his hand.
And I will show you mercy, and he will have mercy on you and return you to your own land.
“‘But if you say, “No, we will not remain in this land!” and you disobey the voice of Jehovah your God
by saying, “No, we will go instead to the land of Egypt, where we will not see war or hear the sound of the horn or hunger for bread; there is where we will live,”
then hear the word of Jehovah, O remnant of Judah. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “If you are absolutely determined to go to Egypt and you go there to reside,
then the very sword you are afraid of will catch up with you there in the land of Egypt, and the very famine you fear will follow after you to Egypt, and there you will die.
And all the men who are determined to go to Egypt to reside there will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. None of them will survive or escape the calamity that I will bring on them.”’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Just as my anger and my wrath were poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath will be poured out on you if you go to Egypt, and you will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach, and you will never again see this place.’
“Jehovah has spoken against you, O remnant of Judah. Do not go to Egypt. You should know for a certainty that I have warned you today
that your error will cost you your lives. For you sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, ‘Pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God, and tell us everything that Jehovah our God says, and we will do it.’
And I told you today, but you will not obey the voice of Jehovah your God or do anything he sent me to tell you.
Therefore, know for a certainty that by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence you will die in the place where you desire to go and reside.”
In the seventh month Ishʹma·el son of Neth·a·niʹah son of E·lishʹa·ma, who was of the royal line and one of the principal men of the king, came with ten other men to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah. As they were eating a meal together in Mizʹpah,
Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and the ten men who were with him rose up and struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan with the sword. So he put to death the one whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
Ishʹma·el also struck down all the Jews who were with Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah, as well as the Chal·deʹan soldiers who were there.
On the second day after Ged·a·liʹah had been put to death, before anyone knew about it,
there came 80 men from Sheʹchem, from Shiʹloh, and from Sa·marʹi·a. Their beards were shaved off, their garments were ripped apart, they had cut themselves, and they had grain offerings and frankincense in their hand to bring to the house of Jehovah.
So Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah went out from Mizʹpah to meet them, weeping as he walked along. When he encountered them, he said to them: “Come to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam.”
But when they came into the city, Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and his men slaughtered them and threw them into the cistern.
But there were ten men among them who said to Ishʹma·el: “Do not put us to death, for we have hidden stores of wheat, barley, oil, and honey in the field.” So he refrained from putting them to death along with their brothers.
Now Ishʹma·el threw all the carcasses of the men he had killed into a great cistern, the one that King Aʹsa had made because of King Baʹa·sha of Israel. This was the cistern that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah filled with the slain men.
Ishʹma·el took captive all the rest of the people in Mizʹpah, including the daughters of the king and all the people left in Mizʹpah, whom Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard had put in the custody of Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah took them captive and went off to cross over to the Amʹmon·ites.
When Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him heard about all the evil that Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had done,
they took all the men and went off to fight against Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and they found him by the great waters in Gibʹe·on.
All the people who were with Ishʹma·el rejoiced when they saw Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs with him.
Then all the people whom Ishʹma·el had taken captive from Mizʹpah turned around and went back with Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah.
But Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah and eight of his men escaped from Jo·haʹnan and went to the Amʹmon·ites.
Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were with him took with them the rest of the people from Mizʹpah, those whom they had rescued from Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah after he had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam. They brought the men, the soldiers, the women, the children, and the court officials back from Gibʹe·on.
So they went and stayed in the lodging place of Chimʹham next to Bethʹle·hem, intending to go on into Egypt
because of the Chal·deʹans. For they had become afraid of them, since Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah had struck down Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
“The sin of Judah is written down with an iron stylus. With a diamond point it is engraved on the tablet of their heartAnd on the horns of their altars,
While their sons remember their altars and their sacred polesBeside a luxuriant tree, on the high hills,
On the mountains in the open countryside. Your resources, all your treasures, I will give as plunder—Yes, your high places because of sin throughout your territories.
You will forfeit, of your own accord, your inheritance that I gave you. And I will make you serve your enemies in a land you do not know,For you have kindled my anger like a fire. It will burn for all time.”
This is what Jehovah says: “Cursed is the man who puts his trust in mere humans,Who relies on human power,And whose heart turns away from Jehovah.
He will become like a solitary tree in the desert. He will not see when good comes,But he will reside in parched places in the wilderness,In a salt land where no one can live.
Blessed is the man who puts his trust in Jehovah,Whose confidence is in Jehovah.
He will become like a tree planted by the waters,That sends out its roots to the stream. He will not notice when heat comes,But his leaves will always flourish. And in the year of drought he will not be anxious,Nor will he quit producing fruit.
The heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate. Who can know it?
I, Jehovah, am searching the heart,Examining the innermost thoughts,To give to each one according to his ways,According to the fruitage of his works.
Like a partridge that gathers what it has not laid,So is the one who acquires riches dishonestly. They will leave him in midlife,And in the end he will prove senseless.”
A glorious throne, exalted from the beginning,Is the place of our sanctuary.
O Jehovah, the hope of Israel,All those who abandon you will be put to shame. Those apostatizing from you will be written in the dust,Because they have abandoned Jehovah, the source of living water.
Heal me, O Jehovah, and I will be healed. Save me, and I will be saved,For you are the object of my praise.
Look! There are those saying to me: “Where is the word of Jehovah? Let it come, please!”
But as for me, I did not run away from following you as a shepherd,Nor did I long for the day of disaster. You well know everything my lips have spoken;It all took place before your face!
Do not be a cause of terror to me. You are my refuge in the day of calamity.
Let my persecutors be put to shame,But do not let me be put to shame. Let them be struck with terror,But do not let me be struck with terror. Bring the day of calamity on them,And crush them and destroy them completely.
This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and stand in the gate of the sons of the people by which the kings of Judah go in and out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.
You must say to them, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah, all people of Judah, and all inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter by these gates.
This is what Jehovah says: “Watch yourselves, and do not carry any load on the Sabbath day or bring it in through the gates of Jerusalem.
You must not bring any load out of your homes on the Sabbath day; and you must do no work at all. Keep the Sabbath day sacred, just as I commanded your forefathers.
But they did not listen or incline their ear, and they stubbornly refused to obey or to accept discipline.”’
“‘“However, if you strictly obey me,” declares Jehovah, “and you bring in no load through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, and you keep the Sabbath day sacred by not doing any work on it,
then kings and princes who sit on the throne of David will also enter in through the gates of this city, riding in the chariot and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city will be inhabited for all time.
And people will come from the cities of Judah, from the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the mountainous region, and from the Negʹeb, bringing whole burnt offerings, sacrifices, grain offerings, frankincense, and thanksgiving sacrifices into the house of Jehovah.
“‘“But if you do not obey me by keeping the Sabbath day sacred and by not carrying loads and bringing them through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, I will set her gates on fire, and it will certainly consume the fortified towers of Jerusalem and will not be extinguished.”’”
“At that time,” declares Jehovah, “I will become God to all the families of Israel, and they will become my people.”
This is what Jehovah says: “The people who survived the sword found favor in the wildernessWhen Israel was walking to his resting-place.”
From far away Jehovah appeared to me and said: “I have loved you with an everlasting love. That is why I have drawn you to me with loyal love.
Yet again I will rebuild you and you will be rebuilt. O virgin of Israel, you will again take up your tambourinesAnd go forth dancing joyfully.
You will again plant vineyards in the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a;The planters will plant and enjoy their fruit.
For the day will come when the watchmen in the mountains of Eʹphra·im will call out: ‘Rise up, let us go up to Zion, to Jehovah our God.’”
For this is what Jehovah says: “Cry out to Jacob with rejoicing. Shout for joy because you are over the nations. Proclaim it; offer praise and say,‘O Jehovah, save your people, the remnant of Israel.’
I am bringing them back from the land of the north. I will gather them together from the remotest parts of the earth. Among them will be the blind and the lame,The pregnant woman and the one giving birth, all together. As a great congregation they will return here.
They will come weeping. I will lead them as they beg for favor. I will guide them to streams of water,On a level path that will not make them stumble. For I am a Father to Israel, and Eʹphra·im is my firstborn.”
Hear the word of Jehovah, you nations,And proclaim it among the islands far away: “The One who scattered Israel will gather him together. He will watch over him as a shepherd does his flock.
For Jehovah will redeem JacobAnd rescue him out of the hand of the one stronger than he is.
They will come and shout joyfully on the height of ZionAnd become radiant over the goodness of Jehovah,Over the grain and the new wine and the oil,And over the young of the flock and the herd. They will become like a well-watered garden,And they will never languish again.”
“At that time the virgin will dance joyfully,Also the young men and the old men together. I will change their mourning into exultation. I will comfort them and give them joy instead of their grief.
I will satisfy the priests with plenty,And my people will be satisfied with my goodness,” declares Jehovah.
“This is what Jehovah says: ‘A voice is heard in Raʹmah, lamentation and bitter weeping: Rachel is weeping over her sons. She has refused to be comforted over her sons,Because they are no more.’”
This is what Jehovah says: “‘Hold back your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears,For there is a reward for your activity,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They will return from the land of the enemy.’
‘And there is a hope for your future,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Your sons will return to their own territory.’”
“I have surely heard Eʹphra·im’s moaning,‘You have corrected me, and I have been corrected,Like a calf that has not been trained. Bring me back, and I will readily turn back,For you are Jehovah my God.
For after my turning back I felt remorse;After I was made to understand I struck my thigh in grief. I was ashamed and humiliated,For I bore the reproach of my youth.’”
“Is Eʹphra·im not a precious son to me, a beloved child? For as often as I speak against him, I do remember him still. That is why my emotions are stirred for him. And I will surely have pity on him,” declares Jehovah.
“Set up road markers for yourself,And put up signposts. Pay attention to the highway, the way that you have to go. Return, O virgin of Israel, return to these cities of yours.
How long will you waver, O unfaithful daughter? For Jehovah has created something new in the earth: A woman will eagerly pursue a man.”
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “They will again say these words in the land of Judah and in its cities when I gather back their captives: ‘May Jehovah bless you, O righteous dwelling place, O holy mountain.’
And in it Judah and all its cities will dwell all together, farmers and those who lead the flocks.
For I will satisfy the weary one and fill each one who is languishing.”
At this I awoke and opened my eyes, and my sleep had been pleasurable to me.
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and with the seed of livestock.”
“And just as I watched over them to uproot, to pull down, to tear down, to destroy, and to do harm, so I will watch over them to build up and to plant,” declares Jehovah.
“In those days they will no longer say, ‘The fathers ate sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons were set on edge.’
But then each one will die for his own error. Any man eating sour grapes will have his own teeth set on edge.”
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, ‘my covenant that they broke, although I was their true master,’ declares Jehovah.”
“For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” declares Jehovah. “I will put my law within them, and in their heart I will write it. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.”
“And they will no longer teach each one his neighbor and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know Jehovah!’ for they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them,” declares Jehovah. “For I will forgive their error, and I will no longer remember their sin.”
This is what Jehovah says,Who gives the sun for light by day,The laws of the moon and the stars for light by night,Who stirs up the sea and makes its waves boisterous,Whose name is Jehovah of armies:
“‘If these regulations should ever fail,’ declares Jehovah,‘Only then would the offspring of Israel cease as a nation before me always.’”
This is what Jehovah says: “‘If the heavens above could be measured and the foundations of the earth below could be explored, only then could I reject all the offspring of Israel for all they have done,’ declares Jehovah.”
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when the city will be built to Jehovah from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel to the Corner Gate.
And the measuring line will go out straight ahead to the hill of Gaʹreb, and it will turn toward Goʹah.
And all the valley of the carcasses and of ashes and all the terraces as far as the Kidʹron Valley, clear to the corner of the Horse Gate toward the east, will be something holy to Jehovah. It will never again be uprooted or torn down.”
This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah when he wrote in a book these words dictated by Jeremiah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning you, Barʹuch,
‘You have said: “Woe to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain! I am weary from my groaning, and I have found no resting-place.”’
“You should say to him, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Look! What I have built up I am tearing down, and what I have planted I am uprooting—the entire land.
But you are seeking great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.”’ “‘For I am about to bring a calamity on all flesh,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and wherever you may go, I will grant you your life as a spoil.’”
This is what Jehovah said: “Go and buy an earthenware flask from a potter. Take some of the elders of the people and some of the elders of the priests,
and go out to the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, at the entrance of the Gate of the Potsherds. And there proclaim the words that I speak to you.
You will say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, you kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem. This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “‘“I am about to bring a calamity on this place, and the ears of anyone who hears about it will tingle.
It is because they abandoned me and made this place unrecognizable. In it they are sacrificing to other gods, whom they and their forefathers and the kings of Judah had not known, and they have filled this place with the blood of the innocent ones.
They built the high places of Baʹal in order to burn their sons in the fire as whole burnt offerings to Baʹal, something that I had not commanded or spoken of and that had never even come into my heart.”’
“‘“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when this place will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter.
I will thwart the plans of Judah and Jerusalem in this place, and I will make them fall by the sword before their enemies and by the hand of those seeking to take their life. And I will give their dead bodies as food to the birds of the heavens and to the beasts of the earth.
And I will make this city an object of horror and something to whistle at. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and whistle over all its plagues.
And I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and they will each eat the flesh of his fellow man, because of the siege and their desperation when they are hemmed in by their enemies and those seeking to take their life.”’
“Then break the flask before the eyes of the men who go with you,
and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “This is how I will break this people and this city, like someone who breaks a potter’s vessel so that it can never be repaired; and they will bury the dead in Toʹpheth until there is no more room to bury them.”’
“‘That is what I will do to this place,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and to its inhabitants, to make this city like Toʹpheth.
And the houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will become unclean like this place, Toʹpheth, yes, all the houses on whose roofs they offered sacrifices to all the army of the heavens and where they poured out drink offerings to other gods.’”
When Jeremiah returned from Toʹpheth where Jehovah sent him to prophesy, he stood in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and said to all the people:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am bringing on this city and on all its towns all the calamity that I have spoken against it, because they stubbornly refused to obey my words.’”
The word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the Maker of earth says, Jehovah who formed it and firmly established it; Jehovah is his name,
‘Call to me, and I will answer you and readily tell you great and incomprehensible things that you have not known.’”
“For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning the houses of this city and the houses of the kings of Judah that are pulled down because of the siege ramparts and the sword,
and concerning those who are coming to fight the Chal·deʹans, filling these places with the carcasses of those whom I struck down in my anger and in my wrath, those whose evil has caused me to hide my face from this city:
‘Here I am bringing recuperation and health to her, and I will heal them and reveal to them an abundance of peace and truth.
And I will bring back the captives of Judah and the captives of Israel, and I will build them up as I did at the start.
And I will purify them from all the guilt of their sins against me, and I will forgive all the guilt of their sins and their transgressions against me.
And she will become to me a name of exultation, a praise, and a beauty before all the nations of the earth who will hear of all the goodness that I bestow on them. And they will be in dread and will tremble because of all the goodness and peace that I will bestow on her.’”
“This is what Jehovah says: ‘In this place that you will say is a wasteland, without man or livestock, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are desolate, without man or inhabitant or livestock, there will again be heard
the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those saying: “Give thanks to Jehovah of armies, for Jehovah is good; his loyal love endures forever!”’ “‘They will bring thanksgiving offerings into the house of Jehovah, for I will bring back the captives of the land, as at the start,’ says Jehovah.”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘In this wasteland, without man or livestock, and in all its cities, there will again be pastures for the shepherds to rest their flocks.’
“‘In the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, in the cities of the south, in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, flocks will again pass under the hands of the one counting them,’ says Jehovah.”
“‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will fulfill the good promise that I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
In those days and at that time I will cause to sprout for David a righteous sprout, and he will execute justice and righteousness in the land.
In those days Judah will be saved and Jerusalem will reside in security. And this is what she will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.’”
“For this is what Jehovah says: ‘There will never fail to be a man from David’s line to sit on the throne of the house of Israel,
nor will the Levitical priests ever fail to have a man stand before me to offer whole burnt offerings, to burn grain offerings, and to offer sacrifices.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you could break my covenant regarding the day and my covenant regarding the night, to prevent day and night from coming at their proper time,
only then could my covenant with my servant David be broken, so that he should not have a son ruling as king on his throne, and so also my covenant with the Levitical priests, my ministers.
Just as the army of the heavens cannot be counted and the sand of the sea cannot be measured, so I will multiply the offspring of my servant David and the Levites who are ministering to me.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Have you not taken note of what this people is saying, ‘Jehovah will reject the two families that he chose’? And they are treating my own people with disrespect, and they no longer regard them as a nation.
“This is what Jehovah says: ‘Just as surely as I have established my covenant regarding the day and the night, the laws of heaven and earth,
so I will never reject the offspring of Jacob and of my servant David, so as not to take from his offspring rulers over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will gather back their captives and have pity on them.’”
Zed·e·kiʹah was 21 years old when he became king, and he reigned for 11 years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Ha·muʹtal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libʹnah.
He continued to do what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, according to all that Je·hoiʹa·kim had done.
It was because of Jehovah’s anger that these things took place in Jerusalem and in Judah, until he cast them out of his sight. And Zed·e·kiʹah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
In the ninth year of Zed·e·kiʹah’s reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came with all his army against Jerusalem. They camped against it and built a siege wall all around it.
And the city was under siege until the 11th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah.
In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, and there was no food for the people of the land.
Finally the city wall was broken through, and all the soldiers fled from the city by night through the gate between the double wall near the king’s garden, while the Chal·deʹans were surrounding the city; and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
But the Chal·deʹan army pursued the king, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho, and all his troops were scattered from his side.
Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, and he passed sentence on him.
And the king of Babylon slaughtered Zed·e·kiʹah’s sons before his eyes, and he also slaughtered all the princes of Judah there at Ribʹlah.
Then the king of Babylon blinded Zed·e·kiʹah’s eyes, bound him with copper fetters, brought him to Babylon, and kept him imprisoned until the day of his death.
In the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that is, in the 19th year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king of Babylon, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, who was an attendant of the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.
He burned down the house of Jehovah, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; he also burned down every large house.
And the walls surrounding Jerusalem were pulled down by the entire Chal·deʹan army that was with the chief of the guard.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile some of the lowly people and the rest of the people who were left in the city. He also took the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon as well as the rest of the master craftsmen.
But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left some of the poorest people of the land to serve as vinedressers and as compulsory laborers.
And the Chal·deʹans broke into pieces the copper pillars of the house of Jehovah and the carriages and the copper Sea that were in the house of Jehovah, and they carried all the copper away to Babylon.
They also took the cans, the shovels, the extinguishers, the bowls, the cups, and all the copper utensils used in the temple service.
The chief of the guard took the basins, the fire holders, the bowls, the cans, the lampstands, the cups, and the bowls that were of genuine gold and silver.
As for the two pillars, the Sea, the 12 copper bulls under the Sea, and the carriages that King Solʹo·mon had made for the house of Jehovah, the copper of all these articles was beyond weighing.
As for the pillars, each pillar was 18 cubits high, a measuring cord of 12 cubits could encircle it; its thickness was four fingerbreadths, and it was hollow.
And the capital on it was of copper; and the height of the one capital was five cubits; and the network and pomegranates all around on the capital were all made of copper. The second pillar was just like it, also the pomegranates.
There were 96 pomegranates on the sides; in all, there were 100 pomegranates around the network.
The chief of the guard also took Se·raiʹah the chief priest, Zeph·a·niʹah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers.
And he took from the city one court official who was the commissioner over the soldiers, seven close associates of the king who were found in the city, as well as the secretary of the chief of the army, the one mustering the people of the land, and 60 men of the common people of the land who were yet found in the city.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Ribʹlah.
The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath. Thus Judah went into exile from its land.
These are the people whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar took into exile: in the seventh year, 3,023 Jews.
In the 18th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, 832 people were taken from Jerusalem.
In the 23rd year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took Jews into exile, 745 people. In all, 4,600 people were taken into exile.
Then in the 37th year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah, in the 12th month, on the 25th day of the month, King Eʹvil-merʹo·dach of Babylon, in the year he became king, released King Je·hoiʹa·chin of Judah and brought him out of prison.
He spoke kindly with him and put his throne higher than the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
So Je·hoiʹa·chin took off his prison garments, and he regularly ate before him all the days of his life.
A regular allowance of food was given him from the king of Babylon, day after day, until the day of his death, all the days of his life.
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Hear the words of this covenant, you people! “Speak them to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
and say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Cursed is the man who does not obey the words of this covenant,
which I commanded your forefathers on the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron-smelting furnace, saying, ‘Obey my voice, and do all the things that I command you; and you will become my people and I will be your God,
so that I may fulfill the oath that I swore to your forefathers, to give them the land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day.’”’” And I answered: “Amen, O Jehovah.”
Jehovah then said to me: “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: ‘Hear the words of this covenant, and carry them out.
For I solemnly admonished your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt and to this day, admonishing them again and again: “Obey my voice.”
But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, each kept stubbornly following his own wicked heart. So I brought on them all the words of this covenant that I commanded them to do, but they refused to carry them out.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “There is a conspiracy among the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They have returned to the errors of their forefathers of old, who refused to obey my words. They too have followed other gods and have served them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant that I made with their forefathers.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am bringing on them a calamity that they will not be able to escape. When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them.
Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go to the gods to which they are making sacrifices and call for help, but these will by no means save them in the time of their calamity.
For your gods have become as many as your cities, O Judah, and you have set up as many altars to the shameful thing as there are streets in Jerusalem, altars to make sacrifices to Baʹal.’
“As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out in their behalf or offer a prayer for them, for I will not be listening when they call out to me because of their calamity.
What right does my beloved one have to be in my houseWhen so many have carried out evil schemes? With holy flesh will they avert the calamity when it comes upon you? Will you exult at that time?
Jehovah once called you a thriving olive tree,Beautiful with fine fruit. With a great roaring sound, he has set her on fire,And they have broken its branches.
“Jehovah of armies, your Planter, has declared that a calamity will come upon you because of the evil committed by the house of Israel and the house of Judah, who have offended me by making sacrifices to Baʹal.”
Jehovah informed me so that I would know;At that time you caused me to see what they were doing.
I was like a docile lamb being brought to the slaughter. I did not know that they were scheming against me: “Let us destroy the tree with its fruit,And let us cut him off from the land of the living,So that his name may be remembered no more.”
But Jehovah of armies judges with righteousness;He examines the innermost thoughts and the heart. Let me see your vengeance on them,For to you I have committed my legal case.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says against the men of Anʹa·thoth who are seeking to take your life and who say: “You must not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, or you will die by our hand”;
therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am going to call them to account. The young men will die by the sword, and their sons and their daughters will die by famine.
Not even a remnant will be left of them, because I will bring calamity on the men of Anʹa·thoth in the year of their being called to account.”
And King Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah began to reign in place of Co·niʹah the son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made him king in the land of Judah.
But he and his servants and the people of the land did not listen to the words of Jehovah spoken through Jeremiah the prophet.
And King Zed·e·kiʹah sent Je·huʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah and Zeph·a·niʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah the priest to Jeremiah the prophet, saying: “Please pray in our behalf to Jehovah our God.”
Jeremiah was moving about freely among the people, for they had not yet put him in prison.
Now Pharʹaoh’s army had set out from Egypt, and the Chal·deʹans who were besieging Jerusalem heard the report about them. So they withdrew from against Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘This is what you should say to the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: “Look! The army of Pharʹaoh that is coming to assist you will have to go back to their land, Egypt.
And the Chal·deʹans will come back and fight against this city and capture it and burn it with fire.”
This is what Jehovah says, “Do not deceive yourselves by saying, ‘The Chal·deʹans will surely go away from against us,’ because they will not go away.
Even if you were to strike down the entire army of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against you and only their wounded men were left, they would still rise up from their tents and burn this city with fire.”’”
When the Chal·deʹan army had withdrawn from against Jerusalem because of Pharʹaoh’s army,
Jeremiah set out from Jerusalem to the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there among his people.
But when he reached the Gate of Benjamin, the officer in charge of the guard, whose name was I·riʹjah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, seized Jeremiah the prophet and said: “You are deserting to the Chal·deʹans!”
But Jeremiah said: “It is not true! I am not deserting to the Chal·deʹans.” But he did not listen to him. So I·riʹjah arrested Jeremiah and brought him in to the princes.
The princes were furious with Jeremiah, and they beat him and imprisoned him in the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, which had been made into a prison.
Jeremiah was put into the dungeon, into the vaulted rooms, and he remained there many days.
Then King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for him, and the king secretly questioned him in his house. He asked, “Is there any word from Jehovah?” Jeremiah said, “There is!” and he continued, “You will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon!”
Jeremiah also said to King Zed·e·kiʹah: “How have I sinned against you and against your servants and against this people, so that you have put me into the prison?
Where, now, are your prophets who prophesied to you, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you and against this land’?
Now listen, please, O my lord the king. May you grant, please, my request for favor. Do not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than the secretary, or I will die there.”
So King Zed·e·kiʹah ordered that Jeremiah be put in custody in the Courtyard of the Guard, and he was given a round loaf of bread daily from the street of the bakers until all the bread in the city was gone. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came from Jehovah:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘Stand in the courtyard of the house of Jehovah and speak concerning all the people of the cities of Judah who are coming in to worship at the house of Jehovah. Tell them everything that I command you; do not take away a word.
Perhaps they will listen and each one will turn back from his evil way, and I will change my mind concerning the calamity that I intend to bring on them because of their evil deeds.
Say to them: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘If you will not listen to me by following my law that I have placed before you,
by listening to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I am sending to you again and again, whom you have not listened to,
then I will make this house like Shiʹloh, and I will make this city an object of cursing to all the nations of the earth.’”’”
And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
So when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him and said: “You will surely die.
Why have you prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, ‘This house will become like Shiʹloh, and this city will be devastated and left without an inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
When the princes of Judah heard these words, they came up from the house of the king to the house of Jehovah and sat down at the entrance of the new gate of Jehovah.
The priests and the prophets said to the princes and to all the people: “This man deserves the death penalty, because he has prophesied against this city just as you have heard with your own ears.”
Jeremiah then said to all the princes and to all the people: “It was Jehovah who sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard.
So now, reform your ways and your actions and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will change his mind concerning the calamity that he has spoken against you.
But as for me, I am in your hand. Do to me whatever seems good and right in your eyes.
Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and upon her inhabitants, for in truth Jehovah sent me to you to speak all these words in your hearing.”
Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and the prophets: “This man does not deserve the death penalty, for he spoke to us in the name of Jehovah our God.”
Furthermore, some of the elders of the land rose up and began saying to the entire congregation of the people:
“Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth was prophesying in the days of King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah, and he said to all the people of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Zion will be plowed up as a field,Jerusalem will become heaps of ruins,And the mountain of the House will become like high places in a forest.”’
“Did King Hez·e·kiʹah of Judah and all Judah then put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah and beg for Jehovah’s favor, so that Jehovah changed his mind concerning the calamity that he had spoken against them? So we are about to bring a great calamity on ourselves.
“And there was another man prophesying in the name of Jehovah, U·riʹjah son of She·maiʹah from Kirʹi·ath-jeʹa·rim, who prophesied against this city and against this land with words like those of Jeremiah.
King Je·hoiʹa·kim and all his mighty men and all the princes heard his words, and the king sought to put him to death. When U·riʹjah heard of it, he at once became afraid and fled to Egypt.
Then King Je·hoiʹa·kim sent El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor and other men with him to Egypt.
They brought U·riʹjah from Egypt and took him to King Je·hoiʹa·kim, who then struck him down with the sword and cast his dead body into the graveyard of the common people.”
But A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan supported Jeremiah, so that he was not handed over to the people to be put to death.
These are the words of Jeremiah the son of Hil·kiʹah, one of the priests in Anʹa·thoth in the land of Benjamin.
The word of Jehovah came to him in the days of Jo·siʹah the son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, in the 13th year of his reign.
It came also in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until the completion of the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, until Jerusalem went into exile in the fifth month.
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,And before you were born I sanctified you. I made you a prophet to the nations.”
But I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! I do not know how to speak, for I am just a boy.”
Jehovah then said to me: “Do not say, ‘I am just a boy.’ For you must go to all those to whom I send you,And you should say everything that I command you.
Do not be afraid because of their appearance,For ‘I am with you to save you,’ declares Jehovah.”
Then Jehovah stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me: “I have put my words in your mouth.
See, I have commissioned you this day to be over the nations and over the kingdoms, to uproot and to pull down, to destroy and to tear down, to build and to plant.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “I see the branch of an almond tree.”
Jehovah said to me: “You have seen correctly, for I am wide awake concerning my word to carry it out.”
The word of Jehovah came to me a second time, saying: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see a boiling pot, and its mouth is tilted away from the north.”
Then Jehovah said to me: “Out of the north the calamity will break looseAgainst all the inhabitants of the land.
For ‘I am summoning all the families of the kingdoms of the north,’ declares Jehovah,‘And they will come; each one will set up his throneAt the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem,Against her walls all aroundAnd against all the cities of Judah.
And I will declare my judgments against them over all their wickedness,Because they have abandoned me,And they are making sacrificial smoke to other godsAnd bowing down to the works of their own hands.’
But you should prepare for action,And you must stand up and tell them everything that I command you. Do not be terrified of them,So that I do not terrify you before them.
For today I have made you a fortified city,An iron pillar, and copper walls against all the land,Toward the kings of Judah and her princes,Toward her priests and the people of the land.
And they will certainly fight against you,But they will not prevail against you,For ‘I am with you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to save you.’”
Now in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Take a scroll and write in it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel and Judah and all the nations, from the first day I spoke to you in the days of Jo·siʹah to this day.
Perhaps when those of the house of Judah hear of all the calamity that I intend to bring on them, they may turn back from their evil ways, so that I may forgive their error and their sin.”
Jeremiah then called Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, and Jeremiah dictated all the words that Jehovah had spoken to him, and Barʹuch wrote them in the scroll.
Then Jeremiah commanded Barʹuch: “I am confined and unable to enter the house of Jehovah.
So you are the one who must go in and read aloud the words of Jehovah from the scroll that you wrote at my dictation. Read them in the hearing of the people at the house of Jehovah on the day of a fast; thus you will read them to all the people of Judah who come in from their cities.
Perhaps their request for favor will reach Jehovah, and they will turn back, each one from his evil ways, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has declared against this people.”
So Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah did all that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him; he read aloud from the scroll the words of Jehovah at the house of Jehovah.
Now in the fifth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came into Jerusalem from the cities of Judah proclaimed a fast before Jehovah.
Barʹuch then read aloud from the scroll the words of Jeremiah at the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan the copyist, in the upper courtyard, at the entrance of the new gate of the house of Jehovah, in the hearing of all the people.
When Mi·caiʹah the son of Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan heard all the words of Jehovah from the scroll,
he went down to the house of the king, to the secretary’s chamber. All the princes were sitting there: E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, De·laʹiah the son of She·maiʹah, El·naʹthan the son of Achʹbor, Gem·a·riʹah the son of Shaʹphan, Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Han·a·niʹah, and all the other princes.
Mi·caiʹah told them all the words that he had heard when Barʹuch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.
Then all the princes sent Je·huʹdi the son of Neth·a·niʹah the son of Shel·e·miʹah the son of Cushʹi to Barʹuch, saying: “Come and bring with you the scroll from which you read in the hearing of the people.” Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah took the scroll in his hand and went in to them.
They said to him: “Sit down, please, and read it aloud to us.” So Barʹuch read it to them.
Now as soon as they heard all the words, they looked at one another in dread, and they said to Barʹuch: “We must certainly tell the king all these words.”
And they asked Barʹuch: “Tell us, please, how you wrote all these words. Was it at his dictation?”
Barʹuch replied to them: “He dictated all these words to me, and I wrote them down with ink in this scroll.”
The princes said to Barʹuch: “Go and hide yourselves, you and Jeremiah, and do not let anyone know where you are.”
Then they went in to the king, to the courtyard, and deposited the scroll in the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary, and they told the king everything they had heard.
So the king sent Je·huʹdi out to get the scroll, and he brought it from the chamber of E·lishʹa·ma the secretary. Je·huʹdi began to read it in the hearing of the king and of all the princes standing by the king.
The king was sitting in the winter house, in the ninth month, with a fire burning in the brazier before him.
After Je·huʹdi had read three or four columns, the king would cut off that portion with the secretary’s knife and pitch it into the fire that was burning in the brazier, until the entire scroll ended up in the fire that was in the brazier.
And they felt no dread; neither the king nor all his servants who heard all these words ripped their garments apart.
Although El·naʹthan, De·laʹiah, and Gem·a·riʹah pleaded with the king not to burn the scroll, he did not listen to them.
Further, the king commanded Je·rahʹme·el the son of the king, Se·raiʹah the son of Azʹri·el, and Shel·e·miʹah the son of Abʹde·el to seize Barʹuch the secretary and Jeremiah the prophet, but Jehovah kept them concealed.
And the word of Jehovah again came to Jeremiah after the king had burned up the scroll containing the words that Barʹuch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, saying:
“Take another scroll and write on it all the same words that were on the first scroll, which King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah burned up.
And you should say against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have burned up this scroll and said, ‘Why have you written on it: “The king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land and empty it of man and beast”?’
Therefore this is what Jehovah says against King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, ‘He will have no one to sit on the throne of David, and his dead body will be left exposed to the heat by day and the frost by night.
I will call him and his descendants and his servants to account for their error, and I will bring on them and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem and on the men of Judah all the calamity that I have spoken against them, but they did not listen.’”’”
Jeremiah then took another scroll and gave it to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, the secretary, and at Jeremiah’s dictation he wrote on it all the words of the scroll that King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah had burned in the fire. And many more words like those were added.
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“Stand in the gate of the house of Jehovah and proclaim there this message, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, all you people of Judah who enter these gates to bow down to Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Reform your ways and your actions, and I will allow you to keep residing in this place.
Do not put your trust in deceptive words and say, ‘This is the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah!’
For if you truly reform your ways and actions; if you truly uphold justice between a man and his neighbor;
if you do not oppress foreign residents, orphans, and widows; if you do not shed innocent blood in this place; and if you do not follow other gods to your own harm;
then I will allow you to keep residing in this place, in the land I gave to your forefathers for all time.”’”
“But you are putting your trust in deceptive words—it will bring absolutely no benefit.
Can you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, make sacrifices to Baʹal, and follow after gods you had not known,
and then come and stand before me in this house that bears my name and say, ‘We will be saved,’ despite your doing all these detestable things?
Has this house that bears my name become a cave of robbers in your eyes? Here I have seen it for myself,” declares Jehovah.
“‘However, go now to my place in Shiʹloh, where I first caused my name to reside, and see what I did to it because of the badness of my people Israel.
But you kept doing all these things,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and even though I spoke to you again and again, you did not listen. I kept calling you, but you would not answer.
So I will do to the house that bears my name, in which you are trusting, and to this place that I gave to you and your forefathers, just as I did to Shiʹloh.
I will throw you out of my sight, just as I threw out all your brothers, all the descendants of Eʹphra·im.’
“As for you, do not pray in behalf of this people. Do not cry out or offer a prayer or plead with me in their behalf, for I will not listen to you.
Do you not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
The sons are gathering wood, the fathers are lighting the fire, and the wives are kneading dough in order to make sacrificial cakes to the Queen of Heaven, and they are pouring out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.
‘But am I the one they are hurting?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Is it not they themselves, to their own shame?’
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Look! My anger and my wrath will be poured out on this place, on man and beast, on the trees of the field and the fruitage of the ground; it will burn and will not be extinguished.’
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go ahead, add your whole burnt offerings to your other sacrifices, and eat the flesh yourselves.
For on the day I brought your forefathers out of the land of Egypt, I did not speak with them or command them concerning whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
But I did give them this command: “Obey my voice, and I will become your God, and you will become my people. You must walk in all the way that I command, so that it may go well with you.”’
But they did not listen or incline their ear; instead, they walked in their own schemes, stubbornly following their wicked heart, and they went backward, not forward,
from the day your forefathers came out of the land of Egypt until this day. So I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them each day, again and again.
But they refused to listen to me, and they did not incline their ear. Instead, they were stubborn, and they acted worse than their forefathers!
“You will speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to you; you will call to them, but they will not answer you.
And you will say to them, ‘This is the nation that did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God and refused to accept discipline. Faithfulness has perished and is not even mentioned among them.’
“Shear off your uncut hair and throw it away, and on the bare hills raise a dirge, for Jehovah has rejected and will abandon this generation that has infuriated him.
‘For the people of Judah have done what is bad in my eyes,’ declares Jehovah. ‘They have set up their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
They have built the high places of Toʹpheth, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, something that I had not commanded and that had never even come into my heart.’
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when it will no longer be called Toʹpheth or the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom but the Valley of the Slaughter. They will bury in Toʹpheth until there is no place left.
And the dead bodies of this people will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth, with no one to frighten them away.
I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, for the land will be reduced to ruins.’”
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, which was the first year of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon.
This is what Jeremiah the prophet spoke concerning all the people of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem:
“From the 13th year of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon, the king of Judah, to this day, these 23 years, the word of Jehovah has come to me, and I kept speaking to you again and again, but you would not listen.
And Jehovah sent all his servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, but you would not listen or incline your ear to hear.
They would say, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways and your evil deeds; then you will continue dwelling for a long time to come in the land that Jehovah long ago gave to you and to your forefathers.
Do not follow other gods and serve them and bow down to them, offending me with the work of your hands; otherwise I will bring calamity on you.’
“‘But you would not listen to me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Instead you offended me with the work of your hands, to your own calamity.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Because you would not obey my words,
I am sending for all the families of the north,” declares Jehovah, “sending for King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, my servant, and I will bring them against this land and against its inhabitants and against all these surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruction and make them an object of horror and something to whistle at and a perpetual ruin.
I will put an end to the sound of exultation and the sound of rejoicing from them, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the hand mill and the light of the lamp.
And all this land will be reduced to ruins and will become an object of horror, and these nations will have to serve the king of Babylon for 70 years.”’
“‘But when 70 years have been fulfilled, I will call to account the king of Babylon and that nation for their error,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will make the land of the Chal·deʹans a desolate wasteland for all time.
I will bring on that land all my words that I have spoken against it, all that is written in this book that Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
For many nations and great kings will make slaves of them, and I will repay them according to their deeds and the work of their own hands.’”
For this is what Jehovah the God of Israel said to me: “Take this cup of the wine of wrath out of my hand, and make all the nations to whom I send you drink it.
And they will drink and stagger and act like madmen because of the sword that I am sending among them.”
So I took the cup out of the hand of Jehovah and made all the nations to whom Jehovah sent me drink:
starting with Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, her kings and her princes, to make them a ruin, an object of horror, something to whistle at and a curse, as it is today;
then Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and his servants, his princes, and all his people,
and all their mixed populations; all the kings of the land of Uz; all the kings of the land of the Phi·lisʹtines, Ashʹke·lon, Gazʹa, Ekʹron, and those remaining of Ashʹdod;
Eʹdom, Moʹab, and the Amʹmon·ites;
all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of Siʹdon, and the kings of the island in the sea;
Deʹdan, Teʹma, Buz, and all those with hair clipped at the temples;
all the kings of the Arabians and all the kings of the mixed populations who reside in the wilderness;
all the kings of Zimʹri, all the kings of Eʹlam, and all the kings of the Medes;
and all the kings of the north near and far, one after the other, and all the other kingdoms of the earth that are on the surface of the ground; and the king of Sheʹshach will drink after them.
“And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Drink and get drunk and vomit and fall so that you cannot get up because of the sword that I am sending among you.”’
And if they refuse to take the cup out of your hand to drink, say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “You must drink it!
For look! if I am bringing calamity first on the city that bears my name, should you go unpunished?”’ “‘You will not go unpunished, for I am calling for a sword against all the inhabitants of the earth,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
“And you are to prophesy all these words to them and say to them,‘From on high Jehovah will roar,And from his holy dwelling he will make his voice heard. He will roar loudly against his abiding place. Shouting like those treading the winepress,He will sing triumphantly against all the inhabitants of the earth.’
‘A noise will resound to the ends of the earth,For Jehovah has a controversy with the nations. He will personally pass judgment on all humans. And he will put the wicked to the sword,’ declares Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah of armies says: ‘Look! A calamity is spreading from nation to nation,And a great tempest will be unleashed from the remotest parts of the earth.
“‘And those slain by Jehovah in that day will be from one end of the earth clear to the other end of the earth. They will not be mourned, nor will they be gathered up or buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.’
Wail, you shepherds, and cry out! Wallow about, you majestic ones of the flock,Because the time of your slaughter and your dispersion has come,And you will fall like a precious vessel!
The shepherds have no place to flee,And there is no escape for the majestic ones of the flock.
Listen! The outcry of the shepherdsAnd the wailing of the majestic ones of the flock,For Jehovah is devastating their pasture.
And the peaceful dwelling places have been made lifelessBecause of the burning anger of Jehovah.
He has left his lair just like a young lion,For their land has become an object of horrorBecause of the cruel swordAnd because of his burning anger.”
This is what Jehovah told me: “Go and buy a linen belt for yourself and put it around your waist, but do not dip it in water.”
So I bought the belt according to the word of Jehovah and put it around my waist.
And the word of Jehovah came to me a second time:
“Take the belt that you bought and are wearing and get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and hide it there in a cleft of the crag.”
So I went and hid it by the Eu·phraʹtes, just as Jehovah had commanded me.
But many days later Jehovah said to me: “Get up, go to the Eu·phraʹtes, and take from there the belt that I commanded you to hide there.”
So I went to the Eu·phraʹtes and dug up the belt and took it from the place where I had hidden it, and I saw that the belt had been ruined; it was completely useless.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘In the same way I will destroy the pride of Judah and the immense pride of Jerusalem.
These evil people who refuse to obey my words, who stubbornly follow their own heart, and who are following other gods, serving and bowing down to them, will become just like this belt that is completely useless.’
‘For just as a belt clings to the waist of a man, so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to become to me a people, a name, a praise, and something beautiful. But they did not obey.’
“And you must also give this message to them, ‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Every large jar should be filled with wine.”’ And they will reply to you, ‘Do we not already know that every large jar should be filled with wine?’
Then say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am filling with drunkenness all the inhabitants of this land, the kings sitting on the throne of David, the priests and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And I will smash them against each other, fathers and sons alike,” declares Jehovah. “I will not show compassion or feel any sorrow or have any mercy on them; nothing will stop me from bringing them to ruin.”’
Hear and pay attention. Do not be haughty, for Jehovah has spoken.
Give glory to Jehovah your GodBefore he brings darknessAnd before your feet stumble on the mountains at dusk. You will hope for the light,But he will bring deep shadow;He will turn it into thick gloom.
And if you refuse to listen,I will weep in secret because of your pride. I will shed many tears, and my eyes will stream with tears,Because the flock of Jehovah has been carried away captive.
Tell the king and the queen mother, ‘Sit in a lower place,For your beautiful crown will fall from your head.’
The cities of the south are shut, with no one to open them. All of Judah has been taken into exile, taken completely into exile.
Raise your eyes and see those coming from the north. Where is the flock you were given, your beautiful sheep?
What will you say when your punishment comesFrom your close friends whom you cultivated from the start? Will not birth pains seize you, like those of a woman giving birth?
And when you say in your heart, ‘Why have these things befallen me?’ It is because of your great error that your skirts have been stripped off And your heels have been treated violently.
Can a Cushʹite change his skin, or a leopard its spots? If so, then you can do good,You who are trained to do bad.
So I will scatter them like straw blown by the desert wind.
This is your lot, the portion that I have measured out to you,” declares Jehovah,“Because you have forgotten me and you trust in lies.
Therefore, I will lift up your skirts over your face,And your shame will be seen,
Your acts of adultery and your lustful neighing,Your obscene prostitution. On the hills, in the field,I have seen your disgusting behavior. Woe to you, O Jerusalem! How much longer will you remain unclean?”
This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am raising up a destructive windAgainst Babylon and the inhabitants of Leb-kaʹmai.
I will send winnowers to Babylon,And they will winnow her and make her land empty;They will come against her on all sides in the day of calamity.
Let the archer not bend his bow. And let no one stand up in his coat of mail. Show no compassion for her young men. Devote all her army to destruction.
And they will fall slain in the land of the Chal·deʹans,Pierced through in her streets.
For Israel and Judah are not widowed from their God, from Jehovah of armies. But their land is full of guilt from the standpoint of the Holy One of Israel.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon,And escape for your life. Do not perish because of her error. For it is the time for Jehovah’s vengeance. He is paying her back for what she has done.
Babylon has been a golden cup in the hand of Jehovah;She made all the earth drunk. From her wine the nations have drunk;That is why the nations have gone mad.
Suddenly Babylon has fallen and is broken. Wail over her! Get balsam for her pain; perhaps she may be healed.”
“We tried to heal Babylon, but she could not be healed. Leave her and let us go, each to his own land. For her judgment has reached to the heavens;It is as high as the clouds.
Jehovah has brought about justice for us. Come, let us recount in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.”
“Polish the arrows; take up the circular shields. Jehovah has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes,Because he intends to bring Babylon to ruin. For this is the vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance for his temple.
Lift up a signal against the walls of Babylon. Strengthen the guard, post the watchmen. Prepare those in ambush. For Jehovah has devised the strategy,And he will carry out what he has promised against the inhabitants of Babylon.”
“O woman who resides on many waters,With abundant treasures,Your end has come, the limit of your profit-making.
Jehovah of armies has sworn by himself,‘I will fill you with men, as numerous as locusts,And they will shout in triumph over you.’
He is the Maker of the earth by his power,The One who established the productive land by his wisdomAnd who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.
When he makes his voice heard,The waters in the heavens are in turmoil,And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain,And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.
Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge. Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image;For his metal image is a falsehood,And there is no spirit in them.
They are a delusion, a work of mockery. When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.
The Share of Jacob is not like these things,For he is the One who formed everything,Even the staff of his inheritance. Jehovah of armies is his name.”
“You are a war club for me, a weapon for battle,For with you I will smash nations. With you I will bring kingdoms to ruin.
With you I will smash the horse and its rider. With you I will smash the war chariot and its rider.
With you I will smash man and woman. With you I will smash old man and boy. With you I will smash young man and woman.
With you I will smash shepherd and his flock. With you I will smash farmer and his team of animals. With you I will smash governors and deputy rulers.
And I will repay Babylon and all the inhabitants of Chal·deʹaFor all the evil that they have committed in Zion before your eyes,” declares Jehovah.
“Here I am against you, O destructive mountain,” declares Jehovah,“You destroyer of the whole earth. I will stretch out my hand against you and roll you down from the cragsAnd make you a burned-out mountain.”
“People will not take from you a cornerstone or a foundation stone,Because you will become desolate forever,” declares Jehovah.
“Lift up a signal in the land. Blow a horn among the nations. Appoint the nations against her. Summon against her the kingdoms of Arʹa·rat, Minʹni, and Ashʹke·naz. Commission against her a recruiting officer. Make the horses come up like bristling locusts.
Appoint against her the nations,The kings of Meʹdi·a, its governors and all its deputy rulersAnd all the lands they rule over.
And the earth will quake and tremble,For the thoughts of Jehovah against Babylon will be carried outTo make the land of Babylon an object of horror, without an inhabitant.
The warriors of Babylon have quit fighting. They sit in their strongholds. Their strength has failed. They have become like women. Her homes have been set on fire. Her bars have been broken.
One courier runs to meet another courier,And one messenger to meet another messenger,To report to the king of Babylon that his city has been captured on every side,
That the fords have been seized,That the papyrus boats have been burned with fire,And that the soldiers are terrified.”
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor. It is the time to tread her down solid. Very soon the time of the harvest will come for her.”
“King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devoured me;He has thrown me into confusion. He has set me down as an empty vessel. He has swallowed me down like a big snake;He has filled his stomach with my fine things. He has rinsed me away.
‘May the violence done to me and to my person come upon Babylon!’ says the inhabitant of Zion. ‘And let my blood come upon the inhabitants of Chal·deʹa!’ says Jerusalem.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am pleading your legal case,And I will execute vengeance for you. I will dry up her sea and make her wells dry.
And Babylon will become piles of stones,A lair of jackals,An object of horror and something to whistle at,Without an inhabitant.
All together they will roar just like young lions. They will growl like lion cubs.”
“When they are inflamed, I will set out their banquet and make them drunk,In order that they may exult;Then they will sleep a lasting sleep,From which they will not wake up,” declares Jehovah.
“I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,Like rams along with the goats.”
“O how Sheʹshach has been captured,How the Praise of the whole earth has been seized! How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!
The sea has come up over Babylon. By the multitude of its waves she has been covered.
Her cities have become an object of horror, a waterless land and a desert. A land where no one will live and where no man will pass through.
I will turn my attention to Bel in Babylon,And I will take out of his mouth what he has swallowed. To him nations will stream no more,And the wall of Babylon will fall.
Get out of her midst, my people! Escape for your lives from the burning anger of Jehovah!
Do not be fainthearted or afraid about the report to be heard in the land. In one year the report will come,And the next year another report,Of violence in the land and of ruler against ruler.
Therefore look! the days are comingWhen I will turn my attention to the graven images of Babylon. All her land will be put to shame,And all her slain will fall in her midst.
The heavens and the earth and everything in themWill shout joyfully over Babylon,For the destroyers will come to her out of the north,” declares Jehovah.
“Not only did Babylon cause the slain of Israel to fallBut also at Babylon the slain ones of all the earth have fallen.
You who escape the sword, keep going, do not stand still! Remember Jehovah from far away,And may Jerusalem come up into your heart.”
“We have been put to shame, for we have heard taunts. Humiliation has covered our faces,For foreigners have come against the holy places of the house of Jehovah.”
“Therefore look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah,“When I will turn my attention to her graven images,And throughout all her land the wounded will groan.”
“Even if Babylon should ascend to the heavens,Even if she should fortify her towering strongholds,From me her destroyers will come,” declares Jehovah.
“Listen! There is an outcry from Babylon,The sound of great disaster from the land of the Chal·deʹans,
For Jehovah is destroying Babylon,He will silence her great voice,And their waves will roar like many waters. The sound of their voice will be heard.
For the destroyer will come upon Babylon;Her warriors will be captured,Their bows will be shattered,For Jehovah is a God of retribution. He will surely repay.
I will make her princes and her wise men drunk,Her governors and her deputy rulers and her warriors,And they will sleep a lasting sleep,From which they will not wake up,” declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
This is what Jehovah of armies says: “The wall of Babylon, though broad, will be completely demolished,And her gates, though high, will be set on fire. The peoples will toil for nothing;The nations will weary themselves just to feed the fire.”
This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet gave as a command to Se·raiʹah son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah when he went with King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign; Se·raiʹah was the quartermaster.
Jeremiah wrote in one book all the calamity that would come upon Babylon, all these words written against Babylon.
Furthermore, Jeremiah said to Se·raiʹah: “When you come to Babylon and see her, you must read aloud all these words.
Then say, ‘O Jehovah, you have said against this place that it will be destroyed and left without an inhabitant, man or beast, and that she will become desolate forever.’
And when you finish reading this book, tie a stone to it and throw it into the middle of the Eu·phraʹtes.
Then say, ‘This is how Babylon will sink down and never rise again because of the calamity that I am bringing on her; and they will grow weary.’” Down to this point are the words of Jeremiah.
Jeremiah received the word from Jehovah when King Zed·e·kiʹah sent to him Pashʹhur son of Mal·chiʹjah and Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, requesting:
“Please inquire of Jehovah in our behalf, because King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon is waging war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will perform one of his wonderful works in our behalf, so that he will withdraw from us.”
Jeremiah said to them: “This is what you should say to Zed·e·kiʹah,
‘This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: “Here I am turning around against you the weapons of war that are in your own hands, with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chal·deʹans who are outside the wall besieging you. And I will gather them into the middle of this city.
And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and a mighty arm, with anger and wrath and great indignation.
I will strike the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. By a great pestilence they will die.”’
“‘“And after that,” declares Jehovah, “I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his servants and the people of this city—those who survive the pestilence, the sword, and the famine—into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who are seeking to take their life. He will strike them down with the sword. He will not feel sorry for them, nor will he show compassion or have any mercy.”’
“And to this people you should say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am putting before you the way of life and the way of death.
Those who remain in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But whoever goes out and surrenders to the Chal·deʹans who are besieging you will keep living, and he will have his life as a spoil.”’
“‘“For I have set my face against this city for calamity and not for good,” declares Jehovah. “It will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.”
“‘To the household of the king of Judah: Hear the word of Jehovah.
O house of David, this is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice every morning,And rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder,So that my wrath does not blaze like a fireAnd burn with no one to extinguish itBecause of your evil deeds.”’
‘Here I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley,O rock of the level land,’ declares Jehovah. ‘As for you who say: “Who will come down against us? And who will invade our dwellings?”
I will hold an accounting against youAs your deeds deserve,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will set her forest ablaze,And it will consume all the things around her.’”
People ask: “If a man sends his wife away and she leaves him and becomes another man’s, should he return to her anymore?” Has that land not been utterly polluted? “You have committed prostitution with many companions,And should you now return to me?” declares Jehovah.
“Raise your eyes to the bare hills and see. Where have you not been raped? You sat along the roadways for them,Like a nomad in the wilderness. You keep polluting the landWith your prostitution and your wickedness.
So showers of rain are withheld,And there is no rain in the spring. You have the brazen look of a wife who commits prostitution;You refuse to feel shame.
But now you call out to me,‘My Father, you are the companion of my youth!
Should one stay resentful forever,Or always hold a grudge?’ This is what you say,But you keep doing all the evil you are capable of doing.”
In the days of King Jo·siʹah, Jehovah said to me: “‘Have you seen what unfaithful Israel has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and underneath every luxuriant tree to commit prostitution.
Even after she did all these things, I kept telling her to return to me, but she did not return; and Judah kept watching her treacherous sister.
When I saw that, I sent unfaithful Israel away with a full certificate of divorce because of her adultery. But her treacherous sister Judah did not become afraid; she too went out and committed prostitution.
She took her prostitution lightly, and she kept polluting the land and committing adultery with stones and with trees.
Despite all this, her treacherous sister Judah did not return to me with all her heart, only in pretense,’ declares Jehovah.”
Jehovah then said to me: “Unfaithful Israel has shown herself to be more righteous than treacherous Judah.
Go and proclaim these words to the north: “‘“Return, O renegade Israel,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not look down angrily on you, for I am loyal,” declares Jehovah.’ ‘“I will not stay resentful forever.
Only acknowledge your guilt, for you have rebelled against Jehovah your God. You continued scattering your favors to strangers under every luxuriant tree, but you would not obey my voice,” declares Jehovah.’”
“Return, you renegade sons,” declares Jehovah. “For I have become your true master; and I will take you, one from a city and two from a family, and I will bring you to Zion.
And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed you with knowledge and insight.
You will become many and will bear fruit in the land in those days,” declares Jehovah. “No more will they say, ‘The ark of the covenant of Jehovah!’ It will not come up into the heart, nor will they remember it or miss it, and it will not be made again.
At that time they will call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah; and all the nations will be brought together to the name of Jehovah at Jerusalem, and they will no longer stubbornly follow their own wicked heart.”
“In those days they will walk together, the house of Judah alongside the house of Israel, and together they will come from the land of the north into the land that I gave to your forefathers as an inheritance.
And I thought, ‘How I placed you among the sons and gave you the desirable land, the most beautiful inheritance among the nations!’ I also thought that you would call me, ‘My Father!’ and that you would not turn away from following me.
‘Truly as a wife treacherously leaves her husband, so also you, O house of Israel, have dealt treacherously with me,’ declares Jehovah.”
On the bare hills a sound is heard,The weeping and the pleading of the people of Israel,For they have distorted their way;They have forgotten Jehovah their God.
“Return, you renegade sons. I will heal your renegade condition.” “Here we are! We have come to you,For you, O Jehovah, are our God.
Truly the hills and the turmoil on the mountains are a delusion. Truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel.
But the shameful thing has consumed the toil of our forefathers since our youth,Their flocks and their herds,Their sons and their daughters.
Let us lie down in our shame,And let our disgrace cover us,For we have sinned against Jehovah our God,We and our fathers since our youth until this day,And we have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Write in a book all the words that I speak to you.
For “look! the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will gather the captives of my people, Israel and Judah,” says Jehovah, “and I will bring them back to the land that I gave to their forefathers, and they will possess it once again.”’”
These are the words that Jehovah spoke to Israel and Judah.
This is what Jehovah says: “We have heard the sounds of trembling;There is terror, and no peace.
Ask, please, whether a man can give birth. Why, then, do I see every strong man with his hands on his stomachLike a woman giving birth? Why has every face turned pale?
Alas! For that day is a terrible one. There is none like it,A time of distress for Jacob. But he will be saved out of it.”
“And in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will break the yoke from off your neck, and your straps I will tear in two; and no more will strangers make him their slave.
They will serve Jehovah their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them.”
“And you, my servant Jacob, do not be afraid,” declares Jehovah,“And do not be terrified, O Israel. For I will save you from far awayAnd your offspring from the land of their captivity. Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed,With no one to make them afraid.”
“For I am with you,” declares Jehovah, “to save you. But I will make an extermination among all the nations to which I scattered you;However, you I will not exterminate. I will discipline you to the proper degree,And I will by no means leave you unpunished.”
For this is what Jehovah says: “There is no cure for your breakdown. Your wound is incurable.
There is no one to plead your cause,No means of healing your ulcer. There is no cure for you.
All your passionate lovers have forgotten you. They no longer seek you out. For with the stroke of an enemy I have struck you,With the punishment of someone cruel,Because of your great guilt and your many sins.
Why do you cry out because of your breakdown? Your pain is incurable! Because of your great guilt and your many sinsI have done this to you.
Therefore all those devouring you will be devoured,And all your enemies will also go into captivity. Those pillaging you will be pillaged,And I will hand all those plundering you over to plundering.”
“But I will restore your health and heal your wounds,” declares Jehovah,“Though they called you an outcast: ‘Zion, for whom no one searches.’”
This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am gathering the captives of the tents of Jacob,And I will have pity for his tabernacles. The city will be rebuilt on her mound,And the fortified tower will stand on its rightful site.
And from them will come thanksgiving and the sounds of laughter. I will multiply them, and they will not be few;I will make them numerous,And they will not be insignificant.
His sons will become as in the past,And before me his assembly will be firmly established. I will deal with all his oppressors.
His majestic one will be one of his own,And from his midst his ruler will emerge. I will cause him to come near, and he will approach me.” “For otherwise, who would dare to approach me?” declares Jehovah.
“And you will become my people, and I will be your God.”
Look! A windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury,A sweeping tempest that whirls down on the head of the wicked.
The burning anger of Jehovah will not turn backUntil he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart. In the final part of the days you will understand this.
O that my head were waters,My eyes a fountain of tears! Then I would weep day and nightFor the slain ones of my people.
O that I had a traveler’s lodging place in the wilderness! Then I would leave my people and go away from them,For they are all adulterers,A band of treacherous people.
They bend their tongue like a bow;Falsehood, not faithfulness, prevails in the land. “They advance from evil to evil,And they pay no attention to me,” declares Jehovah.
“Everyone, be on guard against your neighbor,And do not trust even your brother. For every brother is a betrayer,And every neighbor is a slanderer.
Each one cheats his neighbor,And no one speaks truth. They have taught their tongue to speak falsehood. They wear themselves out doing what is wrong.
You are living in the midst of deception. In their deception they refused to know me,” declares Jehovah.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says: “I will smelt them and test them,For what else can I do with the daughter of my people?
Their tongue is a deadly arrow that speaks deception. With his mouth a person speaks of peace to his neighbor,But inside he lays an ambush.”
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?
I will weep and lament over the mountainsAnd take up a dirge over the pastures of the wilderness,For they have been burned up so that no man passes through,And the sound of livestock is not heard. The birds of heaven and the beasts have fled; they are gone.
I will make Jerusalem piles of stones, the lair of jackals,And I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.
Who is wise enough to understand this? To whom has the mouth of Jehovah spoken, that he may declare it? Why has the land perished? Why is it scorched like the wilderness,So that no one is passing through?”
Jehovah replied: “Because of their rejecting my law that I set before them, and because they have not followed it and obeyed my voice.
Instead, they stubbornly followed their own hearts, and they followed the Baʹal images, as their fathers had taught them to do.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am making this people eat wormwood, and I will make them drink poisoned water.
I will scatter them among the nations that they and their fathers have not known, and I will send a sword after them until I will have exterminated them.’
This is what Jehovah of armies says,‘Behave with understanding. Summon the women who sing dirges,And send for the skilled women to come,
So that they may hurry and raise a lamentation for us,So that our eyes may stream with tearsAnd our eyelids trickle with water.
For the sound of lamentation has been heard from Zion: “How we have been devastated! How great our shame is! For we have left the land, and they have thrown down our homes.”
You women, hear the word of Jehovah. May your ear receive the word of his mouth. Teach your daughters this lamentation,And teach one another this dirge.
For death has come up through our windows;It has entered our fortified towersTo take away the children from the streetsAnd the young men from the public squares.’
Say, ‘This is what Jehovah declares: “The dead bodies of people will fall like manure on the surface of the field,Like a row of newly cut grain after the reaper,With no one to gather them up.”’”
This is what Jehovah says: “Let not the wise man boast about his wisdom;Let not the mighty man boast about his mightiness;And let not the rich man boast about his riches.”
“But let the one boasting boast about this: That he has insight and knowledge of me,That I am Jehovah, the One showing loyal love, justice, and righteousness in the earth,For in these things I take delight,” declares Jehovah.
“Look! Days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “and I will hold an accounting with everyone circumcised and yet uncircumcised,
with Egypt and Judah and Eʹdom and the Amʹmon·ites and Moʹab and with all of those with hair clipped at the temples who are dwelling in the wilderness; for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.”
Now Sheph·a·tiʹah the son of Matʹtan, Ged·a·liʹah the son of Pashʹhur, Juʹcal the son of Shel·e·miʹah, and Pashʹhur the son of Mal·chiʹjah heard the words that Jeremiah was speaking to all the people, saying:
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘The one who remains in this city will die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence. But the one who surrenders to the Chal·deʹans will keep living and will have his life as a spoil and live.’
This is what Jehovah says, ‘This city will surely be handed over to the army of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it.’”
The princes said to the king: “Please have this man put to death, for this is how he is weakening the morale of the soldiers who are left in this city, as well as that of all the people, by speaking such words to them. For this man seeks, not the peace of this people, but their calamity.”
King Zed·e·kiʹah replied: “Look! He is in your hands, for the king cannot do anything to stop you.”
So they took Jeremiah and threw him into the cistern of Mal·chiʹjah the son of the king, which was in the Courtyard of the Guard. They let Jeremiah down by ropes. Now there was no water in the cistern, only mud, and Jeremiah began to sink down into the mud.
Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, a eunuch in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah into the cistern. Now the king was sitting in the Gate of Benjamin,
so Eʹbed-melʹech went out of the king’s house and spoke to the king, saying:
“O my lord the king, what these men have done to Jeremiah the prophet is evil! They have thrown him into the cistern, and he will die there because of the famine, for there is no bread left in the city.”
Then the king commanded Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an: “Take 30 men with you from here, and pull Jeremiah the prophet up out of the cistern before he dies.”
So Eʹbed-melʹech took the men with him and went into the king’s house to a place beneath the treasury, and they took from there some worn-out rags and worn-out pieces of cloth and let them down by ropes to Jeremiah in the cistern.
Then Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an said to Jeremiah: “Please put the rags and the pieces of cloth between your armpits and the ropes.” Jeremiah did so,
and they drew Jeremiah out with the ropes and pulled him up out of the cistern. And Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard.
King Zed·e·kiʹah sent for Jeremiah the prophet to come to him at the third entrance, which is in the house of Jehovah, and the king said to Jeremiah: “I have something to ask of you. Do not hide anything from me.”
Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “If I tell you, you will certainly put me to death. And if I give you advice, you will not listen to me.”
So King Zed·e·kiʹah secretly swore to Jeremiah, saying: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who has given us this life, I will not put you to death, and I will not hand you over to these men who are seeking to take your life.”
Jeremiah then said to Zed·e·kiʹah: “This is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘If you surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, your life will be spared, and this city will not be burned with fire, and you and your household will be spared.
But if you will not surrender to the princes of the king of Babylon, this city will be handed over to the Chal·deʹans, and they will burn it with fire, and you will not escape out of their hand.’”
Then King Zed·e·kiʹah said to Jeremiah: “I am afraid of the Jews who have deserted to the Chal·deʹans, for if I am handed over to them, they may deal cruelly with me.”
But Jeremiah said: “You will not be handed over to them. Obey, please, the voice of Jehovah in what I am telling you, and it will go well with you, and you will continue to live.
But if you refuse to surrender, this is what Jehovah has revealed to me:
Look! All the women remaining in the house of the king of Judah are being brought out to the princes of the king of Babylon, and they are saying,‘The men whom you trusted have deceived you and overcome you. They have caused your foot to sink into the mud. Now they have turned away in retreat.’
And all your wives and your sons they are bringing out to the Chal·deʹans, and you will not escape out of their hand, but you will be seized by the king of Babylon, and because of you this city will be burned with fire.”
Zed·e·kiʹah then said to Jeremiah: “Do not let anyone know about these things, so that you do not die.
And if the princes hear that I have spoken with you and they come and say to you, ‘Tell us, please, what you said to the king. Do not hide anything from us, and we will not put you to death. What did the king say to you?’
you must answer them, ‘I was making a request of the king, that he not send me back to the house of Je·honʹa·than to die there.’”
In time all the princes came in to Jeremiah and questioned him. He told them everything that the king had commanded him to say. So they said no more to him, for no one had heard the conversation.
Until the day that Jerusalem was captured, Jeremiah remained in the Courtyard of the Guard; he was still there when Jerusalem was captured.
The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chal·deʹans, through Jeremiah the prophet:
“Declare it among the nations and proclaim it. Raise a signal and proclaim it. Do not hide anything! Say, ‘Babylon has been captured. Bel has been put to shame. Merʹo·dach has become terrified. Her images have been put to shame. Her disgusting idols have become terrified.’
For a nation has come against her from the north. It makes her land an object of horror;No one is dwelling in her. Both man and beast have taken flight;They have gone away.”
“In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah, “the people of Israel and the people of Judah will come together. They will weep as they walk, and together they will seek Jehovah their God.
They will ask the way to Zion, with their faces turned in that direction, saying, ‘Come and let us join ourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that will not be forgotten.’
My people have become a flock of lost sheep. Their own shepherds caused them to stray. They led them away onto the mountains, roaming from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place.
All those finding them have devoured them, and their enemies have said, ‘We are not guilty, because they sinned against Jehovah, against the dwelling place of righteousness and the hope of their forefathers, Jehovah.’”
“Flee out of the midst of Babylon,Go out of the land of the Chal·deʹans,And be like the leading animals before the flock.
For here I am raising up and bringing against BabylonAn assembly of great nations from the land of the north. They will come against her in battle formation;From there she will be captured. Their arrows are like those of a warriorCausing bereavement of children;They do not come back without results.
Chal·deʹa will become a spoil. All those taking spoil from her will be fully satisfied,” declares Jehovah.
“For you kept rejoicing, you kept exultingWhen pillaging my own inheritance. For you kept pawing like a heifer in the grass,And you kept neighing like stallions.
Your mother has been put to shame. She who gave birth to you has been disappointed. Look! She is the least of the nations,A waterless wilderness and a desert.
Because of the indignation of Jehovah she will not be inhabited;She will become utterly desolate. Anyone passing by Babylon will stare in horrorAnd whistle because of all her plagues.
Come against Babylon in battle formation on every side,All you who are bending the bow. Shoot at her, spare no arrow,For it is against Jehovah that she has sinned.
Shout a war cry against her on every side. She has surrendered. Her pillars have fallen, her walls are torn down,For it is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take your vengeance on her. Do to her just as she has done.
Cut off the sower from BabylonAnd the one handling the sickle in harvesttime. Because of the cruel sword, each will return to his own people,Each one will flee to his own land.
“The people of Israel are scattered sheep. Lions have dispersed them. First the king of As·syrʹi·a devoured them; then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gnawed on their bones.
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I will deal with the king of Babylon and with his land in the same way that I dealt with the king of As·syrʹi·a.
And I will bring Israel back to his pasture, and he will graze on Carʹmel and on Baʹshan, and on the mountains of Eʹphra·im and of Gilʹe·ad he will be satisfied.’”
“In those days and at that time,” declares Jehovah,“Israel’s guilt will be searched for,But there will be none,And the sins of Judah will not be found,For I will forgive those whom I let remain.”
“Go up against the land of Mer·a·thaʹim and against the inhabitants of Peʹkod. Let them be massacred and completely destroyed,” declares Jehovah. “Do all that I have commanded you.
There is the sound of war in the land,A great catastrophe.
How the forge hammer of all the earth has been cut down and broken! How Babylon has become an object of horror among the nations!
I have laid a snare for you, and you have been caught, O Babylon,And you did not know it. You were found and captured,For it was Jehovah whom you opposed.
Jehovah has opened his storehouse,And he brings out the weapons of his indignation. For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a workIn the land of the Chal·deʹans.
Come against her from distant places. Open up her granaries. Pile her up like heaps of grain. Destroy her completely. May she have no one left.
Massacre all her young bulls;Let them go down to the slaughter. Woe to them, for their day has come,Their time of reckoning!
There is the sound of those fleeing,Those escaping from the land of Babylon,To declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God,The vengeance for his temple.
Summon archers against Babylon,All who are bending the bow. Camp all around her; let no one escape. Repay her according to her activity. Do to her just as she has done. For she has acted arrogantly against Jehovah,Against the Holy One of Israel.
So her young men will fall in her public squares,And all her soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah.
“Look! I am against you, O defiant one,” declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,“For your day must come, the time that I will call you to account.
You, O defiant one, will stumble and fall,With no one to raise you up. And I will set your cities on fire,And it will consume everything around you.”
This is what Jehovah of armies says: “The people of Israel and Judah are oppressed,And all those taking them captive have held onto them. They have refused to let them go.
But their Repurchaser is strong. Jehovah of armies is his name. He will surely plead their legal case,In order to give rest to the landAnd to bring agitation to the inhabitants of Babylon.”
“There is a sword against the Chal·deʹans,” declares Jehovah,“Against the inhabitants of Babylon and against her princes and against her wise ones.
There is a sword against the empty talkers, and they will act foolishly. There is a sword against her warriors, and they will become terrified.
There is a sword against their horses and their war chariots,And against all the mixed populations in her midst,And they will become like women. There is a sword against her treasures, and they will be plundered.
There is a devastation on her waters, and they will be dried up. For it is a land of graven images,And because of their frightful visions they keep acting with madness.
Therefore, the desert creatures will dwell with the howling animals,And in her the ostriches will dwell. She will never again be inhabited,Nor will she be a place of residence throughout all generations.”
“Just as with God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” declares Jehovah, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
Look! A people is coming in from the north;A great nation and grand kings will be raised upFrom the remotest parts of the earth.
Bow and javelin they wield. They are cruel and will show no mercy. Their sound is like the roaring sea,As they ride on their horses. Like one man, they line up in battle formation against you, O daughter of Babylon.
The king of Babylon has heard the report about them,And his hands drop down. Anguish seizes him,Pain like that of a woman giving birth.
“Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make them run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Babylon and what he has thought out against the land of the Chal·deʹans. Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away. He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.
At the sound of Babylon’s capture, the earth will quake,And an outcry will be heard among the nations.”
Then Jehovah showed me two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon had carried into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, along with the princes of Judah, the craftsmen, and the metalworkers; he took them from Jerusalem to Babylon.
One basket had very good figs, like early figs, but the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they could not be eaten.
Jehovah then asked me: “What do you see, Jeremiah?” So I said: “Figs; the good figs are very good, but the bad ones are very bad, so bad that they cannot be eaten.”
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Like these good figs, so I will regard in a good way the exiles of Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the Chal·deʹans.
I will keep my eye on them for their good, and I will cause them to return to this land. I will build them up, and I will not tear down; I will plant them, and I will not uproot.
And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. They will become my people, and I will become their God, for they will return to me with all their heart.
“‘But concerning the bad figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten, this is what Jehovah says: “So I will regard King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, his princes, the remnant of Jerusalem who are left in this land, and those who are dwelling in the land of Egypt.
I will make them an object of horror and calamity to all the kingdoms of the earth, a reproach, a proverbial saying, a cause for ridicule, and a curse in all the places to which I disperse them.
And I will send against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until they have perished from the land that I gave to them and to their forefathers.”’”
This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Phi·lisʹtines, before Pharʹaoh struck down Gazʹa.
This is what Jehovah says: “Look! Waters are coming from the north. They will become a flooding torrent. And they will flood the land and everything in it,The city and those inhabiting it. The men will cry out,And everyone dwelling in the land will wail.
At the sound of the pounding hooves of his stallions,At the rattling of his war chariotsAnd the rumbling of his wheels,Fathers will not even turn around for their sons,For their hands fall limp,
Because the day that is coming will destroy all the Phi·lisʹtines;It will cut off from Tyre and Siʹdon every remaining ally. For Jehovah will destroy the Phi·lisʹtines,Who are the remaining ones from the island of Caphʹtor.
Baldness will come to Gazʹa. Ashʹke·lon has been silenced. O remnant of their valley plain,How long will you keep making cuts on yourself?
Ah! The sword of Jehovah! How long will you not be quiet? Go back into your sheath. Take your rest and be silent.
How can it be quietWhen Jehovah has given it a command? Against Ashʹke·lon and the seacoast,There is where he has assigned it.”
In the beginning of the reign of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
“This is what Jehovah has told me, ‘Make for yourself straps and yoke bars, and put them on your neck.
Then send them to the king of Eʹdom, the king of Moʹab, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, the king of Tyre, and the king of Siʹdon by the hand of the messengers who have come to Jerusalem to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah.
Give them this command for their masters: “‘“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says; this is what you should say to your masters,
‘It is I who made the earth, mankind, and the beasts that are on the surface of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm; and I have given it to whomever I please.
And now I have given all these lands into the hand of my servant King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon; even the wild beasts of the field I have given him to serve him.
All the nations will serve him and his son and his grandson until the time for his own land comes, when many nations and great kings will make him their slave.’
“‘“‘If any nation or kingdom refuses to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and refuses to put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, I will punish that nation with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence,’ declares Jehovah, ‘until I have finished them off by his hand.’
“‘“‘Therefore, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, your dreamers, your magicians, and your sorcerers, who are saying to you: “You will not serve the king of Babylon.”
For they are prophesying lies to you, so that you will be taken far away from your land and I will disperse you and you will perish.
“‘“‘But the nation that brings its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, I will allow to remain on its land,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to cultivate it and dwell in it.’”’”
Also to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah I spoke in the same way, saying: “Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him and his people, and you will keep living.
Why should you and your people die by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, as Jehovah has said about the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are saying to you, ‘You will not serve the king of Babylon,’ because they are prophesying lies to you.
“‘For I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah, ‘but they are prophesying lies in my name, with the result that I will disperse you and you will perish, you and the prophets who are prophesying to you.’”
And to the priests and to all this people I said: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Do not listen to the words of your prophets who are prophesying to you: “Look! The utensils of the house of Jehovah will be brought back from Babylon very soon!” for they are prophesying lies to you.
Do not listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon and you will keep living. Why should this city become a ruin?
But if they are prophets and if the word of Jehovah is with them, please let them beg Jehovah of armies that the remaining utensils in the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem may not be taken away to Babylon.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says concerning the pillars, the Sea, the carriages, and the remaining utensils that are left in this city,
which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon did not take when he took into exile Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, together with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;
yes, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning the utensils that are left at the house of Jehovah, in the house of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem:
‘“To Babylon they will be brought, and there they will remain until the day I turn my attention to them,” declares Jehovah. “Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.”’”
The word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I well remember the devotion of your youth,The love you showed when you were engaged to marry,How you followed me in the wilderness,In a land not sown with seed.
Israel was holy to Jehovah, the firstfruits of his harvest.”’ ‘Anyone devouring him would become guilty. Disaster would come upon them,’ declares Jehovah.”
Hear the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob,And all you families of the house of Israel.
This is what Jehovah says: “What fault did your forefathers find in me,So that they strayed so far from me,And they walked after worthless idols and became worthless themselves?
They did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah,The One who brought us out of the land of Egypt,Who led us through the wilderness,Through a land of deserts and pits,Through a land of drought and of deep shadow,Through a land where no man travelsAnd where no humans dwell?’
I then brought you to a land of orchards,To eat its fruitage and its good things. But you came in and defiled my land;You made my inheritance something detestable.
The priests did not ask, ‘Where is Jehovah?’ Those handling the Law did not know me,The shepherds rebelled against me,The prophets prophesied by Baʹal,And they followed those who could bring no benefit.
‘So I will contend further with you,’ declares Jehovah,‘And I will contend with the sons of your sons.’
‘But cross over to the coastlands of the Kitʹtim and see. Yes, send to Keʹdar and consider carefully;See whether anything like this has happened.
Has a nation ever changed its gods for those that are not gods? But my own people have exchanged my glory for what is useless.
Stare in amazement at this, you heavens;Shudder in absolute horror,’ declares Jehovah,
‘Because my people have done two bad things: They have abandoned me, the source of living water,And dug for themselves cisterns,Broken cisterns, that cannot hold water.’
‘Is Israel a servant or a slave born in the household? Then why has he been given over to plunder?
Against him young lions roar;They have raised their voice. They made his land an object of horror. His cities have been set on fire, so that there is no inhabitant.
The people of Noph and Tahʹpan·es feed on the crown of your head.
Have you not brought this on yourselfBy abandoning Jehovah your GodWhile he was leading you in the way?
Now why do you wish for the way to EgyptTo drink the waters of Shiʹhor? Why do you wish for the way to As·syrʹi·aTo drink the waters of the River?
Your wickedness should correct you,And your own unfaithfulness should reprove you. Know and realize how bad and bitter it isTo abandon Jehovah your God;You have shown no fear of me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies.
‘For long ago I smashed your yokeAnd tore off your shackles. But you said: “I am not going to serve,” For on every high hill and under every luxuriant treeYou were lying sprawled out, prostituting yourself.
I planted you as a choice red vine, all of it pure seed;So how have you turned into the degenerate shoots of a foreign vine before me?’
‘Though you should wash with soda and use much lye,Your guilt would still be a stain before me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
How can you say, ‘I have not defiled myself. I have not followed the Baʹals’? Look at your way in the valley. Consider what you have done. You are like a swift, young she-camel,Aimlessly running back and forth in her ways,
A wild donkey accustomed to the wilderness,Sniffing the wind in her lust. Who can restrain her when she is in heat? None of those looking for her will need to weary themselves. In her season they will find her.
Keep your feet from going bareAnd your throat from thirst. But you said, ‘It is hopeless! No! I have fallen in love with strangers,And I will follow them.’
Like the shame of a thief when he is caught,So the house of Israel has been put to shame,They, their kings and their princes,Their priests and their prophets.
They say to a tree, ‘You are my father,’ And to a stone, ‘You gave birth to me.’ But to me they turn their back and not their face. And in the time of their calamity they will say,‘Rise up and save us!’
Now where are your gods that you made for yourself? Let them rise up if they can save you in your time of calamity,For your gods have become as numerous as your cities, O Judah.
‘Why do you keep contending against me? Why have all of you rebelled against me?’ declares Jehovah.
I have struck your sons in vain. They would accept no discipline;Your own sword devoured your prophets,Like a marauding lion.
O generation, consider for yourselves the word of Jehovah. Have I become like a wilderness to IsraelOr a land of oppressive darkness? Why have these, my people, said, ‘We roam freely. We will come to you no more’?
Can a virgin forget her ornaments,A bride her breastbands? And yet my own people have forgotten me for countless days.
How skillfully, O woman, you set your course to seek love! You have trained yourself in the ways of wickedness.
Even your skirts are stained with the blood of the innocent poor ones,Though I did not find them in the act of breaking in;It is on all your skirts.
But you say, ‘I am innocent. Surely his anger has turned back from me.’ Now I am bringing judgment against youBecause you say, ‘I have not sinned.’
Why do you treat so lightly your unstable course? You will become ashamed of Egypt too,Just as you became ashamed of As·syrʹi·a.
For this reason also you will go out with your hands on your head,For Jehovah has rejected those in whom you put confidence;They will not bring you success.”
The word that came to Jeremiah for all the Jews living in the land of Egypt, those living in Migʹdol, Tahʹpan·hes, Noph, and the land of Pathʹros, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘You have seen all the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem and on all the cities of Judah, and today they are in ruins, without an inhabitant.
It is because of the evil things that they did to offend me by going and making sacrifices and serving other gods whom they had not known, neither you nor your forefathers.
I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying: “Please do not do this detestable thing that I hate.”
But they did not listen or incline their ear to turn back from their evil by not making sacrifices to other gods.
So my wrath and my anger were poured out and burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they became a ruin and a wasteland, as they are today.’
“And now this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Why are you causing a great calamity to yourselves, so that every man and woman, child and infant, will perish from Judah, leaving you without a remnant?
Why should you offend me with the works of your hands by sacrificing to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have gone to reside? You will perish and become an object of cursing and a reproach among all the nations of the earth.
Have you forgotten the wicked deeds of your forefathers and the wicked deeds of the kings of Judah and the wicked deeds of their wives, as well as your own wicked deeds and the wicked deeds of your wives, that were done in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
Down to this day they have not humbled themselves, they have shown no fear, nor have they walked in my law and my statutes that I set before you and your forefathers.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here I am determined to bring calamity on you, to destroy all Judah.
And I will take the remnant of Judah who were determined to go to the land of Egypt to reside there, and they will all perish in the land of Egypt. They will fall by the sword and perish by the famine; from the least to the greatest, they will die by the sword and by famine. And they will become a curse, an object of horror, a malediction, and a reproach.
I will punish those dwelling in the land of Egypt just as I punished Jerusalem, with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence.
And the remnant of Judah who have gone to reside in the land of Egypt will not escape or survive to return to the land of Judah. They will long to return and dwell there, but they will not return, except for a few escapees.’”
All the men who knew that their wives had been making sacrifices to other gods and all the wives who were standing there, who formed a large group, and all the people who were living in the land of Egypt, in Pathʹros, answered Jeremiah:
“We will not listen to the word that you have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah.
Instead, we will surely carry out every word that our mouths have spoken, to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her, just as we, our forefathers, our kings, and our princes did in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem when we were satisfied with bread and were well-off, when we saw no calamity at all.
From the time we quit making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked everything and have perished by the sword and by the famine.”
The women added: “And when we were making sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, was it without the consent of our husbands that we made sacrificial cakes shaped in her image and we poured out drink offerings to her?”
Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men and their wives and to all the people who were speaking to him:
“The sacrifices that you, your forefathers, your kings, your princes, and the people of the land made in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem—Jehovah remembered them and they came up into his heart!
Finally Jehovah could no longer put up with your evil practices and the detestable things you had done, and your land became a devastated place, an object of horror and cursing, without an inhabitant, as it is today.
It is because you have made these sacrifices and because you have sinned against Jehovah by not obeying the voice of Jehovah and following his law, his statutes, and his reminders that this calamity has come upon you, as is the case today.”
Jeremiah continued to say to all the people and to all the women: “Hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are in the land of Egypt.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘What you and your wives have spoken with your mouths, you have fulfilled with your hands, for you said: “We will surely carry out our vows to make sacrifices to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her.” You women will surely carry out your vows and perform your vows.’
“Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, all you of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt: ‘“Here I swear by my own great name,” says Jehovah, “that my name will no longer be called on in an oath by any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt who says, ‘As surely as the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is alive!’
Now I am watching over them to bring calamity and not something good; all the men of Judah in the land of Egypt will perish by the sword and by the famine, until they cease to exist.
Only a few will escape the sword and return from the land of Egypt to the land of Judah. Then all the remnant of Judah who came to the land of Egypt to reside there will know whose word has come true, mine or theirs!”’”
“‘And this is the sign for you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that I will punish you in this place, so that you will know that my words promising calamity against you will surely come true.
This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am giving Pharʹaoh Hophʹra, the king of Egypt, into the hand of his enemies and of those seeking to take his life, just as I gave King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, who was his enemy and who sought to take his life.”’”
Hear the word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O house of Israel.
This is what Jehovah says: “Do not learn the way of the nations,And do not be terrified by the signs of the heavensBecause the nations are terrified by them.
For the customs of the peoples are a delusion. It is just a tree of the forest that is cut down,Worked by the hands of the craftsman with his tool.
They adorn it with silver and goldAnd fasten it with hammer and nails so that it will not fall over.
Like a scarecrow in a cucumber field, they cannot speak;They have to be carried, for they cannot walk. Do not fear them, for they can do no harm,Nor can they do any good.”
No one is like you, O Jehovah. You are great, and your name is great and mighty.
Who should not fear you, O King of the nations, for it is fitting;Because among all the wise ones of the nations and among all their kingdoms,There is no one at all like you.
They are all unreasoning and stupid. Instruction from a tree is an utter delusion.
Silver plates are imported from Tarʹshish and gold from Uʹphaz,The work of a craftsman, of the hands of a metalworker. Their clothing is blue thread and purple wool. They are all made by skilled workers.
But Jehovah is truly God. He is the living God and the eternal King. Because of his indignation the earth will quake,And no nations will endure his denunciation.
This is what you should say to them: “The gods that did not make the heavens and the earthWill perish from the earth and from under these heavens.”
He is the Maker of the earth by his power,The One who established the productive land by his wisdomAnd who stretched out the heavens by his understanding.
When he makes his voice heard,The waters in the heavens are in turmoil,And he causes clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightning for the rain,And he brings the wind out of his storehouses.
Every man acts unreasonably and without knowledge. Every metalworker will be put to shame because of the carved image;For his metal image is a falsehood,And there is no spirit in them.
They are a delusion, a work of mockery. When their day of reckoning comes, they will perish.
The Share of Jacob is not like these things,For he is the One who formed everything,And Israel is the staff of his inheritance. Jehovah of armies is his name.
Gather up your bundle from the ground,O woman dwelling under siege.
For this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am hurling the inhabitants out of the land at this time,And I will cause them to experience distress.”
Woe to me because of my breakdown! My wound is incurable. And I said: “Surely this is my sickness, and I must bear it.
My tent has been devastated, and my tent cords have all been torn apart. My sons have left me and are no more. There is no one left to stretch out my tent or raise up my tent cloths.
For the shepherds have behaved senselessly,And they have not inquired of Jehovah. That is why they have not acted with insight,And all their flocks have been scattered.”
Listen! A report! It is coming! A great pounding from the land of the north,To make the cities of Judah desolate, a lair of jackals.
I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.
Correct me, O Jehovah, with judgment,But not in your anger, that you may not reduce me to nothing.
Pour out your wrath on the nations who ignore you And on the families who do not call on your name. For they have devoured Jacob,Yes, they have devoured him to the point of extermination,And they have desolated his homeland.
abaxial
abdomen
abdomen
abdominal
abdominal cavity
abduction 
abductor muscle 
aberrant 
aberration 
abiotic factor 
ablation 
ablation 
ablation 
abnormal 
abnormal 
abomasum 
abomasum 
aborigines 
abort
abortion 
abortion 
abortion 
abrasion 
abrasion 
abrasion 
abrasive 
abrasive 
abridged life table 
abscess 
abscissa
abscission 
abscission 
abscission layer
absolute 
absolute convergence 
absolute deviation about the mean 
absolute deviation about the mean 
absolute error 
absolute extremum (point) 
absolute humidity
absolutely covergent series 
absolute maximum 
absolute minimum 
absolute rest 
absolute value 
absolute zero 
absolute zero 
absorb (to)
absorb 
absorbability 
absorbable 
absorbate 
absorbent 
absorber 
absorbing well 
absorptance 
absorpation 
absorption 
absorption 
absorption 
absorption 
absorption (soil) 
absorption spectrum 
absorption specturm 
absorptivity 
abstract (n) 
abstract (v)  
abstract  algebra 
abstract geometry
abstracting 
abstruaction 
abstraction 
abundant species 
abutment
abyssal plain 
abyssal plane 
abyssal rock
acacia 
accelerate 
accelerating electrode 
acceleration 
accelerator 
accelerator 
accelerometer 
acceptable quality level 
acceptance region 
acceptance sampling 
acceptance sampling plan 
acceptor (atom)  
acceptor 
access 
accessory 
accessory mineral 
acclimatization 
accomodation 
accomodation 
accomodation of the eye 
accordion 
accounting 
accretion 
accretion theory 
accumulation (cluster; limit)  point 
accumulator 
accumulator 
accumulator 
accuracy 
accuracy 
accurate 
acetabulum 
acetabulum 
acetolysis 
acetone 
acetylation 
acetylene 
achene 
Achilles tendon 
Achilles tendon 
achne  
achromatic 
acicular 
acid 
acid 
acid anhydride 
acid-base balance 
acidic 
acidic rock
acidic salt 
acidity 
acidolysis 
acidosis 
acid rain 
acid resistant 
acid salt 
acid soil 
acid value 
acini 
acoustics 
acquiclude 
acquired 
acquired characteristics 
acquired characters 
acquired immunity 
acreage 
acrominon 
actinometer 
actinomorphic 
actinomycetes 
action 
action 
activate 
activate 
activating group 
activation (process) 
activation 
activation analysis 
activation energy 
activation force 
active 
active (element) 
active 
active agent 
active circuit 
active component 
active component 
active current 
active earth pressure 
active immunity 
active immunity 
active power (real power) 
active transport 
active volcanno 
active wire
activity 
activity 
actual cohort 
actual mass (real mass) 
actuator 
acute 
acute 
acute angle 
acute toxicity 
acute triangle 
acyclic
acyl 
acylation 
adamantine 
adapt (to) 
adapt  
adaptation 
adaptation 
adaptation 
adaptation 
adaptation 
adapter 
adaptive radiation 
adaxial 
addendum 
addendum circle 
addened (term) 
adder 
addiction 
addition 
addition 
addition 
addition polymer 
addition reaction 
additive 
additive constant 
additive identity 
additive model 
additive process 
additive property 
additives 
address register 
adduction 
adductor muscle 
adenoid 
Aden series 
adhesion 
adhesion 
adhesion 
adhesion 
adhesion soil 
adhesive
adhesive 
adhesive label 
adhesive power 
adhesive tape 
adhesiveness 
adhesivity 
adiabatic (process) 
adiabatic 
adiabatic change 
adiabatic heating 
Adigrat sandstone 
adipose 
adipose tissue 
adipose tissue 
adjacent angles 
adjustable wrench 
adjusting screw 
adminstrative machinery 
admittance 
admittance 
admixture 
adobe 
adobe 
adolescent 
ADP (adenosin diphosphate) 
adrenal gland 
adrenal gland 
adrenalin 
adrenaline 
adreno cortico trophic hormone 
adsorbability 
adsorbable 
adsorbate 
adsorbent 
adsorption 
adsorption 
adult 
advanced 
advancing coast 
advection 
advection 
advection fog 
adventitious 
adventitious root 
adz 
aeolian 
aeolian deposit 
aeolian deposit 
aeration 
aeration 
aeration zone 
aerenchyman 
aerial 
aerial cableways 
aerial root 
aerial roots 
aerobe 
aerobic 
aerobic 
aerobic 
aerobic respiration 
aerobic respiration 
aerobic respiration 
aero drome 
aerodynamics 
aerography 
aeronautics 
aeronomy 
aerosol 
aerotropism 
afferent 
afferebt 
afferent neuron 
affinity 
affluent 
(af) forestation 
afforestation 
afforestation 
aflatoxin
afro-alpine
afro-alpine vegetation 
after birth 
after burning 
afterglow 
after shock 
after shock 
agar 
agar 
agate 
age 
age 
age-distribution 
age heaping 
agent 
agent 
age-ratio 
age-specific 
age-specific birthrate
age-specific death rate 
age-specific mortality 
age structure 
agglomerate 
agglomerate 
agglomeration 
agglutination 
agglutination 
aggglutination 
agglutinin 
agglutinogen 
aggradation 
aggradation 
aggradation 
aggregate 
aggregate soil 
aging
aging (of population) 
agonic line 
agrarian 
agricultural density 
agriculture 
agroechology 
agribinustm 
agronomy 
air 
air bladder (swim bladder) 
airborne 
air brake 
air brick 
air condensor 
air conditioning 
air-cooled engine 
air-core coil 
air current 
air drying 
air entraining agent 
air gap 
air glow 
air layering 
air mass 
air mass 
air mass 
air pollution 
air pollution 
air pressure 
air pump 
air sac  
air space (chamber) 
air stream 
air survey 
air terminal
air-tight 
alanine 
alba (white matter) 
albedo 
albedo 
albinisim 
albino 
albite 
albumen 
albumen 
alcohol 
alcohol 
alcoholic beverages 
alcove 
alfisol 
algae 
algal bloom 
algebra 
algebraic
algebraically closed field  
algebraically embeded 
algebraic closure
algebraic closure of field 
algebraic equation 
algebraic extention 
algebraic plane curve
algorithm 
algorithm 
alldade 
alidade 
alignment 
alimentary canal 
alimentary canal 
aliphatic 
alkali 
alkali metal 
alkalimetry 
alkaline 
alkaline 
alkaline rock 
alkaline soil 
alkalosis 
alkane 
alkene 
alkoxide 
alkyl 
alkyl group 
alkylating Agent 
alkylation 
alkyne 
allele (allelomorph) 
Allen key (hexagonal socket wrench)
allergen 
allergy 
alligator clip 
allocation of a sample 
allochtonous 
allotrimorphic 
allotrope 
allotropy 
allowable (adj.)  
alloy 
alloy 
alloy steel 
alluvial fan 
alluvial fan 
alluvial plain 
alluvial soil 
alluvium 
almagest 
almanac
alpha 
alpha decay 
alpha particle 
alpine meadows 
alpine period 
alpine system 
alping glacier 
alternate angles 
alternate exterior angles 
alternate host 
alternate interior angles 
alternate leaves 
alternating 
alternating current (AC)  
alternating current 
alternating series 
alternation 
alternation of generation 
alternative hypothesis 
alternator
altimeter 
altimerter 
altimeter 
altiplano 
altitude 
altitude (of a triangle etc.) 
altitude 
alto-cumulus 
alto-stratus
alum 
aluminium 
aluminium foil 
alumino silcate 
alveolus
alveolus 
alveolus 
amalgam 
amalgam 
amalgamation 
amber 
amber 
ambient
ambient temperature 
ambiguous 
amendment soil 
amenorrphoea 
amensal
amensalism
amine 
amino acid 
amino-acid 
ammeter 
ammonia soultion 
ammonite 
ammonolysis 
amnion 
amnion 
amniotic fluid 
amniotic fluid 
amniotic pouch (amniotic cavity) 
amoeba 
amoebiasis 
amorphous 
amorphous 
amorphous 
amount 
amount 
ampere 
Ampere's theorem 
amperometry 
amphiarthrosis 
amphibia 
amphibian 
amphibol 
amphibolite 
amphiprotic 
amphoteric 
amphoteric oxide 
amplification 
amplifier 
amplifier 
amplify
amplitude 
amplitude 
amplitude (of a funcation) 
amplitude (argument) of a complex number 
ampoule 
ampoule 
amp-turn 
ampulla 
ampulla 
amylase 
amylase 
anabatic wind 
anabolism 
anabolism 
anabolism 
anaemia (anemia) 
anaemia 
anaerobe 
anaerobe 
anaerobic 
anaerobic respiration 
anaerobic respiration 
anaesthesia 
anal fin 
analemma 
analgestic 
analog 
analog 
analog to digita convertor (ADC) 
analogous 
analogous organs 
analogy 
analyse 
analysis  
analysis 
analysis 
analysis of covariance 
analysis of covariance model 
analysis of variance 
analysis of variance model 
analytic 
analytic (function)  
analytic (geometry) 
analytic (analytical) 
analytical balance 
analytical balance 
analytic survey
analyze (to) 
analyzer 
anaphase 
anatomy 
anatomy 
ancestor 
anestor wor ship 
anchor 
anchor 
anchor bolt 
andalusite 
andesite 
and gate 
anadroecium 
androgen 
androgen 
anemia 
anemogram 
anemograph 
anemo-meter 
anemometer 
anemometer 
anerobic respiration 
aneroid barometer 
aneroid barometer 
angiosperm 
angiosperm 
angle 
angle 
angle  
angle dozer 
angle iron 
angle measurements system 
angle of depression 
angle of deviation 
angle of dip 
angle of elevation 
angle of friction 
angle of friction 
angle of friction 
angle of incidence 
angle of reflection 
angle of relief (relief angle) 
angle of repose 
angstrom 
angular unit 
angular 
angular acceleration 
angular diameter 
angular momentum 
angularity 
angular uncon formity 
angular velocity 
anhydride 
anhydrite 
anhydrous 
anidiuretic hormone 
animal (s) 
animal 
animal community 
animal fet 
animal kingdom 
animal kingdom 
animal pole 
animal products 
anion 
anion 
anion 
anise 
anisotropic 
anisotropic 
ankle 
ankylosis 
anneal 
annealed 
annealing 
annihilate 
annihilation 
annihilation 
annual 
annual 
annual march of temperature 
annual range of temperature 
annual ring 
annualar 
annular drainagge 
annualar eclipse 
annular eclipse 
annular stream 
annode 
anode 
anode 
anomaly 
anomaly 
anoreria 
anorexia 
anorthosite 
anoxica 
anphylactic 
Antolo limestone 
Antarctic circle 
antecedent drainage 
antecedent river 
antermeridian 
antemortem 
antenatal 
anteenna 
antenna 
antenna 
ante partum 
anterior 
anterior 
anterior 
anterior vena cava 
ante solarium 
anther 
antheridium 
anthesis 
anthophyta 
anthracite 
anthracite 
anthrax 
anthropogeography 
anthropology 
anthropometric measurements 
anthropometerist 
anthropometry 
anti 
antibiotic 
antibiotic 
antibody 
antibody 
antichlor 
anticlinal mountain 
anticline 
anticilinorium 
anticline 
anti-clock wish 
anticoagulant 
anticoagulant 
anticyclone 
antiderivative 
antiodote 
antiodote 
antiform 
antifreeze 
antigen 
antigen 
anti-gravity 
antihistamine 
anti-knock 
antilogarithm 
anti-matter 
anti-node
antioxidant 
anti-particle 
anti-peristalsis 
antiphyretic 
antipode
anti-proton 
anti-resonance 
antiseptic 
antiserum 
antitoxin 
antitoxin 
anti-trades 
antrax 
anuria
anuria 
anus
anvil 
anvil (incus) 
anxious 
aorta 
aorta 
apartment 
apatite 
ape-man
aperiodic 
aperiodic 
aperture (radiator) 
aperture 
apex 
apex 
apex 
aphelion 
aphelion 
aphelion 
aphotic zone 
apical bud 
apical dominance 
apical meristem 
apiculture 
aplite 
apnea
apogamy (apomixis) 
apogee
apogee
apomixis 
aponeurosis 
apophyses 
apparatus 
apparatus 
apparent
apparent magnitude
apparent movement 
apparent noon 
apparent solar time 
apparent solar time 
apparent velocity 
apparent weight 
appearance 
appendage 
appendectomy 
appendicities
appendicular skeleton 
appendix 
appetite 
appetizer 
apple 
applicator 
applied 
applied mathematics 
applied physics 
apprximate 
approximate 
approximation 
approximation 
appulse 
apricot 
apron 
apron 
aquaregia 
aquarium 
aquatic 
aquatic 
aquatic 
aquatic animals 
aquatic life 
aquatic plant 
aqueous 
aqueous humor 
aqueous humor 
aquiclude 
aquifer 
aquifer 
aquometry 
arabic numeral 
arable farming 
arable land 
arachidonic acid 
arachnids 
arachnoid 
arachnoid membrane 
aragonite 
aranchata 
arbor 
arboreal 
arboriculture 
arc
arc
arch 
arch 
archaeology 
archegonium 
archenteron 
archeozoie 
Archimedes's principle 
archipelago 
architect 
architectural ornament 
architecture 
architrave 
archway 
Arctic circle 
Arctic circle 
arcuate delta 
area 
area 
area 
area diagram 
areal strip mining 
area samplint 
areola 
aresenopyrite 
arete 
arginine
arid
arithmetic 
arithmetic progreasion 
arithmetic scale 
arkose 
arm 
armature
armature 
arm circumference 
arm Strip 
aromatic 
array 
array
arrow 
arrow-worm 
arroyo 
arterial road 
arteriole 
arterioles 
artery 
artery 
artesian basin 
artesian water 
artesian well 
arthritis 
arthropods
articular cartilage 
articular membrane 
articular process 
artificial 
artificial 
artificial 
artificial classification 
artificial feeding 
artificial incubation 
artificial insemination 
artifical insemination 
artificial parthenogenesis 
artificial radio activity 
artificial respiration 
artificial respiration 
artificial selection 
aryl 
asbestos 
asbestos 
asbestos 
asbestos 
asbestos 
asariasis 
ascaris 
ascending colon 
ascending colon 
ascending infection 
ascending order.
ascending tubule 
ascites 
ascomycetes 
ascorbic acid 
aseptic 
asexual 
asexual reproducation 
asexual reproducation 
ash 
ash 
ash 
ash cone 
ashlar 
ashlar facing 
aspartic acid 
aspect 
asphalt 
asphyxia 
aspirate 
aspiration 
aspiration 
aspiration 
aspirator 
aspirator bottle 
assay (to)  
assay 
assaying 
assemble (to) 
assemble 
assembler 
assembling 
assembly 
assembly 
assemble drawing 
assembly language 
assignable cause 
assimilation 
assimilation 
assimilation 
assimilation 
assimilation 
associated liquid 
association 
association 
association neuron 
asssoiciative 
associative property 
assume 
assumption 
astable 
astoroid 
asteoids 
asthenosphere 
asthenosphere 
asthma 
astigmatic 
astigmatisum 
astigmatism 
astral ray 
astoid 
astoid bnlet 
astology 
astrology 
astonaut 
astronautics 
astronomer 
astronomy 
astronomy 
astronomy 
astrophysics 
asymetric 
asymmetrical 
asymmetrical fold 
asymmetry 
asymmetry 
asymmetry 
asymptote 
asymptote 
asynchronous 
atlas 
atlas 
atlas 
atmometer 
atomosphere 
atmosphere 
atmosphere 
atmospheric density 
atmospheric pressure
atmospheric pressure 
atmospheric refraction of light 
atoll 
atoll 
atom 
atom 
atomic
atomic bomb 
atomic energy 
atomic energy 
atomic fission 
atomicity 
atomicity 
atomic nucleus 
atomicity 
atomic nucleus 
atomic number 
atomic number 
atomic orbital 
atomic radius 
atomic structure 
atomic volume 
atomic weight 
atomic wight 
aomization 
alom smasher 
ATP 
ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
atrium 
atrium 
atrium (auricle) 
atrophy 
attenuated 
attenuation 
attenuation coeffcient 
attenuation constant 
attenuator 
attic 
attraction 
attraction 
attribute 
attribute process control 
attribute testing 
attrition 
atypical 
audio frequency 
audiometr 
auditorium 
audiotry 
auditory 
auditory capsule 
auditory nerve 
auditory nerve 
auger mining 
augite 
aurora 
aurora australis 
aurora borealis (northern lights) 
ausculation 
ausculatation 
Australopithecus 
authigenci 
autochtonous 
autoclae 
autoclave 
autoclave 
autocorrelation 
autogamy 
auto-inhibition 
autoinnoculation 
automatic 
automatic 
automatic burette 
automatic nervous system 
automatic wrench 
auto metamorphism 
automorphism 
autonomic 
autopsy 
autosomal chromosome 
autotomy 
autotroph 
autotrophic 
autotrophism 
autumn 
autumnal equinox 
auxiliary view 
auxin 
auxins 
auxochrome 
avalanche 
avalanche 
avalanche 
average 
average life time 
aves (birds) 
avitaminosis 
Avogadro's number 
Avogadro's hypthesis 
awl (bradawi) 
awn 
awn 
awnless 
axe 
axel 
axial force 
axial plane 
axial rift 
axial skeleton 
axil 
axilla 
axiom (postulate) 
axis 
axis 
axis 
axis 
axis 
axis 
axis of a cone 
axis of a conic section 
axis of fold 
axis of rotation 
axis of rotation 
axis of symmetry 
axis vertabera 
axle 
axon 
axon 
azeotrope 
azimuth 
azimuth 
azimuthal projection 
azonal soil  
baboon 
bacillary dysentry 
bacillus 
bacillus 
back 
back bone 
back cross 
back electromotive force 
back extraction 
backfill 
back firing 
back flow 
background 
background 
background radiation 
back pressure 
back saw 
backset bed 
aback shore 
backshore 
back sight 
back stope (of cuesta) 
back swamp 
back titration 
back wash 
back yard gardening 
bacon 
bacteria 
bacteria 
bactericidal 
bactericide 
bacteriology 
bacteriology 
bacteriology 
bacteriology 
badlands 
badlands 
bahada 
bake
baking powder 
baking powder 
balance 
balance (to balance an equation) 
balance beam 
balance of forces 
balanced diet 
balanced diet 
balanced equation 
balanced ration 
balance pan 
balance pointer 
balance scale 
balancing 
balcony 
ball and socket 
ball and socket joint 
ball bearing 
ballistic 
ballistic galvanometer 
ballistic missile 
ballistic pendulum 
ballistics 
ball joint 
balloon 
balloon 
balloon sonde 
ball type stop valve 
balmer lines 
balmer series 
baluster 
banana 
banana juice 
band 
band 
band-pass 
band-pass filter 
band saw 
band spectrum 
band width 
band width 
bandage 
banded 
banded iron formation 
banding 
bank (of a river) 
bank (v) 
bank caving 
bank caving 
bank-full stage (of stream) 
banking of curve 
bar 
bar 
bar (elongated piece of metal) 
bar (unit of pressure) 
barbed wire 
barchan (barkhan) 
barchan 
bar clamp 
bar graph 
bargraph (bardiagram) 
bark 
barley 
bar metal 
abarn 
barograph 
barograph 
barometer 
barometer 
barometer 
barred spiral galaxy 
barreness 
barrens 
barrier 
barrier 
barrier reef 
barrier reef 
barycentre 
baryon 
basal metabolism  
basal metabolism
basal slip 
basalt 
basalt 
basalte 
base 
base (of a transiistor) 
base 
base 
base (of number system) 
base 
base flow (of stream) 
base-level 
base level 
base-line study
basement 
basement complex 
basement complex 
basement memberane 
base of a frustrum 
base of a prism 
base period 
basicity 
basic occuipation 
basic rock 
basic salt 
basidiomycetes 
basin 
basin 
basis of a vector space 
bat 
batch 
batch 
batch mixer 
bath 
batholith 
batholiths 
bathosphere 
batten 
battery  
battery
battery (secondary cells) 
battery
bauxite 
bauxite 
bay 
bay 
bay barrier 
bay bars 
BCG 
B-complex vitamins 
beach 
beachdrift 
beak 
beak 
beaker 
beam 
beam 
beam 
beam-collar beam 
beam compass 
bean of light 
beam- tie beam 
bearing 
bearing 
bearing 
bearing capacity 
bearing pile 
bearing plate 
bearing surface 
beat 
beat phenomenon 
Beaufort scale 
bed 
bed load (of stream) 
bed load 
bed rock 
bed rock 
bed rock 
bed room 
bed sores (pressure sores) 
beeding plant 
beef 
beef 
beef brain 
beef farming 
beef tape-worm 
beef type 
beer 
beet root 
behaviour 
behaviour 
behavour 
bhavioural isolation
beel crank 
belt 
belt 
belt of concentration 
bench 
bench 
bench mark 
bench mark 
bench mark 
bench mark 
bench terrace 
bench terracing 
benech vice 
bench work 
bend 
bend 
bend 
bending 
bending 
bending moment 
bending movement 
bending stength 
bending 
benioff zone 
benthos 
benthos 
Berber 
bergshrund 
beri-beri 
Bernoulli distribution 
Bernoulli trial 
berry 
berry 
Bessemer converter 
best estimator 
best linear unbiased estimator 
beta 
beta disintagration 
beta emission 
beta particle 
beta ray 
betatron 
bethose 
beton brute 
bevel 
bevel gear 
Bias 
bias 
blased estimator 
biceps 
biceps 
biconcave lens 
biconvex lens 
bicuspid 
bicuspid valve 
bid 
biennial 
biennial 
biuracation 
big-bang theory 
bight 
bi-implication 
bilateral 
bilateral symmetry 
bilateral symmetry 
bile 
bile 
bile 
bile 
bile duct 
bile duct 
bilharizia 
bilinear form 
bill (of birds) 
bill of quantity 
bimetallic 
bimetallic element 
binary 
binary 
binary 
binary acid 
binary countrer 
binary digit 
binary fission 
binary notation 
binary numeral 
binary operation 
binary star 
bind 
binding energy 
binding substances 
binocular 
binocular vision 
binomial 
binomial  
binomial 
binomial classificationn  
binomial coefficient 
binomial expansion 
binomial nomenclature 
binomial series 
bioassay 
bio-chemical 
bio-chemical process 
biochemical rock 
biochemist 
biochemistry 
biochronology 
bioclastic 
bioclimtaology 
biodegradable 
bioflavinoids 
biogeography 
biological assay 
biological control 
biological efficiency 
biological sediment 
biology 
bioluminescence 
biomass 
biomass 
biomass 
biomass 
biopsy 
biosphere 
biosphere 
biosphere 
biostatigraphy 
biostrome 
biosynthesis 
biotic 
biotic factor 
biotic factors 
biotin 
biotite 
biotite 
bipass (adj) 
bipass capacitor 
bipedal 
bipedal gait 
bipedalism 
bipolar 
bipolar transistor 
bird-foot delta 
birds eye-chili 
birefringence 
birth control 
birth control 
birth rate 
birth rate 
birth rate 
birth weight 
biscuit 
bisect 
bisector 
bisector of a line sagment 
bisector of an angle 
bisexual 
bisexual 
bishop's weed 
bispherical lens 
bistable 
bistable 
bistake 
bisteak 
bit 
bit brance 
bitot's spot 
bitter orange  
bittern 
bitumen 
bitumen 
bitumen 
bituminous 
bivariable (bivariate) 
black berry 
black body 
black body radiation 
black earth 
black leg 
black pepper 
blackout 
bladder 
bladder 
bladder worm 
blade (for cutting) 
blade (for rotors) 
blade 
blank determination 
blank dose 
blank flange 
blank soultion 
blast furnace 
blast furnace 
blasting 
blastocoel 
blasoderm 
blastodisc 
blastopore 
blastopore 
blastula 
bleach (bleaching agent) 
bleaching 
bleeding 
blend(n) 
blend (to) 
blending 
blinding 
blind spot 
blind spot (optic disk)
blind spot of the eye 
blister 
blizzard 
bloat 
block 
block 
block and tackle 
block diagram 
block lava 
block mountain 
block mountain 
block yard 
blood 
blood 
blood cell 
blood circulation 
blood cholestrol 
blood clotting 
blood fat 
blood group 
blood group 
blood group A 
blood group AB 
blood group B 
blood group O
blood pressure 
blood pressure 
blood sinus 
blood type 
blood vessel 
blood vessels 
bloom (algae) 
blotting paper 
blow 
blower 
blow hole 
blow hole 
blowing 
blow torch 
blue-green algae 
blue print 
bluff 
board
board 
bob 
bob of pendulum 
body 
body-centered 
body conformation 
body force 
body of uterus 
body sizee 
body wave 
bog 
bog iron ore 
bog soil 
Bohr's atom 
boil (furuncle) 
boil 
boiled egg 
boiled milk 
boiled vegetables 
boiled water 
boiler 
boiler 
boiler 
boiling chips 
boiling flask 
boiling point 
boiling point 
boiling point 
boiling water reactor 
bold cropper 
boll 
bolometer 
bolometric magnitude 
bolson 
bolt 
bolt 
bolus 
bolus 
bombard 
bombardment 
bomb calorimeter 
bond 
bond 
bond 
bond (n) 
bond energy 
bonding (adj.) 
bonding energy 
bond length 
bond moment 
bond stability 
bone 
bone 
bone bed 
bone black 
bone marrow 
bonnet (hood) 
bony labyrinth 
book-gill 
book-lung 
booster 
booster 
boot (s) 
boot stage 
bora 
bore 
bore 
bore (tidal) 
bore 
boreal 
hore hole 
Borel fleld 
boring 
boring machine 
bornite 
borrow (n) 
borrowed light 
borrow pit 
bos-indicus 
boson 
boss 
bos-taurus 
botanist 
botany 
botryoidal 
bottle 
bottom deadcenter 
bottom land (for gears) 
bottom set bed 
botulism 
botulism 
bouger anomaly 
boulder 
boulder 
boulder clay 
boulder train 
bounce 
boundary 
boundary 
boundary layer 
bounded function 
bounded interval 
bounded sequence 
bow legs 
bow saw 
Bowman's capsule 
box coupling 
box girder 
box gutter 
brace 
brace 
brace bit 
braces 
bracket 
backets 
brackish water 
bract 
brad 
bradycardia 
Bragg's reflection 
Braided river course 
braided stream 
brain 
brain 
brake  
brake 
brake cylinder 
brake drum 
brake lining 
brake pad 
brake shoe 
braker zone 
branch (v) 
branched chain 
branchial respiration 
branching 
branch vein 
branding 
brandy 
brass 
brass 
brassica seed 
brayton (joule) cycle 
brazing 
breadth 
breakebility 
breakable (fragile) 
breakdown 
breakdown voltage 
breaker 
breaker 
breakfast 
break water 
breast 
breast engorgement 
breast feeding 
breast milk 
breathing center 
breccia 
breecia 
breech 
breech presentation 
breed 
breed 
breeder 
breeder seed 
breeding Age 
breed rack 
bremsstrahlung 
brick 
brick suction 
bridge 
bridge 
bridge 
bridging 
bright 
bright line spectrum 
brightness 
brine 
brisket 
brittle 
brittle 
broad bean 
broadcasting (fretilizer) 
broadleaf plants
broad ligaments 
broadsider array 
broken joint 
broken line 
bronchi 
bronchioles 
bronchioles 
bronchitis 
bronchus 
bronze age 
brooder house 
brook 
brookite 
broth 
brow 
brown algae 
brown clay 
brown cola 
brown soil 
Brownian motion 
Brownian motion 
Brownian movement 
Brownian movement 
browser 
browser 
brucellosis 
bruise 
bruit
brunton pocket transit 
brush 
brushes 
brushwood 
bryophyta 
bubble (to 
bubble (n) 
bubble chamber 
bubbling 
bubo 
buccal cavity 
buccal respiration 
buchner flask 
buchner funnel 
buckel 
bucket 
buckle (v) 
buckle fold 
bucking 
buckthorn 
bud 
bud 
bud 
budding 
budding 
bud stick(s) 
bud union 
buffer 
buffer 
buffer state 
buffing wheel 
builder 
building 
building industry
building materials 
built-up area 
bulb 
bulb 
bulb crop 
bulb pipette 
bulbo - urethral gland 
bulk
bulk 
bulk density 
bulking 
bulk modulus
bulky 
bull 
bulla 
bulldozer 
bull's eye window 
bull testing 
bumping 
bungalow 
Busen burner 
bunt order 
buoy 
buoyancy 
buoyant force 
burdizze 
burette 
burlap-bag 
burn (chemical) 
burn (thermal) 
burner 
burning (soil) 
burrows 
bursa 
bus 
bush 
bush 
bush fallow 
bushing 
bushmen 
butress 
butress root 
butte 
butte 
butter 
butter fat 
butter-fat yield 
butterfly 
buttering 
butter milk 
butting 
butt joint 
butt joint 
buttock 
buttress thread 
butt rivelting 
by-pass 
by-product 
by-product 
caatinga 
cabbage 
cable 
cacao 
cachexia 
cactus 
cadastral survey 
cadaver 
caecum 
caesarean section 
calcaneous 
calcaneum 
calcarenite 
calcareous soil 
calciferol 
calcification 
calcification 
calcification 
calcination 
calcination 
calcite 
calcite 
calcitonin 
calculate (compute) 
calculation 
calculator 
calculator 
claculus 
calculus 
caldera 
caldera 
caldera cone 
caldera lake 
caladonian 
calendar 
calendar day 
calibrate (to) 
calibrate 
calibration 
calibration 
calibration 
caliper 
callus 
calam 
calorie 
calorie 
calorie 
calorie meter 
calorie metry 
caloriemeter 
calory (calorie) 
calory intake 
calory requirement 
caltivar 
calving 
calving interval 
calyx 
calyx 
cam 
camber 
camber angle 
cambium 
cambrian 
camera 
camouflage 
camphor 
campo cerrado 
campio limpo 
campos 
campos sujo 
camshaft 
canal 
canal 
cancellation 
cancer 
candela 
candle 
candle power
candyling 
candy  
cane sugar 
canibalism 
canine 
canine (teeth) tooth 
canned food 
canning 
canning 
cannon 
cannula 
canopy 
canopy 
canthus 
cantilever 
canyon 
canyon (Gorge) 
cap 
capacitance 
capacitive 
capacitive coupling 
capacitive reactance 
capacitive tunning 
capacitor 
capacitor 
capacity 
capacity (of stream) 
capacity 
cape 
capilarity 
capillary 
capillary (adj.) 
capillary 
capillary action 
capillary action 
capillary bed (net)
capillary fragility 
capillary fringe 
capilary tube 
capillary water 
capital 
capitulum (head) 
cap nut 
capon 
caponization 
cap rock 
caprock 
capstan 
capsule 
capsule 
capsule 
capsule 
capsule 
capture
capture release sampling or capture recapture sampling 
caramel 
carat 
caravan 
carboanion
carbocation 
carbohydrate 
carbohydrate 
carbohydrate 
carbon 
carbonation 
carbonation 
carbon balance 
carbon cycle 
caron cycle 
carbondioxide 
carbondioxide 
carbon fixation 
carbon-14 
carbon-14-dating 
carbonic acid 
carboniferous period 
carbonium ion 
carbonizable 
carbonization 
carbonization 
carbon monoxide 
carbon -tera chloride 
carborundum 
carbuncle 
carburetor 
carcass 
carcass 
carcinogen 
cardamom 
cardiac end of stomach 
cardiac muscle 
cardiac sphincter 
cardinal compass points (direction) 
cardinal direction 
cardinal number 
cardiovascular system 
caribou 
carnassia teeth 
carnivore 
carnivore 
carnivorous 
carnivorous 
carnot cycle 
carnot cyvle 
carnotite 
carotene 
carotene 
carotid artery 
carotid pulse 
carpal 
carpals 
carport 
carrier 
carrier 
carrier 
carrier 
carrier 
carrier 
carrot 
carrot juice 
carry (n) 
carrying capacity 
carrying capacity (of stream) 
cart 
cartesian coordinate system 
cartilage 
cartilage 
cartogram 
cartography 
caruncle 
caryopsis 
cascade 
casein 
casement window 
cash crop 
cash crop farming 
casing 
cassiterite 
cast 
cast 
caste 
caster angle 
caste System 
casting 
cast-in-situ 
cast-iron 
cast iron 
cast iron 
castle nut 
castor bean 
castrate 
castration 
castration 
castration 
catabolism 
cataclassis 
catalase 
catalase 
catalysis 
catalyst 
catalyst 
catalyst 
catalytic 
catalyze 
cataract 
cataract 
cataract 
catastrophism 
catastrophy 
catchment area 
categorical data 
category 
catgut 
catheter 
cathode 
cathode 
cathode 
cathode ray 
cathode ray 
cation 
cation 
cation hydrate 
catkin 
cattle 
cattle guard 
cattle tick fever 
caucasian 
caudal fin 
caudal vertabrate 
caul king 
cauliflower 
causality 
causative agent 
cause 
cause -specific death rate 
cause variable 
caustic 
caustic potash 
caustic soda 
cautery 
cave 
cavendish balance 
cavernous 
cacitation 
cavity 
cavity 
cavity 
ceca 
cecum 
ceiling 
ceiling joint 
celestial 
celestial equator 
celestial sphere 
cell (plant) 
cell 
cell 
cell 
cell 
cell 
cellar 
cell body 
cell body 
cell division 
cell membranne 
cellophane 
cells (of pressure) 
cell sap 
cell theory 
cell wall 
cellular digestion 
cellular respiration 
cellulase 
cellulose 
cellulose 
cellulose 
celsius temprature scale 
cement 
cement 
cement 
cement 
cementation 
cementation 
cementation 
cement clinker 
cement slurry 
cenozoic 
cenozoic era 
censor (to) 
censored variable 
censoring 
census 
center bit 
center of 
center of curvature 
center of gravity 
center of gyration 
ceter of mass 
center of percussion 
center punch 
centigrade 
centigrade 
centigrade (celsius) scale
centigrade scale 
centimeter 
centiped 
central angle 
central canal 
central depression 
central forces 
central moment 
central nervous system 
centre 
centre of a circle 
centre of a sphere 
centre of an ellipse 
centre to centre 
centrifugal force 
centrifugal force 
centerifugal force 
centrifugal pump 
centrifugation 
centrifuge 
centrifuge (to) 
cetrifuge 
centrifuge tube 
centriole 
centietal force 
centripetal force 
centripetal force 
centroid 
centroid 
centromere 
centrosome 
centrum 
cephalic index 
cephalothorax 
ceramic 
ceramic 
ceramic material 
ceramic products 
cereal 
cereals 
cereals 
cerebellum 
cerebral hemisphere 
cerebro-spinal fluid 
cerebrum 
certain event 
certification 
certified seed 
cervical vertebrae 
cervix 
cervix uteri 
cesaro sums 
CGS system 
chain 
chain 
chain (of mountain) 
chain 
chainman 
chain mechanism 
chain process 
chain reaction 
chain relative 
chain rule 
chain survey 
chain vice 
chair rail 
chalaza 
chalaza 
chalazae 
chalcophyrite 
chalk 
chalk 
chamber 
chamfer 
chamfer 
chance 
chance cause 
chance vartiation 
chancer 
chancroid (H.Ducrey) 
change 
change of state 
channel 
channel (of river) 
channel 
chnneled 
chaparal
characterise (v) 
charactersitic 
characterstic 
characterstic (adj.) 
characterstic (n) 
characterstic curve 
characterstic of a logarithm 
characteristics (trait) 
characterstic (eigen) vector 
charcoal 
charge 
charge (electric) 
charge (n) 
charge carrier 
charged particle 
charging 
charging 
chart 
chart 
chart (v)
chart 
chase 
chaser 
chassis 
check (to) 
check dam 
check vaive 
checkered land scape 
cheese 
cheese 
chemical 
chemical 
chemical activity 
chemical bond 
chemical change 
chemical digestion 
chemical energy 
chemical energy 
chemical equilibrium 
chemical formula 
chemical kinetics 
chemical pollution 
chemical property 
chemical reaction 
chemical resistance 
chemical sediment 
chemical sedinent 
chemical weathering 
chemical weathering 
chemoautotroph 
chemoautotrop[hism 
chemosynthesis 
chemotaxis 
chemotherapy 
chemotrophism 
chenier 
Cherenkov radiation 
chernozem 
chert 
chest 
chest floor (sternum) 
chestnut soil 
chest x-ray 
chevon 
chevron 
chew 
chiasma 
chicken
chicken pox 
chick pea 
chi distribution 
chif of party 
chid 
child-bearing Age 
child-woman ratio 
Chile salt peter 
chill 
chilli 
chilling 
chi-meson 
chimney 
chimney 
chimney breast 
china clay 
chinook 
chip 
chipping 
chips 
chisel 
chisel 
chi square test 
chitin 
chlorination 
chlorine 
chlorine water 
chlorophyll 
chlorophyll 
chloroplast 
chlorosis 
chlorosis 
choke 
cholecalciferol 
cholecystitis 
cholera 
cholestrol 
cholestrol 
chondrichthyes 
chondrite 
chondrule 
choper 
chord 
chord 
chordae tendinae 
chordate 
chorion 
chorion 
chorisometric map 
chorochromatic map 
chorgraphic map 
choroid 
choropleth 
chromatid 
chromatogram 
chromatograph 
chromatography
chromoplast 
chromosomal recombination 
chromosome 
chromosome 
chromosome mutation 
chromosphere 
chromosphere 
chronic 
chronograph 
chronometer 
chronometer 
chronon 
clironostrati graphy 
chrysocola 
chrysotile 
chuck 
churn (butter) 
chyle 
chymase 
chyme 
chyme 
chyme 
chymotrypsin 
cicatrix 
cilia 
cilia 
cilia 
ciliary 
ciliary body 
ciliary muscle 
ciliary muscle 
ciliate 
ciliates 
cinder 
cinder cone 
cinder cone 
cinnabar 
cinnamon 
cicadian rhythm 
circle  
circle  
circleof convergence  
circlip 
cicuit 
circuit board 
circuit 
circuit board 
circuit breaker 
circuit diagram 
circular cone 
circullar cylinder 
circular function  
circular motion 
circular muscle 
circular pitch 
circular region 
circular saw 
circulating system 
circulation 
circulatory system 
circulatory system 
circumcentre  
circumcision 
circumference 
circumferential pitch 
circum-pacific belt 
circumpolary 
circumpolary stars 
circum-polar whirl 
circumscribed 
circumscribed circle 
circumscribed polygon 
circumscribed sphere 
cirque 
cirque 
cirque lake 
cirrhosis 
cirrocumulus 
circumcision 
cirrus 
cirrus cloud 
cis (as a prefix) 
cistern 
citric acid 
citric acid cycle 
citrin
citron 
citrulline 
civil engineer 
civil year 
clack 
cladding 
clamp 
clamp 
clamping (n). 
clasping roots 
class 
class 
class (group) 
class boundary 
class frequency 
classical 
classical conditioning 
classification 
class limit 
class mark 
class width (class size) 
clastic sediment 
clastic sediment 
clavicle 
clavicle 
claw  
claw hammer 
claw hammer 
claw hatchet 
clay 
clay 
clay 
clay minerals 
clay plug 
clay soil 
clay soil 
clay stone 
cleaning (adj) 
cleaning Agent 
cleaning Solution 
clear 
clearance 
clearance 
clearing and grubbing
clearness 
cleat 
cleavage 
cleavage 
cleavage 
cleavage 
cleavage furrow 
cleft graft 
cliff 
cliff 
climacteric 
climate 
climate 
climatic controls 
climatology 
climax community 
climax community (of vegetation) 
climber (climbing Stem) 
climograph 
clinic 
clinical 
clinker 
clinograph 
clinometer 
clinometer 
clinophyroxene 
clinophyroxene 
clinophyroxene 
clip 
clipping 
clitellum 
clitoris 
clitoris 
cloaca 
cloca 
clocwise 
clockwise 
clockwise 
clockwise direction 
clod 
clog 
clone 
clone 
cloning 
clossed castration 
closed circuit 
closed circulation 
closed circulatory system 
closed covering 
closed curve 
closed cycle 
closed depression 
closed interval 
close population 
closed proposition 
closed traverse 
close-packed 
closing error 
clostridium tetani 
closure 
closure (of …) 
closure (prperty) 
clot formation 
clotting 
cloud burst 
cloud chamber 
cloudiness 
cloud seeding 
cloud seeding 
clout nail 
clove 
cloves 
club hammer 
club mosses 
cluster 
cluster 
clustered settlement 
cluster sample 
cluster sampline 
cluster variables 
clutch 
clutch disc lining 
coagulant 
coagulation 
coagulation 
coagulation 
coal 
coal 
coal 
coal gas 
coaling station 
cola seam 
coarse (thread) 
coarse aggregate 
coarse grained 
coast 
coastal 
coastal plain 
coastal plain 
coastline 
coated 
coaxial cable 
cobble 
cobbles 
coca cola 
coccidiosis 
coccolith 
coccon 
coccus 
coccygeal vertabrae 
coccyx 
coccyx 
cochlea 
cochlear channels 
cockroach 
cocoa 
coconut oil 
code (to) 
cod extension 
co-dominance 
coefficient 
coefficient 
coefficient 
coefficient 
coefficient 
coefficient of concordance 
coefficient of contingency 
coefficient of correlation 
coefficient of determination
coefficient of expansion 
coefficient of friction 
coefficient of kurtosis 
coefficient of quartile variation 
coefficient of restitution 
coefficient of skewness 
coefficient of thermal expansion 
coefficient of variation 
coelentrate 
coelentrates 
coelom 
coenobium 
coenzyme 
co-enzyme 
coercive 
coercive force 
coercivity 
co-existence 
coffee 
coffee arabica 
coffee robusta 
coffer 
cofferdam 
cognac 
cohere 
coherent 
coherent source 
cohesion 
cohesion 
cohesive 
chohesive force 
cohort 
coil 
coil 
coil pitch 
coil spring 
coinage metal 
coking coal 
col 
cold current 
cold desert 
cold front 
cold front 
cold process 
cold rolling 
cold zone 
coleoptile 
colic 
colitis 
collagen 
collapse 
collaps (lung) 
collar (of burner) 
collar beam 
collector 
collenchyma 
coller (for shaft) 
colligative properties 
collimate 
collimation 
collimation error 
collimator 
colliner 
collinearity 
collision 
collision probability 
collisional mountain 
colloid 
colloid 
colloidal osmotic pressure 
colluvial deposit 
colluvium 
colon 
colon 
colonial 
colonization 
colony 
color code 
colostrum 
colostrum 
colour 
colour 
colour bar 
colour blind 
colour blind 
colour blindness 
colour blindness 
colour complementary colours 
colour filter 
colour: primary 
clour: secondary 
colours: tertiary colours 
column 
column 
column 
column 
column of a matrix 
column rank of a matrix
columnar 
coma 
comgmatic  
comb 
combination 
combination 
combination 
combination 
combination principle 
combination reaction 
combinatorial 
combine (to)  
combine (int.v) 
combine (trans.v) 
combustibility 
combustibility 
combustible 
combustible 
combustion 
combustion 
combustion 
cobustion boat 
cobustion chamber 
comet 
comet 
comet 
commensal 
commensalism 
commensurable quantities 
commercial farm 
commercialization 
comminute 
common (of land) 
common-base (cB) amplifier 
common bile duct 
common cold 
common-collector (cc) amplifier 
common differnence 
common divisor 
common-emitter (cE) amplifier 
common external tangent 
common factor 
common internal tangent 
common ion effect 
common logarithm 
common multiple 
common ratio 
common tangent 
common ownership 
communicable 
communicable disease 
communicable period 
communication 
communication satellite 
community 
community ( of plants) 
community succession 
commutation 
communtative 
commutative group 
communtative property 
commutative ring 
commutator 
commutator segments 
compact 
compaction 
compaction 
compandor 
companion cell 
comparative anatomy 
comparator 
comparision 
comparision test 
compass 
compass 
compasses 
compasses (for drawing) 
compass saw 
compatibility 
compatible 
compatible 
compensated pendulum 
compensating eyepiece 
compensation 
compensation 
compensationd depth 
compensation point 
competence 
competent bed 
competition 
competition 
compiler 
compiler 
complement 
complementarity 
complementary 
complementary 
complementary angles 
complementary colour 
complementary sets 
completed family 
complete dominance 
complete fertilizer 
complete flower 
complete life table 
completely randomized diesign 
complete metamorphosis 
completeness property (of the real numbers) 
complete the square 
completing the square 
completion 
complex 
complex fraction 
complex number  
complex plane 
complexometric titration 
complcated fructure 
complication 
component 
component  
component 
component 
component 
component 
component vector 
components of a vector 
composite 
composite cone
composite funcation 
composite number 
composition 
composition of funcations 
compost 
compost 
composting 
compound 
compound 
compound curve 
compound eye 
compound interest 
compound leaf 
compound lens 
compound microscope 
compound microscioe 
compound (complex) propsition 
compress 
compressibility 
compression 
compression 
compressional foce 
compression wave 
compression force 
compression ignition 
compression ratio 
compressive 
compressive strain 
compressive strength 
compressor 
compressor muscle 
compton scattering 
computer 
computer 
computer 
concave 
concave-convex lens 
concave lens 
concave mirror 
concave polygon 
concave slope 
concentrate (to) 
concentraated load 
concentrated soultion 
concentration 
concentration (as a process) 
concentration 
concentric 
concentric circles 
concept 
concept 
conception 
conception 
conceptual 
concession 
conchoidal 
conclusion 
concomitant variable 
concordant intrusive rock 
concordant pluton 
concrete 
concrete; (lean concrete) 
concrete; (masonry unit) 
concret; (plain concrete) 
concrete; (rich concrete) 
concrete; (rich concrete) 
concurrence 
concurrent 
concurrent 
concurrent forces 
concussion 
condensate
condensation 
condensation 
condensation 
condensation 
condensation 
condensation level 
condensation nuclei 
condensation polymer 
condense 
condense 
condense (v) 
condensed structural formula 
condenser 
condenser 
condenser 
conditional convergence 
conditional convergent series 
conditional distribution 
conditional expectation 
conditional probability 
conditional propability density function 
conditional variance 
conditioned reflex 
conditioned response 
conditioning 
condominium 
conduct (to) 
conductance 
conductance 
conduction 
conduction 
conducation 
conductivity (conductance) 
conductivity 
cobnductivity 
conductometry 
conductor 
conductor 
conductory 
conduit 
conduit 
condyle 
condyle 
condyloma 
cone 
cone 
cone 
cone 
cone 
cone 
cone 
cone gear 
conelet 
cone of depression 
cone-shaped 
confederation
confidence coefficient 
confidence interval 
confidence level 
confidence limit 
configuration  
configuration
configuration  
configuration of stars 
confluence 
conformation 
confounded 
congenital 
conglomerate 
congruency 
congruent 
congruent circles 
congruent segments 
conical 
conical 
conical flask 
conical funnel 
conical pendulum 
conical projection 
conic projection 
conic section 
conic surface 
coniferophyta 
coniferous forest 
coniferous forest 
coniferous tree 
conjecture (hypothesis) 
conjugate 
conjugate 
conjugate 
conjugate (v) 
conjugate acid 
conjugate angle 
conjugate axis (of a hyperbola) 
conjugate base 
conjugate impedance 
conjugate of complex number 
conjugation 
conjugation 
conjunction 
conjunction 
conjunction 
conjunctiva 
conjunctiva 
conjunctival xerosis 
copnnate water 
connect 
connected 
connecting rod 
connecting tube 
connection 
connective tissue 
connector 
connectors 
consciousness 
consequent stream 
consequent stream 
conservation 
conservation 
conservation 
conservation of angular momentum 
conservation of charge 
conservation of energy 
conservation of mass - energy 
conservation of momentum 
conservationist 
conservative 
conservative field 
conservative force 
consistant estimator 
consistency 
consistency 
consistant  
consistent equation 
console 
consolidate 
consolidation  
consolidation of sector accounts 
constancy 
constant 
constant 
constant 
constant of proportionality 
constant-ration scale 
constant of variation 
constantan 
constellation 
constellation 
constipation 
constitutional isomerism 
Constraint 
constriction 
construction joint 
constructive 
constructive interference 
consulting engineer 
consumer 
consumer 
consumers (in nature) 
consumer's expenditure 
consumer's risk 
consumption (food) 
consumptive use 
contact
contact 
contact herbicide 
contact metamorphism 
contact metamor phis 
contact potential 
contagious 
container 
containment 
contaminant 
contaminate 
contamination 
content 
continent 
continent 
continental 
continental climate 
continental collision 
continental crust 
continental drift 
continental glacier 
continental plateau 
continental platform
continental rise 
continental rupture 
continental shelf 
continental shelf 
continental shield
continental slope 
continental slope 
continental slope 
contingency 
contingency table 
continued fraction 
continuity (test) 
continuity 
continuity 
continuity correction 
continuity principle 
continuous 
continuous 
continuous beam 
continuous data 
continuous reaction series 
continuous spectrum 
ccontinuous specturm 
continous variable 
continuous variation 
continuous variation 
continuum 
continuum mechanics 
contour 
contour (line) 
contour direction 
contour interval 
contour line 
contour lines 
contour ploughing (farming) 
contour ploughing 
contour ploughing 
contraception 
contraceptive 
contract 
contract 
contractile vacuole 
contraction 
contraction 
contractor 
contracture 
contradiction 
contradiction used as opposite of tautology) 
contrapositive an implication) 
contrast 
contrast 
contrast; intensity contrast 
contrast shading 
contrast; simultaneous  contrast 
contrast; temperature contrast 
control 
control chart 
control experiment 
control grid 
controlled (v) 
controlled fission 
controlled process 
control limit
control register 
control unit 
contusion 
conurbation 
conus arteriosus 
convection 
convection 
convection current 
convection current 
convection rain 
convection shower 
convergence 
convergence 
convergence 
convergent 
convergent sequence 
convergent series 
converse (of an implication) 
conversion 
conversion process 
converter 
converter reactor 
convex 
convex lens 
convex mirror 
convex pologyon 
convex region 
convex set 
convex slope 
conveyer 
convoluted tubule 
convolution 
convulsant
convulsion 
cooking 
cool (to) 
cool 
coolant 
cooling 
coordinate (plane) 
coordinate 
coordinate covalent compound 
coordinated 
coordinate plane 
coordinates (geographic)
coordinates (spherical) 
coordinates of a point 
coordinates system 
coordinate system 
coordinate system 
coordinate system of a line 
cooordinate system of a plane 
coordination 
coordination compound 
coordination number 
coordination sphere 
coperecipition 
copolymerization 
copper 
copper 
copper 
copper sulphate 
copra 
coprolite 
copulate 
copulation 
copulation 
coquina 
coracoid 
coral 
coral 
coral polyps 
coral reef 
cord 
cord 
cordillera 
cordillera 
core 
core 
core 
core 
coriander 
coriolis force 
coriolis force 
coriolis force 
cork 
cork 
cork borer 
cork cambium 
cork ring 
corm 
corn 
corn belt 
cornea 
corneal xerosis 
corner reflector 
cornicle 
corolla 
corollary 
corona 
corona australis 
corona borealis 
coronary artery 
coronary vein 
coronary vessel 
corpuscle
corpuscle 
corpuscular 
corpuscular radiation 
corpuscular theory of light 
corpus iuteum 
corrasion 
corrasion 
correct 
correlation 
coorelation coefficient 
correlogram 
correspond (int.v) 
correspond (tr.v) 
correspondence 
correspondence 
correspondence principle 
corresponding 
corresponding angles 
corresponding sides 
corrie 
corrindale sheep 
corrodability 
corrodable 
corrosion 
corrosion 
corrosion 
corrosive 
cortex
cortex
cortisone 
corundum 
corymb 
cosine series 
cosmic 
cosmic radiation 
cosmic ray snower 
cosmogeny 
cosmogony
cosmology 
cosmology 
cosmos 
cosmos 
cost function 
cost of living index 
cost price 
costal 
coterminal angle 
cotter pin 
cotton belt 
cotton seed 
cotton wool 
cotledon 
couch 
coulomb  
Coulomb's law 
count (to) 
count down 
countable 
countable infinite set 
counter 
counter 
counter clockwise 
counter clockwise 
counter trades 
countersink 
counting 
counting (natural) number 
couple 
couple 
couple arm 
coupler 
coupling 
coupling 
course 
covlence 
covalent 
covalent bond 
covalent compound 
covariance 
cove 
cover 
cover crop 
cover crop 
cover slip (cover glass) (slide cover) 
cover vegetation 
covering 
cow and calf system 
Cowper's gland 
crab 
cracking 
crag-and-tail 
cramps 
crane 
cranial cavity 
cranial nerves
cranial nerves 
cranium 
cranium 
crank 
crank case 
crank pin 
crank shaft 
crater 
crater lake 
crator 
crawler tractor 
cream 
creationist 
creek 
creep 
creep 
creeper 
creeping flow 
creeping stem 
crenation 
creole 
creole negro 
creole white 
crepitation
crest 
crest 
cretaceous 
cretinism 
crevasse 
crevasse 
crevice 
critical
critical
critical angle 
critical angle 
critical damping 
criticality 
critical point (number) 
critical point
critical pressure 
critical region 
critical temperature 
crop 
crop 
crop 
cropping 
crop residue 
crop residues 
crop rotation 
crop rotation 
crops 
cross bedding 
cross-belt 
cross breeding 
cross breeding 
cross connecting tube 
cross fertilization
crossing 
crossing-over 
cross matching 
cross multiplication 
cross-pollination 
cross pollination 
cross product 
cross -section 
cross section 
Cross- section 
croup 
crow bar 
crowing 
crown (of teeth) 
crowns /trees/ 
crown wheel 
crucible 
crucible 
crude birth rate 
crude death rate 
crude density 
crude moment 
crude oil 
crude oil 
crude oil 
crude rate 
crumb structure (of soils) 
cursh (to) 
crushed aggregate 
crust 
crust 
crustacean 
crustaceans 
crustalline 
crustal plate 
crustal root 
crutch 
cryptocrystalline 
cryptogam 
cryptor chidism 
crystal 
crystal 
crystal 
crystal 
crystal 
crystal form 
crystal habit 
crystal lattice 
crystalline 
crystalline complex 
crystalline highlands 
crystalline rock 
crystallinity 
crystallization 
crystallization 
crystallize (to) 
crystallography 
crystallography 
crystal oscilator 
crystal structure 
C.S.F. (cerebro-spinal fluid) 
CSM (corn soya milk) 
cube 
cube (of a number) 
cube root 
cuble  
cubic 
cubic system 
cubing 
cud 
cud 
cuesta 
cuesta 
cull out 
culm 
cultivation 
cultivator 
cultural factors 
cultural landscape 
culture 
culture 
culture 
cummin (black) 
cumulate 
cumulative distribution 
cummulative distribution funcation 
cumulative frequency 
cumulonimbus 
cumulus 
cumulus cloud 
cup anemometer 
cupola furnace 
curie 
Curie point 
curing 
curing 
current 
current 
current 
current goods and services 
current meter (of streams) 
curvature (of the earth's surface) 
curvature 
curvature 
curve 
curve 
curve 
curve fitting 
curvilinear 
curvilinear 
curvilinear coorrelation 
curvilinear motion 
cusp 
cusp 
cusp 
cuspate delta 
cticle 
cutin 
cutinization 
cut-off (of lake)
cut off 
cut of frequency 
cuticle 
cuttings (s) 
cutting 
cutting planes 
cyancobalamin 
cycle 
cycle 
cycle 
cycle 
cycle of erosion 
cyclie 
cyclie 
cyclic 
cyclical component 
cyclic group 
cyclization
cyclone 
cclonic rain fall 
cyclothem 
cyclotron 
cylinder 
cylinder 
cylinder 
cylinder black 
cylinder head 
cylinderical 
cylinderical coordinate system 
cylinderical projection 
cylinderical reflector 
cyme 
cymose 
cynrotron 
cyst 
cyst 
cyst formation  
cysteine 
cystic duct 
cystine 
cytochrome 
cytokinesis 
cytokinin 
cytology 
cytology 
cytoplasm 
cytooplsmic streaming 
cytotaxonomy 
D'arsonval galvanometer 
dado joint 
daily march of temperature 
daily maximum temerature 
daily minimum temperature 
daily range of temperature 
dairy cattle 
dairy farming  
dairy products 
dairy type 
dais 
dalmation coast 
dam (cow) 
dam 
damp
damped harmonic motion 
damped vibration 
dampener 
dampint 
dampint 
dampproof 
danddruff 
Darey's law 
dark reaction 
Darwinism 
Darwinism 
dashpot 
data 
data 
data 
data flow 
data path (route) 
data reduction 
date(v) 
datum 
datum (level) 
datum 
datum line 
daughter cell 
daughter cell 
daughter substance 
day-neutral plant 
daylight saving time 
D.D.T 
deactivate 
deactivating group 
deactivation 
dead center 
dead ground 
dead light 
dead load 
dead load 
deamination 
death rate 
death rate 
debeaking 
debris 
debris 
debris slide 
decade box 
decade counter 
decalcification 
decant (to) 
decantation 
decarboxylation 
decay 
decay constant 
decay series 
decaying quantity 
dechcbitus bedsore 
decelerate 
deceleration 
deciduous 
deciduous forest 
deciduous teeth 
deciduous tree 
dicile 
decimal 
decimal expansion 
decimal fraction 
decimal number 
decimal place 
decimal system (decimal number system) 
decimeter 
declination 
decode 
decollement 
decompose (decomposition) 
decomposer 
decomposer (in nature) 
decomposition 
decomposition 
decomposition 
decomposition of a fraction 
decompression 
decreasing function 
dedendum 
dedendum circle 
deductive reasoning 
deeps 
defacto count 
defacto population  
defatted milk 
defection 
defect 
defect 
defect 
defective 
defective items 
defect solid 
deficiency 
deficiency disease 
deficiency symptom 
definable 
define 
definite (determinate) inforescence 
definite integral 
defination 
defination 
deflation 
deflation 
deflation hallow 
deflecting coil 
deflection 
deflection 
deflection angle 
deflection yoke 
deflocculate 
defoliation 
deforestation 
deform 
deformation 
deformation 
deformation 
deformed bars 
defromity 
degenerate 
degenerate 
degenerate state 
degradation 
degradation 
degradation 
degradation 
degree 
degree (of a polynomial nth degree 
degree 
degree of association  
degree of dissociation 
degree of extension 
degree of freedom 
degree of freedom 
degree of orientation 
dehiscent 
dehiscent fruit
dehorning 
dehydrate (to)  
dehydration 
dehydration 
dehydration 
dehydration 
dehydration 
dehydrogenate (to) 
dehydrogenation 
dehydrohalorgenation 
deionizer 
de jure count 
de jure polution 
dealy line 
dealyed (v) 
delayed reaction 
deliquescence 
deliquescent 
delirium
delivery 
delocalization 
delocalization energy 
delocalized 
delta 
delta connection 
deltoid 
demagnetization 
demagnetization 
demagnetize 
dementia 
demineralization 
demineralizer 
demodulate 
demography 
demography 
demonstrate 
demonstration 
demonstration 
demonstration 
denaturation 
denatured alcohol 
dendrite 
dendritic 
dendritic drainage 
dendritic road pattern 
dendrology 
denduation 
denitrification
denitrification 
denominator 
dense population 
density 
density 
density of population 
dental 
dental caries 
dental formula 
dentation 
dentine 
dentine 
denudation 
denumerable 
deoxygenated blood 
departure 
dependancy ratio 
dependent 
dependent 
dependent euqation 
dependent variable 
deplasmolysis 
depletion layer 
deposit 
deposit 
deposition 
deposition 
depositional remanent magnetism 
depreciation 
depreciation 
depreciation allowance 
depressed 
depression 
depression 
depression 
depression 
depression rain fall 
depressor muscle 
depth 
depth (thread or gear) 
depth 
deranged drainage 
derivation 
derivative 
derivative 
derivative of a polnomial 
derived 
derived unit 
dermatitis 
dermatologist 
dermatology 
dermis 
dermis 
desalination 
desalinization 
descending colon 
descending colon 
descending order 
descending tubule 
descriminant of a quadratic equation 
descriptive statstics 
descriptive survey 
desert pavement 
desert soil 
desert varnish 
design 
design 
design 
dessicant 
dessilcation 
dessication 
dessicator 
destructive 
destructive 
destructive interference 
detachable fastener 
detail drawing  
detassel 
detection (of demodulation) 
detection 
detector 
detergent 
determinant 
determinate in - florescence 
determination 
dtermination 
determintaion of constants 
determine (to) 
determinism (geographic) 
deterministic model 
detonation 
detonation 
detouring 
detrital 
detritus 
detritus 
deuterium 
deuteron 
developing tank (developing bath) 
deviation 
deviation 
deviation about the mean 
deviation about the median 
device 
devitrification 
devonian period 
dew 
dew 
dew point 
dew point 
dewlap 
dextral 
dextrorotatory 
dextrose 
dextrose 
diabase 
diabetes 
diabetes mellitus 
diabetic 
diabetic diet 
diachronous
diagenesis 
diagnosis 
diagonal 
diagram 
diagram 
dial 
dial reading 
dial thermometer 
dialysis 
diamagnetic 
diamagnetism 
diameter 
diameter 
diamond 
diamond 
diaphaniety 
diaphragm
diaphragm 
diaphragm 
diaphysis 
diapir 
diarrhea 
diarrhea 
diarrheal disease 
diarthrosis 
diastase 
diastema 
diastole 
diastole 
diastophism 
diastrophism 
diatom 
diatomic 
diatomic element 
diatomite 
diatomite 
diatreme 
dichotomy 
dichroic 
dichroic crystal 
dicot (dicotyledon) 
dicotyledons 
dicotyledons flower 
dicotyledons plants 
die 
die 
dielectric 
dielectric constant 
diesel cycle 
diesel engine 
diesel oil 
die stock 
diet 
diet 
dietary nuutrient 
dietary study 
dietary survey 
dietary treatment 
dietetics 
dietician 
difference 
difference 
difference of two sets (relative complement) 
differnentiable 
differnetial 
differential 
differential calculus 
differntial equation 
differential geometry 
differential sttlement 
differential weathering 
differential weathering 
differential winding 
differentially permeable membrane 
differentiation 
differentiation 
differentiation 
differentiation 
diffraction 
diffraction grating 
diffraction pattern 
diffuse reflection 
diffused reflection 
diffuser 
diffusion 
diffusion 
diffusion 
diffusion of gase 
diffusion of heat 
diffusivity 
digestible 
digestible energy 
digestible protein 
digestion 
digestion 
digestion 
digestion 
digestion coeficients (DPC) 
digestive 
digestive enzyme 
digestive enzyme 
digestive juice 
digestive system 
digestive sytem 
digestive sytem 
digit 
digital (circuit) 
digital to analog convertor (DAC) 
dihedral angie 
dihybrid 
dilatancy 
dilatation 
dilatational wave 
dilute (adj) 
dilute (to) 
dilute solution 
dilution 
dilution assay 
dimension 
dimenstion 
dimension 
dimension 
dimensional analysis 
dimension line 
diminish 
dimorphism 
diode 
diode 
dioecious 
dioecious 
dioecious 
diopter 
diorite 
dip 
dip 
dipeptide 
diphteria 
diphteria 
diploblastic 
diplopia 
dipole 
dipole magnetic field 
dipole moment 
diopole moment 
dipping 
diippint vat 
dips 
dip-slipe fault 
dip-slope 
direct (adj.) 
direct assay 
direct correlation 
direct coupling 
direct curerent (DC) 
direct current 
direct current (DC) block 
directed distance 
directed line 
direction 
directional antenna 
direction finder 
directrix 
directrix of a cylinder 
direct standardization 
direcft stress 
direct sum of spaces 
direct sum of subspaces 
direct variation 
disaccharide 
disassemble 
disc 
disc 
dise brake 
disc (flexible) coupling 
discharge (of stream) 
discharge 
discharge 
discharge 
dscharged cell 
discharge lamp 
disconformity 
discountinuity 
discountinuity 
discountinuous 
discountinuous reaction series 
discontinuous variation 
discontinuous variation 
discordant intrustive rock 
discordant pluto 
discount 
discovery 
discreminator 
discrete data 
discrete quanitity 
discrete variable 
disease 
disease 
disease organism 
disease symptoms 
disease vector 
disengage 
disinfect (to) 
disinfectant 
disinfectant 
disinfectant 
disinfection 
disinfection 
disinfestant 
disintegrate (to 
disintegration 
disintergration 
disintergration constant 
disjoint sets 
disjunction 
discolcation 
dislocation 
dismantle 
dismantling 
disowned lamb 
disperse 
dispersion 
dispersion 
dispersion 
dispersion 
displace (v) 
displacement 
displacement 
displacement reaction 
disposable income 
disposal income 
disproportionation 
disproportionation reaction 
dissected plateau 
dissection 
disseminate 
disseminated deposit 
disemination 
dissipate (to) 
dissipate 
dissipation 
dissipation 
dissipation of energy 
dissipative 
dissipative force 
dissipator 
dissociation 
dissociation 
dissociation 
dissiloution  
dissolve (to) 
distal 
distal 
distal convoluted tubule 
distance 
distance- time curve 
distension 
distillate 
distillation 
distilled water 
distiller 
distortion 
distoration 
distributary 
distribution 
distribution 
distribution
distribution coefficient 
distribution funcation 
distribution lines 
distribution of income 
distribution switch board 
distribution transformer 
distributive property 
distrurbance 
diuretic 
diurnal 
diurnal 
diurnal circle
diurnal range of temperature 
divedend 
divergence 
divergence 
divergent 
divergent sequence 
divergent series 
diversification 
divide (or water shed) 
divide 
ddivider 
divider (compass type) 
dividers 
division 
division algorithm 
division ring 
divisor 
divorce 
dizgotic twins 
D-layer 
docking 
dodeca hedron 
dodeca hedron 
dog-legged stair 
doldrums 
doline (swallow hole) 
doline 
dolly 
dolomite 
dolomite 
dolomite 
dolomitization 
Dolo stone 
domain 
domain of convergence 
domain of study 
dome 
dome mountain 
dome mountain 
domestication 
dominant 
dominant (adj) 
dominant (gene) 
dominant characterstics 
dominant wave length 
dominion 
donor (atom) 
donor 
donor 
door and window frames 
door check 
doping 
doping 
Doppler' effect 
Doppler's shift 
dormancy 
dormancy 
dormant feature 
dormant voicano 
dormitory 
dorsal 
dorsal 
drsal aorta 
dorsal fin 
dorsal fissure 
dorsal root 
dorsum 
dosage (n) 
dose 
dose 
dose (dosage) 
dose metameter 
dosimetry 
dot map 
dotted lines 
double 
double 
double acceptance sampling plan 
double acting engine 
double angle formula 
double bond 
double circulation 
double displacement reaction 
double entry accounting 
double framed roof 
double helixm
double integral 
double limits 
double maxima 
double refraction 
double salt 
double samplling plan 
double sequence 
double series 
dovetail joint 
dovetail saw 
dowel
down draft 
down fold 
downhill breeze 
DPT 
draft 
drafting 
draftsman 
draft type 
drag bar 
drag fold 
drain 
drain pipe 
drainage 
drainage 
drainage 
drainage basin 
drainage ditch 
drainage system 
draw (for wires) 
draw down
draw knife 
dradger 
dranching 
dressing 
dreied whole milk 
drier (dryer) 
drift (as a tool) 
drift 
drift 
drift 
drill 
drill bit 
drilling 
drilling 
drip mould
drip stone 
driver 
drizzle 
dron 
drop hammer 
droplet 
dropper 
dropping (s) 
dropping bottle 
drought 
drought 
drought evading 
drought hardiness 
drowned valley (of  submerged valley) 
drumlin 
drumlin 
druse 
dry 
dry adiabatic laps rate 
dry bulb thermo meter 
dry cell (primary cells) 
dry cell battery 
dray cow 
dry crrops 
dry farming 
dry fruit 
dry ice 
drying oven 
dry land farming 
dry liner 
dry-lotfinishing 
dry matter 
dryopithecus 
dry point settlement 
dry wall 
dry weight 
DSM (dried skimmed milk) 
dual basis 
dual cycle 
dual purpose 
dual space 
dual type 
duck 
duct 
duct 
ductile 
ductile 
ductile 
ductile 
ductility 
ductility 
ductility 
ductless gland (endocrine gland) 
dummy variable 
dune 
dune 
dung 
dunite 
duodenum 
duodenum 
duplex 
duplexer 
duralumin 
dura mater 
dura mater 
duration 
duration 
dust bowl 
dust counter 
dust devil 
dust insecticide 
dust dstorm 
dwarf 
dye 
dye 
dyke 
dyke 
dynamic load 
dynamic meta morphism 
dynamics
dynamic sector 
dynamics of population 
dynamo 
dynamometer 
dynamo theory 
dyne 
dysentry 
dyspnea 
dystocia 
dysuria 
era 
ear 
ear drum 
ear drum (tympanic membrane) 
ear lobe 
earphone 
earth 
earth 
earthenware 
earth flow 
earth ground 
earth pillar 
earth pillar 
earth pressure 
earth quake 
earth quake 
earth quake 
earthquake swarm 
earth rotation 
earth tremor 
earth tremor 
earth work 
earth worm 
earthy 
easterlies 
easting 
eatable 
eave 
ebb current 
ebb tide 
ebonite 
eccentricity 
eccentricity of a conic section 
ecchymosis 
ecdysis (moult) 
echinoderm 
echinoderms 
echo 
eclampsia 
eclipse (of the moon) 
eclipse (of the sun) 
eclipse (of the moon) 
eclipse 
eclogite 
ecologica balance 
ecological nicke 
ecological plastisity 
ecological succession 
ecology
ecology 
ecology 
ecology 
economic geology 
economic traits 
economic transaction 
economizer 
ecospherre 
ecosystem 
ecosystem 
ecotype 
ectoderm 
ectoderm 
ectomy 
ectoparasite (external parasite) 
ectopic 
ectoplasm 
eczema 
E.D.D. 
edaphic 
edaphic 
edphic factor 
eddy 
eddy current 
edema 
edema 
edge 
edge view 
edge view 
edible 
edible portion 
Edison effect 
effect 
effect 
effect 
effective 
effective 
effect 
effective 
effective 
effective constituent 
effective (RMS) current (voltage) 
effective depth 
effective energy 
effective items
effective nuclear charge 
effective valve (RMS valve) 
effector 
effector organ 
effect variable 
efffernt 
efferent 
efferent neurons 
effesive 
efficiency 
efficency 
efficiency of machine 
efficient 
effluent stream 
effluorescence 
effluorescent 
effusion 
effusion 
egestion 
egestion 
eegg nucleus 
egg protein 
egg shell 
ejaculate 
ejaculatory duct 
eject 
ejecta 
ejection 
ejector 
elastance 
elastic
elastic 
elastic 
elastic 
elastic collision 
elastic fluid 
elastic impact 
elastic limit 
elastic limit 
elasticity 
elasticity 
elasticity 
elasticity 
elastic rebound 
elastoresistance 
elastrator 
E-layer 
elbow 
elbow 
elbow 
elbow of capture 
electric 
electrical charge 
electrical impedance 
electical insulator 
electrical load 
electric charge 
electric circuit 
electric current 
electric double layer 
electric energy 
electric field 
electric field 
electric flux 
electric generator 
electric lines of force 
electric network 
electric sourve 
electric spark 
electrization 
electrochemical charge 
electro chemical equivalent 
electrochemical series 
electrochemistry 
electrode 
electrode 
electrode 
electrolysis 
electrolysis 
electrolyte 
electrolyte 
electrolytes 
electrolytic 
electrolytic capacitor 
electrolytic conduction 
electrolyze (to) 
electromagnet 
electromagnet (electromagnetic) spectrum 
electromagnetic interaction 
electromagnetic spectrum 
electromagnetic units 
electromagnetic waves 
electromotive 
electromotive force (emF) 
electromotive force 
electron 
electron 
electron 
electron affinity 
electron beam 
electron beam 
electron capture 
electron cloud
electronegative
electronegativity 
electron gun 
electronic formula 
electronic symbol 
electronics 
electronic transition 
electron microscope 
electron microscope 
electron pair 
electron transfer 
electron tube 
electron volt 
electrphille 
electrophorus 
electroplating 
electroplating 
electroplating 
electroscope 
electroscopem 
electrostatic 
electrostatic energy 
electrostaic generator 
electrostatics 
electrostatic units 
electrovalence 
electrovalent 
element 
element 
element 
element 
element 
element 
elementary out come 
elementary process 
elements of weather and climate 
elephantiasis 
elephantiasis 
elevation 
elevation 
elevation 
elevation-back elevation 
elevation- front elevation 
elevation-left side elevation 
elecation- right side elevation 
elevator 
elevetor 
elimination reaction 
ellipse 
ellipse 
ellipse 
ellipsoid 
ellipitc polarization 
elluvation 
elongation 
elongation 
eluant 
eluate 
elution 
eluviation 
emaciation 
emanation 
emasculation 
emasculation 
embankment 
embankment 
embed 
embedding 
embolus 
embryo 
embryo 
embryo 
embryo 
embryology 
embyo sac 
emergence 
emergency 
emergent 
emergent coast 
emesis 
emigrant 
emigrate 
emigration 
emission 
emission (electron) 
emission 
emission spectrum 
emission spectrum 
emissive 
emissivity 
emit 
emit 
emmiter 
emotion 
emphasis 
empirical 
empirical 
empircal fact 
empiricat formula 
empirieal law 
empty (null) st 
empyema 
emulsify (to) 
emulsifying agent 
emulsification 
emulsion 
emulstion 
emulsion technique 
enamel 
enamel 
enamel 
enamel 
enamelled wire 
enargite 
encephalititis 
encava 
end bearing pile 
end correction 
endemic  
endemic 
endemic  
endemic species 
endmill 
enderogonic 
endergonic 
end fire array 
endocarp 
edndocrine gland 
endocrine system 
endocrinology 
endoderm 
endoderm 
endodermis 
endo-enzyme 
endoergic
endoergic reaction 
endogenetic 
endogenous 
endogenous 
endogenous death 
endolymph 
endometrium 
endometrium 
endomorphism 
endoparasite (internal parasite) 
endophyte 
endoplasm 
endoplasmic reticulum 
endoskeleton 
endo sperm 
endosperm 
endospore 
endothermic 
endothermic 
endothermic process 
endotoxin 
endotoxin 
endozoic 
endplate 
endpoint 
end point 
end point of an interval 
end view 
erema 
energy 
energy balance 
energy barrier 
energy conversion 
energy density 
energy level 
energy level 
energy loss 
energy of activation 
energy state 
energy state diagram 
energage 
engine 
enginnering geology 
English bond 
enlarge 
enlarger 
enrichment 
enthalpy 
enthalpy 
enthalpy 
entine 
entisol  
entomology
entomolgy
entrainment (by sream)
entrenched (of incised) meander
entrepot
entropy
entropy
entropy
environment 
environment 
environment 
environment 
environmental medium
environmental variation
enzyme
enzyme
enzyme
enzymes
eocene
eon
epeorogenesis
epeirogeny
ephemeral
ephemeral
ephemeris
epicenter
epicenter
epicentre
epicontinental  sea
epicotyl
epicotyl
epicycle
epidemic
epidemic
epidermis
epidermis
epidermis
epididymis
epididymis
epididymis
epidote
epigeal
epigeal
epiglottis
epiglottis
epilepsy
epimorphism
epinasty
epiphyseal plate
epiphysis
epiphysis
epiphyte
epiphytes
epiphytotics
episodic
epithelial (epithelium)
epithelium
epizoite
epoch
epsom salt
equal
equal-arm balance
equality
equality of function
equality of number
equalizer
equally likely (equiprobable)
equal probability of selection method
equal sets
equate
equate (to)
equation
equation
equation
equation
equation of state
equator
equator
equatorial climate
equatorial low
equatorial rain forest
equatorial westerlies
equiangualar
equidistant
equigrangular
equilateral
equilateral hyperbola
equilibriant
equilibrium
equilibrium
equinox
equinox
equipartition
equipartion of energy
equipment
equipment
equipotential does
equipotential
equipotnetial line
equipotnetial surface
equivalence
equivalence
equivalence classes
equivalence relation
equivalent
equivalent circuit
equivalent event
equivalent fractions
equivalent network
equivalent sets
equivalent vectors
equivalent weight
era
era
erect
erect image
erector muscle
erepsin
erg
erg
ergotism
Erlenmeyer-flask
erosion
erosion
erratic block
erratic boulder
erratic component
erratic rock
error
error
A-error
B-error
error component
error of approximation 
error term (disturbance term)
erruption (of volcano)
erthrocyte
erythems
escalator
escape (v)
escape velocity
escarpment
escarpment 
escutcheon
esker
esophagous
esophagus
esophagus
essential aminoacid 
essential fatty acid
esterfication 
esterify (to)
estimate (n)
estimate (to)
estimate (point estimate)
estimation
estimation
estimator
estivation
estrogen
estrogen
estuarine coast
estuary
estuary
etching
ether
ethics
ethnography
ethology
etiolation
etiology
Euclidean domain
Euclidean ring
eugenics
eugeosyncline
euhedral
eukaryote
eukaryotic 
eumycetes
eunch
cuphotic zone
Eurasia
eurypterida
Eustachian tube
Eustachian tube 
eustasy
eustatic movement
euthenics
eutrophication
evaporate
evaporate
evaporating dish
evaporation
evaporation
evaporation
evaporation
evaporator
evaporite
evaporatranspiration
even
even
even function
even permutation
even slope
event
event space
evergreen
evergreen
evidence
evolution
evolution
evolution
evolution
evolutionist
ewe
exacerbation
exact
examine (to)
excavation
exceedance
excision
excitation
excitation potential
excite
excited state
exciter
exclusion
exclusion principle
exclusive or gate (XOR)
excreta
excreta
excretion
ecretion
excretory system
exergonic
exergonic
exfoliation
exfoliation
exhalation
exhalation
exhaust mainfold
exhaust valve
exile
exine
existence
exocarp
exocrine
exocrine gland (duct gland)
exo-enzyme
exoergic
exoergic reaction 
exogenetic
exogenous
exogenous
exogenous death
expgenous factor
exoskeleton
exospore
exothermic
exothermic
exothermic
exothermic reaction
exotic
exotic
exotic plant
exotoxin
exotoxin
expand
expansion
expansion bolt 
expansion joint
expansion ratio
expectation
expected value
expectorate
experience
experiment
experiment
experiment
experimental
experimenta control 
experimental design
expiration
explained variability (regression)
explode (to)
explosion
explosion
explosion
explosive
explosive rivet
exponent
exponent
exponential decay
exponential decay
exponential equation 
exponential function
exponential trend
export 
expose (to)
exposed aggregate
exposure
exposure
expression
extend
extension
extension
extension by radical 
extension of a field
extension of an algebraic structure
extensive
extensive farming
extensive property
extensive quantity
extensor muscle
exterior angle of a polygon
exterior angles
exterior of a circle
exterior of an angle
exterior of a polygon
exteriror point
external
external
external
external auditory meatus (external canal)
external digestion
external fertilization
external force
external genitalia
external intercostal muscles
external respiration
extinct
extinct
extinction
extinction
extinction
extinction
extinction coefficient
extinct species
extinct species
extinct volcano
extinguish (to)
extracellular
extracellular digestion
extracellular digestion
extracellular enzyme
extracellular enzyme
extracellular fluid 
extract (n)
extract (to)
extract
extraction
extraction apparatus
extractor
extractor
extragalactic
extraneous solution
extrapolate
extrapolate
extrapolation
exteme climate
extremities
extremities
extremum (point)
extremum value
extrinaic semi conductor
extrinsic
extruded
extrusion 
extrusive igneous rock 
extrusive rock
exudate
exudate
exudation pressure
eye (of hurricane)
eye
eye-ball
eyebrow
eye-coat
eye lash
eye lash 
eye lid 
eyelids
eye muscles (ocular muscles)
eye piece
fabric
fabricated building components
facade
face (for teeth of gear)
face
face angle
faceplate
facial
facies
facing wall
factor 
factor 
factor of safety
factorial (n-factorial)
factorial experiment
factorization
factorize 
facultative parasite
faeces
faeces
faeces
Fahrenheit
Fahrenheit scale
Fahrenheit scale
failure
fainting
fall (n)
fall line 
fall line 
Fallopian tube
fall out
fall-out
fallow
false ceiling
false fruit
false hypothesis
false ribs
false set
false work
family
family
family (of circles :lines…)
family planning
famine
fan
Fan
fan belt
fang
fang bolt
farad
Faraday's law of electrolysis
Faraday's law of induction
farm price index
farn yard manure (farm manure)
far point
farsightedness
fascia
fascia
fascia board
fastener
fat
fat
fat
fat
fat
fat body 
fat body 
fat soluble
fat soluble vitamin
fathom
fatigue
fatigue
fats
fattening
fatty
fatty acid
fatty acids
faucet
fault
fault
fault coast
fault creep
fault line
fault plane
fault scarp
fault scarp
fault trap
fauna
fauna
fauna
fauna
faunizone
feather
febrile
fecal energy
fecundity
fecundity
fecundity
fecundity
federation
feederer
feed pipe
feeder (lines)
feeder lines
feeder route
feeding
feldspar
feldspar
felling
female contact
femoral
femoral artery
femoral vein
femur
femur
fenstration
ferment
ferment (to)
ferment
fermentation
fementation
fern
ferro-cemento
ferromagnesians
ferromagnetic
ferromagentism
ferrous
fertility (plant)
fertility (soil)
fertility
fertility rate
fertility rate
fertilization (soil)
fertiliation 
fertilization 
fertilize
fertilizer
fertilizer
feruic
fetal
fetal position
fetal stethoscope
fetch
fetor
fetus (foetus)
fetus
fever
fiber
fiber
fiber cell
fiber crops
fibre
fibril
fibrin
fibrinogen
fibrosis
fibrous protein
fibrous root
fibrous root
fibrous roots
fibula 
fibula 
fidelity
field
field
α field
field-book
field capacity
field capacity (of soils)
field distance
field effect transitor 
field lines
field magnet
field strength (intensity)
figure
figure
filament
filament
filament
filament
filament
filament lamp
filamentous
filar
filar micrometer
file
file 
filial generation
filler
fillet
film
film
filter (n) 
filter (to)
filter
filter (electrical)
filter
filter by suction
filtered
filter paper
filter press
filtering flask
filtrate
filtration
fin
fin
final host
financial enterprise sector
fine (thread)
fine aggregate
fine grained rock
fineness
fineness modulus
fine silt
finish
finishing
finite
finite extension
finite field
finite group
finite number
finite population
finite population correction
finite sequence
finite series
finite set
fin-rays
fiord
fiord
fire ball
fire extinguisher
firing order 
firmament
firn
firn
first aid 
first angle projection
first derivative test
firstpolar body
fishbone antenna
fissility
fission
fission
fission
fissure
fissure
fissure
fiossure
fissure eruption
fistula
fit
fitting
fittings
fixative (fixing agent)
fixed 
fixed carbon
fixed dunes
fixed effect
fixed point
fixed point
fixed pulley
fixer
fixing (fixation)
fixing moment
flaccid
flagella
flagellates
flame
flame
flange
flange
flanged coupling 
flank (for gear teeth)
flap
flash (adj.)
flashing
flash point 
flask
flat
flat
flat gradient
flat roof
flattening
flatter
flatus
flatworm
F-layer 
fleece
flemish bond
flesh
flex
flex
flexible
flexible
flexibility
flexion
flexor
flexor muscle
flexural
flexural stress
flexure
flexure
flight
flint
flint
flip flop
floatation
float finish 
floating
floating ribs
flocculation
flocculation
flock size
flood
flood abatement
flood crest
flood frequency
flooding
flooding
flood plain
flood plain
flood regulation
flood tide
floor
floor plan
flora
flora
flora
floret
floret
flotsam
flourescence
flow
flow diagram 
flower (s)
flower
flower bud
flowering plant
flower of sulphur
flower stalk
flow load
flow of a river
flow resources
flow stone
fluctuation
flue
flue (gas)
fluff
fluid
fluid
fluid
fluid dunamics
fluidity
fluorescence
fluorescent
fluorite
fluorosis
flush
flush rivet
fluted (filter)
fluvial
fluvial deposit
fluviatile
fluvioglacial
flux
flux
flux density
flux linkage
fly
flysch
fly wheel
foam
focal
focal antenna
focal length
focal plain
focal point
focus (of earth quake)
focus 
focus
focus
focus (to)
focused (adj.)
focus of earthquake
fodder crop 
foder crops
foetation (featation)
foetus (fetus)
fog
fohn
fold
fold
fold mountain
foliation
foliation 
foliation
foliation
follicle
follicle
follicle stimulating hormone
fontanelle
food additives
food analysis
food chain
food contaminant
food energy
food oxidation
food preservation
food preservative
food recipe
food standards
food stuffs
food technologist
food technology
food value
food web
foot
foot and mouth disease
foothill
footing
foot path
foot print
foot print
foot rot
footstep bearing 
foot valve
foot wall
forage 
foramen
foramen magnum
forbidden
forbidden state
force
force fit
forced convection
forced vibration
force malt
forceps
ford
forearms
forebrain
forecast (predict)
foredeep
foredunes
forehead
foreign body
foreland
foreland
foreman
foreshock
foreshock
foreshore
foreshorten (-ing)
foresight
forest
forestation(af-)
forest bed
forest mensuration
fore-udder
forewing
forge(v)
forged 
fork-lift truck
form
foormalin
formation
formation
formation
formation level
form work
formula
formula
formula
formulate (to)
formulate (v)
formulation 
formulation 
formulat weight
forward (bias)
fossil
fossil
fossil fuel
fossil fuel
fossil mineral
fossil soil
Foucault method
foundation
foundation seed
fourth power law
four stroke engine
fovea centralis
fowl
fractile
fraction
fraction
fractional distillation
fractionating column
fractionation
fractionation
fraction collector
fracture
fracture
fracture
fracture zone
frame
frame
frame of reference
frame work
fraternal twins
Fraunhofer lines
free body
free end
free energy
free energy
free expansion
free fall
free living
free living organism
free martin
free oscillation
free stone
free vibration
free wheel
freeze (to)
freeze 
freezer
freeze-thaw
freezing 
freezing point
freezing point
freezing point
French curve
French curve
French window
frenulum
Freon
frequency
freqneucy
frequency
frequency
freqneucy converter
frequency discrimination
frequency distribution
frequency mixer
frequency modulation (FM)
frequency modulation
frequency polygon
frequency response
fresh breeze
fresh gale
fresh water
fresh water
fresh weight
friable
friction
friction
friction dise
friction pile
fried banana
frigid zone
fringe
fringing reef
fringing reef
frog
frond
front
frontal bone
frontal bone
frontal rain
frontier
front view 
frost 
frost 
frost action
frost free period
frost heaving
frost polygon
frost wedging
frothy
fructose
fruit
fruit-fly
frustrum of a cone
frustrum of a pyramid
fuel
fuel cell
fuel injection
fulcrum
fulcrum
full-cream milk
fuller 
full wave rectification
fumarole
fume hood
fumerole
fumigation
function
function
function
functional group
fundamental
fundamental
fundamantal law
fundamental theorem of calculus
fundamental tissues
fund resources
fundus
fundus
fungicide
fungicide
fungus
fungus
fungus
funnel
funnel
funnel chest
furnace
furnace
furniture
furrign
furrow
fuse
fuse
fuse (v)
fushing
fusion
fusion
fusion
fusion
fusion nucleus
gabbro
gable 
gable roof
gain
gain 
galactic disc
galactose
galaxy
galaxy
galaxy
gale
galena
gall bladder
gall bladder
gallery
gallery
gallery forest 
gallery forest 
gallop
galvanic cell
galvanization
galvanize (to)
galvanize
galvanized
galvanized iron
galvanometer
galvanometer
galvanotropism
game
gametocyte
gametogenesis
gametogonium
gametophyte
gamma ray
ganged capacitor
ganglion
ganglion (ganglia)
gangrene
gang saw
gangue
gantry
gantry crane
gaoge
gap
gargolyl
gas
gas
gas
gas chromatography
gas constant
gas diode
gaseous state
gasket
gasoline benzine-benzene
gasometer (gas holder)
gasping
gastric
gastric
gastric gland
gastric juice
gastric juice
gastric juice
gastrin
gastritis
gastriciel
gastricueminus 
gastrodermis
gastroenteritis
gastroenteritis
gastro entrology
gastro intestinal diseases
gastro intestinal tract 
gastrovascular cavity
gastrulation
gastrulla
gas turbine 
gate
gate valve
gate valve
gauge
gauge (n)
gauge (v)
gauge pressure
Gaussian lens equation
gauze
gavel
Gay Lussac's law
gce
geanticline
gearing
gear pump
gear train
Geiger counter
Geiger counter 
Geiger's rule
gemma
gemorphology
gem stone
gene
gene
gene locus
gene mutation
gene pool
general
general fertility rate
general theory of relativity
generate
generation
generation
generation interval (length)
generation life table
generation number
generative nuclues
generator
generator
genesis
genetic damage
genetic recombination
genetic (plant)
genetics
geniculated
genitalia
genitalia
genito-urinary system
genotype
genotype
genotypic variation
gentian violet
gentle breeze
gentle gradient
genus 
geo
geocentric
goechemistry
geochronology
geode
geodesy
geodesy
geodetic
geographical determinism
geographical environment
geographical grid
geographical isolation
geographical pole
geography
geoid
geological history
geological occurrence
geological time
geologic column
geologic
geologic revolution
geologic time
geology
geomagnetism
geometrical 
geometrical isomerism
geometrical optics
geometric mean
geometric progression 
geometric series
geometry
geomorphology
geophysical
geophysics
geophysics
geophysics
geopolitic
geosyncline
geosyncline
geotaxis
geothermal
geothermal
geotropic
geotropism
germ
germ
germcell
germcell (gamete)
germ cell cell)
germicide
germinated seed
germination
germination
germinative layer 
germplasm
germ theory
gesso
gestation
gestation period
gestation period
geyser
geyser
ghetto
ghost
ghost town
giardia
giardiasis
gibberelin
gibbus
gibosity
gill
gill
gill arch
gill chamber
fill filament
gill rackers
gill slits
gimlet
gingira
girder
girdle
gizzard
gizzard
glacioal deposit
glacial period
glaciated rock
glaciation
glaciation
glacier
gland 
gland 
gland 
gland 
gland cistern (lactiferous sinus)
glass
glass
glass
glass wool
glassy
gl;aze
glazed paper
glenoid
glenoid fossa
flide
gliding plane
globe
globe
globe (stop) valve
flobular protein
globule
globulin
globiulin
glomerulus
glomerulus
glottis
glove
gloves
glow
glucose
glucose
glucose
glume
glutelins
gluten
glutenin
glyceride
glycerides
glycerol
glycine
glycogen
glycogen
glcogen
glycolysis
glycosuria
gneiss
gnomonic projection
goat brain
goggles
going
goiter
goiter
goiter
golden algae
golgi gody (golgi apparatus)
gonad
gonadotrophin
gondwanaland
gondwanaland
gonod
gonorrhea
good apetite
goodness of fit
goodness of fit test
goose
gorge
gossan
gouge
gouge
gout
governor
government expenditure
government savings
government sector
gown
graafian follicle
graafian follicle
grab
graben
gradation
graded
graded bedding
graded shading
grade of ore
grader
gradient
gradient
gradient
gradient of a river
grading
grading seeds)
graduate (to)
graduated pipette
graduation
graduation line
graft
graft (-ing)
graft
grain (crop)
grain 
grain in matrix
grain
grain
grain crops
graininess
grain-shape
gram atomic weight
gram equivalent weight
gram molecular weight
grand mean 
granite
granite
granitization
granophyre
granophyric texture
grangular disintegration
granular texture
granulation
granule
granule
granulite
granuloma ingiunale
granvle
graph
graph
graph
graph
graphic representation 
graphite
graphite
graphite
graphite
graphite pile
grass
grass land
grass lands
grassland soil
grass thicket
graticule
grating
grating space
gravel
gravel
gravel
gravimetric analysis
gravimetry 
gravitation
gravitational constant 
gravitational field
gravity
gravity
gravity dam
gravity folding 
gravity gliding
gravity tectonics
grazer
grazer
grazing
grazing graound 
grazing land 
grazing season
grease
grease
grease 
grease gun
great circle
great circle
great circle
greater than (˃)
greater than or equal to (≥)
great comma divisor 
great trochanter
greatest element
greatest integer function 
greatest lower bound
green algae 
green house (glass house)
green house (glass house)
green house
green house effect
green manure 
green manure 
greenschist
greenstone
Greenwich mean time (GMT)
gregarious phase
gregarious phase
grey matter
grey wacke
grid
grid
gridiron perispective
grid north
grid origin
grind (to)
grinder (in stream)
grinding
grinding mill
grinding wheel
grindstone
groid 
groin
groom
groove
gross energy
gross national product 
gross production rate
gross profit 
grotto 
ground 
ground 
ground 
ground cover
ground floor
ground joint
ground (bottom) maraine
ground mass
ground moraine 
ground state
ground state
ground water 
ground water 
group
group
group
grouped data 
grouping 
grouping error
group theory
grout 
grove
growing season 
grown junction
growth 
growth 
growth chart
growth hormone 
growth hormone 
growth hormone 
growth movement 
grub screw 
gruel 
grummusol
gurad cell 
guide 
guide 
gulf 
gulley erosion 
gullies 
gulley erosion 
gume 
gumbotil 
gun cotton 
gun powder 
gunite 
gusset 
guttation 
gutter bracket 
guyot 
gymnosperm 
gynaecologist (gyneco)
gynaecology (gynecology) 
gynoecium 
gypsum 
gypsum 
gypsum 
gypsum 
gyration 
gyroscope
gyrus
habitat
habitat
habitat
habitat isolation 
habituation 
habutation 
hachures
hackle
hackley
hack saw
hadal
haematemesis
haematology
haemolysis
haemophilia 
haemorrhage
hail 
hail 
hair
hair cell
hair crack
hair folicle
hair hygrometer
hair papilla
hairspring 
half bat
half-closed interval
half inferior ovary
half-layer 
half -life 
half-life
half-line (rays)
half plane
half -power frequency
half-sibs 
half value
half wave restification 
halite
halo
halo
halogen
halophyte
halophyte
halophytes
halter
halving 
ham
hamlet
hammada (hamada)
hammer 
hand
handicap
hand mating
hand saw
hand sprayer
hand vice 
hanging valley 
hanging wall
haphazard sampling 
haptotropisem 
harbour 
hard 
hard acid 
hard cation
hard core
hardiness
hardness
hardness
hardness
hardness
hard pan
hard pan
hard radiation
hard up
hard water
hard wood
hard wood
harmattan 
harmonic 
harmonic function 
harmonic mean 
harmonic motion 
harmonics
harmonic series 
harmonic series 
harrow 
harrowing 
harvest 
hatchability 
hatchery
hatchery
hatchet
hatching 
haustoria 
haversian canals
hay
hay-rack
hazard
haze (of the atmosphere)
head
head (of a coin)
header 
heade index
heading bond 
head land
head room
headstock
head stream
headward erosion
headward erosion
head water
hearing
heart
heart beat
heart burn
heart chamber
heart fillure
heart girth
hearth
heart wood
heat (period)
heat
heat (to)
heat
heat capacity
heat capacity
heat content
heat dissipation
heat engine
heat equator
heater
heater
heat exchanger
heat flux
heating (adj.)
heating
heating flame
heating mantle
heat insulating
heat of combustion
heat of condensation
heat of formation
heat of fusion
heat of fusion 
heat of reaction
heat of solidification
heat of sublimation
heat of transformation
heat of vaporization
heat of vaporization
heat pump
heat radiation
heat resistance
heat sink
heat valve
heavenly body 
heavy 
heavy hydrogen
heavy metal
heavy soil
heavy water
hedges
height
height
height
height sticks
helical
helical
helical stair
heliminth
heliocentric
heliport
helix
helix
hell-in
hematite
hematite
hematuria
hemimorphite
hemiplegia
hemisphere
hemisphere
hemisphere
hemoglobin
hemopoiesis
hemorrhage
hemorrhage external
hemorrhage internal
hemorrhoid
henry
hepatic duct
hepatic portal vien
heptatitis
herb
herb
herb
herbaceous
herbacious
herbalist
herbarium
herbicide
herbicide
herbicide
herbicide
herbivore
herbivorous
herbivorous
hercyulam orogeny
herd
herd replacement
hereditary
hereditary
ereditary variation
heredity
heredity
hermaphrodite
hermaphrodite
hernia
herring bond
herring-bone gear
hertz
hetrocyst
herterodyne
heterogenous
heterosced asticity
heterosis
heterosis
heterothllic
heterotroph
heterotrophic
heterotrophism
heterozygote
heterzygous
hetrogamete
hetrogamous
hetrogamy
hetrogeneous (adj.)
hetrolysis
hetrosis (hydbrid vigor)
hetrozygote
hetrozygous
hexagon
hexagonal
Hexagonal system 
hexahedron
hibernation
hibernation
hiccup
high atmospheric pressure,
high carbon steel
higher derivatives
highest
highest common factor
high frequency (HF)
high latitude
high pass filter
high pressure cell
high savanna
highway
hill shading
hilum
hilum 
hind (rear-udder)
hindbrain
hindwing
hinge
hinge joint
hinterland
hip
hip
hip bone (-illium)
hipped roof
histidine
histogram
histology
historical geology
hoar frost
hoarsness
hob
hoe
hoe
hog
hogback
hogback
hogging
hoist
holder
hole
hollow core door 
hollow masonory unit
holocrystalline
holophytic
holozoic
homeostasis
homeotherm
home range
homestead
hominid
hominds
homo
homoerectus
homogeneous (adj.)
homogenizer
homogenous
homogenous
homologous
homologous
homologous
homologous chromosomes
homologous organs
homologous series
homolographic projection 
homologue
homology
homolysis
homomorphism
homo neanderthalis
Homo sapiens
Homosapiens
homosced asticity
homosphere
homozygote
homozygote
homozygous
homozygous
hoof
hoof trimares
hook
hook
hook (of worms eg. Tapeworm)
hook-nail
hook spanner
Hook's law
hood worm
hook worm
horizon (soil)
horizon (soil)
horizon (soil)
horizontal
horizontal
horizontal
horizontal axis
horizontal axis
horizontal component
horizontal control
horizontal range
hormone
hormone
hormone
hormone
hormone
horn
horn antenna
hornblende
hornblende
hornfels
horny layer
horse lattitude
horse latitudes
horse power hour
horse shoe magnet
horse taill
horst
horst
horticulture
horticulture
hose
host
host
host
hosteomalacia
hot
hotiron dehorent
hot plate
hot-rolled
hot rulling
hot spot 
hot spring
hot spring
hoygen's principles
hoypostyle
hub
hub cap
hudlling
hull
hull
hulled
hull-less
hum
humnerus
humerus
humld
humldity
humidity
hummocky
hump
humpless
humus
humus
humus
humus
huronininian
hurricane
hurricane
husk
hyaline
hybrid
hybrid
hybrid
hybrid breakdown
hybrid circuit 
hybridization
hybridization
hybridization
hybrid sterility
hybrid vigour (heterosis)
hybridized orbital
hydatid
hydrate (to)
hydrate 
hydration
hydration
hydration
hydration
hydraulic
hydraulic action
hydroalic brake
hydraulic coupling
hydraulic grade
hydraulid gradient
hydraulic lift
hydraulic press
hydraulic 
hydraulic turbine
hydrocarbon
hydrocele
hydrodynamics
hydroelectric power
hydrogen
hydrogenate
hydrogenation
hydrogen bomb
hydrogen bond
hydrogen torch
hydrogeology
hydrologic (water) cycle
hydrologic cycle
hydrology
hydrology
hydroplogy
hydrolysis
hydrometer
hydrometer
hydrophobia
hydrophyte
hydrophyte
hydrophytes
hydroponics
hydrosphere
hydrosphere
hydrostatic pressure
hydrostatics
hydrothermal solution
hydrotropism
hygiene (the science)
hygrometer
hygrometer
hygrometer
hygrophilous
hygroscope
hygroscopic
hygroscopy
hymen
hymen
hypayssal rock
hyper
hyper
hyperbola 
hyperbola 
hyperboloidof one sheet
hyperboloid of two sheets
hyper emesis gravidarm
hyperglycemia
hyperglycemia
hypermetropia
hyperon
hyperpysreixa
hypersonic velocity
hypersthene
hypertension
hypter thyroidism
hypertonic
hyptertrophy
hypervitaminosis
hypha
hypocentre
hypochondrium
hypocotyl
hypocotyl
hypogeal
hypogeal
hypoglycemia
hypoglycemia
hypotension
hypotenuse
hypothermia
hypothermia
hypothesis
hypothesis
hypothesis
hypothesis
hypothesise
hypothesis of an implication (antecedent)
hypothesis testing
hypothetical cohort
hypothetical population 
hypothyroidism
hypotonic
hypovitaminosis
hyposometer
hyteresis
hysteresis
hysteresis loop
I-beam
ice
ice
ice-berg
ice cap
ice cap
ice crustal
ice point
ice sheet
ice sheet
ichthyology
ICSM (instant coren soya milk)
icterus
ideal
ideal gas
ideal solution
identical twins
identification 
identity
identity element
identity matrix (unit matrix)
idle 
idler gear
ideal pulley
igneous rock
igneous rock
ignite (to)
ignite 
ignition
ignition
ignition coil
ignition temperature
ileocecal valve
ileum
ileum
ilium
illegitimate seed
illite
illumination (n)
illumination photometer
illuminometer
illuvial horzon
illuviation
ilmenite
image
image
image
imaginary axis
imaginary line
imaginary number
imaginary part
imaginary part of a complex number
imbibition
imbibition pressure
immerse (to)
immersion
immersion
immigrant
immigrate
immigration
immiscibility
immiscible
immitance
immobile
immune
immunity
immunity
immunization (active)
immunization (passive)
impact metamorphism 
impact metamorphism 
impedance
Impedance
impedance matching
impeller 
imperfect flower
imperfect flower
impermeability
impermeable
impermeable
impermeable
impermeable
imp[ermeable
impermeable membrane
impervious
impetigo
implantation
implantation
implication
implicit differntiation
implosion
import
impossible event
impotence
impregnate
impregnated coild
impregnation
impregnation
impression
imprinting
improper fraction
improper integral
improper integral of the first kind
improper integral of the second kind
impulse (delta function)
impulse (delta function)
impulse
impulse
impulse-momentum principle
impulsive
impulsive force
impure
impurity
impurity
inactive
inactive volcano
inactivity
inanimate
inbredline
inbreeding
inbreeding
inbreeding
incandescent
incanescent lamp
in-centre
inceptisol
inch
incidence
incidence
incidence
incident
incident light
incident ray
incise
incised meander
incision
incisors
incisors
inclination
inclination
iunclination
inclination of a line
inlinator
inclined plane
incommensurable quantities
incompatibility
incompatible
incomplete dominance (partial dominance)
incomplete flower
incomplete metamorphosis
inconsistent
inconsistent equation
incontinence
incosahedron
increasing function
incubate
incubation
incubation period
incubation period
incubator
indefinable
indefinables of mechanics
indefinite (indeterminate) inflorescence
indefinite integral
indehiscent
indehiscent fruit
indentation
independent disturbance
independent variable
independence
independent
independent assortment
independent equation
indeterminacy
indeterminacy principle 
indeterminate (inflorescence)
index
index
index
index finger
index fossil
index of refraction
index of summation
indicator
indicator organism
indicator species
indicatrit
indigenous 
indigestible
indigestion
indigo
indirect
indirect biological assay
indirect variation
individual merit testing
induce
induced
induced current
induced electromotive force
induced EMF
induced voltage
inductance
induction 
induction 
inductin coil
induction motor
inductive
inductive
inductive effect 
omdictove reactance
inductive reasoning
inductive tuning
inductor
induration
induration
industrialized building
industrial waste
inelastic
inelastic ollision
inequality
inequality
inert
inert gs
inertance
inertia
inertial force
inertial frame
inertial mass
inertness
inface (of cuesta)
infant
infant
infant feeding
infection
infection
inerior conchae
inferior ovary
inferior vena cava
infertility
infestat
infestation
infinite
infinite
infinite extension
infinite field
infinite group
infinite limit
infinite number
infinite population
infinite sequence
infinite sign
infinitesimal
infirmity
inflammability
inflammable (flammable)
inflammation
inflated
inflorescence
inflorescence
influenza
infocus
informatiion
infra-class
infrared lamp
infrared 
infrared
infra-species
infusion
ingestion
ingestion 
ingle nook
ingot
inguinal
inguinal canal
inhalation (inspiration)
inhalation (inspiration)
inheritance
inherited
inhibition
inhibition
inhibition
inhibitor
inhibitor
initial opint
initial set
initial side of an angle
inject 
injection
inland
inland
inland basin
inland delta
inland delta
inland drainage basin 
inlet
inlet
inlet manifold
inlier
in-migrant
inner ear
inner shell membrance
innominate bone
inoculate
inoculation
inoculation
inorganic
inorganic
in phase
input
input
input impedance
inscribed
inscribed angle
inscribed circle
inscribed polygon
inscribed polyhedron
inscribed sphere
insect
insect
insect-borne
insecticide
insecticie
insecticide
insectivores
inselberg
inselberg
insemination
insequent drainage (stream)
insertion
insertion (of muscle)
insidious
insight learning
insolation
insolation
insolation
insoluble
insolvable equation
insomnia
inspection
inspection
installation
instant
instant coffee
instant milk
instant tea
instantaneous
instantaneous acceleration
instantaneous velocity
instar
instinct
instinct
instinct
insinctive
instinctive
instinctively
instinctive reaction
instruction register
instrument
instrument
instrument
instrumental analysis
instrumentation
insular climate
insulate (to)
insulate
insulation
insulation
insulator
insulator
insulator
insulin
insulin
intaglio
intake
intake
integer
integer function
integrable
integral
integral caculus
integral domain
integral symbol (s)
integral test
integrate
integrated circuit
integration
integration
integration by parts
integtation by substitution
integration technique
intelligence quotient
intense
intensifying screen
intensity
intensity
intensity of illumination
intensive 
intensive cultivtion
intensive farming
intensive property
inter
interaction
interaction
interaction
interatomic
intercellular enzyme
intercellular fluid 
intercensal data
inter-census (inter-censal)
intercept(n)
intercept(v)
intercept
intercostal
intercostal
intercostal muscles
intercourse
interest
interface
interface
interere
interference
interference
interference figure
interference of light 
interference of sound
interferometer
interfluve
interglacial
intergranular
interior angle of a polygon
interior angles
interior drainage
interior of a circle
interior of an angle
interoior ofpolygon
interior point
interior span
interlobate morine
interlocking spurs
intermediate
intermediate (n)
intermediate
intermediate
intermediate frequency
intermediate goods
intermediate host
intermediate host
intermediate lava
intermediate rock
iontermediate value theorem
intermittent
intermolecular
intermontane
internal
internal
internal
internal combusion (IC) engine
internal digestion
internal energy
internal energy
internal fertilization
internal force
internal intercostal muscles
internal medicine
interna; migration
internal organ
internal reflection
internal resistance 
internal respiration
international date line
international migration
internist
internode
internode
interphase
inter-planting (cropping)
interplanting
interpolate
interpolate
interpolation
interpreter
inter-quartile range
interrupted projection
intersect (v)
intersection
intersection of two lines
intersection of two planes
inter sex
interspecific competetion
interspecifc hybridization
interstellar
interstellar matter
interstice
interstitial
interstitial
intertilled crops
interval 
interval 
interval estimate 
interval estimation 
interval of convergence 
intestinal amylase 
intestinal glands 
intestinal juice 
intestinal juice 
intestinal obstruction 
intestinal parasites 
intestine
intine 
intolerance 
intoxication
intra 
intra-auricular septum 
intracellular 
intracellular 
intra-cellular digestion
intra-cellular digestion
intracellular enzyme
intracellular enzyme
intracellular fluid
intraclast
intradermal 
intragranular
intramascular
intramascular
intramolecular 
intra-natal 
intraperitoneal 
intraspeciefic competetion
intra-uterine 
intrauterine device
intravenous 
intra-venous 
intraventrcular septum 
intrinsic 
intrinsic 
intrinsic birth rate 
intrinsic death rate 
intrinsic property 
intrinsic rate of increase
intrinsic semi-conductor 
intrusive igneous rock 
intrusive rock 
intussusception 
invar 
invariant 
invariant quantity 
invention 
inventory 
inverse
inverse 
inverse correlation 
inverse function 
inverse function theorem
inverse of a matrix 
inverse relation 
inverse square law 
inversion 
inversion (of temperature)
inversion 
inverst 
invertebrate 
inverted
inverted image 
invertible matrix 
investigate (to) 
investigation 
invisible 
invitro
invitro 
invivo 
invivo 
involuntrary 
involuntrary action
involuntrary muscles 
iodine 
iodine 
iodine value 
iodization 
iodized salt 
iodometry 
ion 
ion 
ionization 
ionization 
ionization chamber
ionization energy 
ionize 
ionosphere 
ionosphere 
ionosphere 
ion-pair
iris 
iris 
iron 
iron core
iron-stone 
iron support iron ring 
irradiation 
irrational number 
irreducible
irreducible polynomial
irragular 
irregular flower 
irreversib ility 
irreversible
irreversible
irreversible
irreversible process
irrigation
irigation
irritability
irritability
irritability
irritaton
irrotatonal 
irrotatonal motion
isanomalous line
isarithm
ischaemia 
ischium
ischium
isenthalpic process
isentropic 
island arc 
islands of Langer hans 
islets of Langer hans 
iso-leucine 
isobar 
isobar 
isobaric
isobaric process 
isobath 
isochemical 
isochoric
isochoric process 
isochronous
isogamete 
isogamete 
isogamy
isogonic line
isogram
isogyre 
isohaline 
isohyets 
isohypeal
isolating mechanism
isoline
isolation
isolation 
isoline 
isomer 
isomerism 
isometric (drawing)
isometric line 
isometric projection 
isometric system 
isomorphism 
isomorphous
isomorphous
isomorphous replacement 
isoneph
isopleth
isosceles trapezium 
isoseismal line 
isostatic 
isostays 
isotach 
isotherm 
isotherm 
isothermal 
isotonic 
isotonic 
isotope
isotope
isotopic
isotropic
isotropic
isthmus
itching 
itch mite 
jack 
jamb
jamming (for mechanical elements)
jamming
jar
jasper 
jaundice 
jaw 
jaw 
jejunum
jejunum
jemstone(precious stone)
jet 
jet 
jet piercing
jet propulsion
jettison
jetty (pier)
jetty
jewel
jib crane 
jigger 
joint
joint
joint
joint
jont (in a rock)
joint
joint
joint probability density function
joints 
joint sealant 
joist 
Joule 
Joule's law 
journal 
jubilee clip (worm-drive clip)
judgement sample 
jump
junction (n)
junction transistor 
jungle 
kala-azar 
kaolin
karst 
karst 
karyogamy
karyokinesis 
katabatic wind 
keel 
keel petal
keeper (for magnet)
keloid 
Kelvin temperature 
keratin 
keratophyre 
kerb
kernel
kernel
kerogen
kerosene 
ketone 
ketosis
kettle lake 
key 
key holesaw 
keys 
keyway 
khamisis 
kidney
kidney failure 
kidney stone 
killing frost 
kiln drying 
kilo 
kilogram
kilometer 
kilowatt 
kilowatt-hour
kimberlite 
kindling
kindling temperature
kinematics
kinetic
kinetic
kinetic energy
kinetic friction
kinetics
kinetic theory of gases 
king closure 
kingdom 
king pin 
king post 
kit 
klystrontube 
knee 
knee 
knick point 
knob 
knock 
knoll
knot
knot (in speed measurement)
knuckle joint
knul
Koplik's spot
kurtosis
kwashiorkor
kwashiorkour
kyanite
kyphosis
labia
labia-inner
labia majora
labia minora
labia-outer
labial palp
labile
labile complex
lability
labium (labia)
labium
lable 
laboratory
laboratory
labour
labradorite
labrum
labyrinth
lacation
laccolith
lacetation
lacolith
lacrimal duct
lacrimal gland
lactation
lacteals
lactogen hormone 
lactose
lactose 
lactrimal
lacustrine
lacustrine
ladder
laddle
laevorotatory
lag 
lag 
lag deposit
lagged variable 
lagging
lagoon 
lag time
lahar 
laitance 
lally coiumn
Lamarckism
lamb
lambing pen 
lamina 
lamina 
laminar
laminar plow 
laminar flow
laminated cote
laminating
lamination
laminations 
lamp
lampblack
land breeze 
land clearing
landfill 
landform
land mass
land preparation 
land scape
land slide
land slide
lanos
lap
lapilli
lapilli
lap joint 
lap joint 
lapping 
lapping compound
lapse rate (of temperature)
lard 
large intestine 
large intestine 
larva 
larva 
larvicide
larynx
larynx
latch (wood)
latching relay
latent 
latent heat
latent heat 
lateral 
lateral 
lateral (adj.)
lateral 
lateral area
lateral bud (axillary bud)
lateral corrasion
lateral edge 
lateral erosion
lateral face 
lateral line 
lateral magnificaion
lateral meristem
lateral (marginal) moraine 
lateral moraine
lateral process 
lateral vein
laterite 
lateritic soil
latery
late 
lathe
lather
lattice 
latitude 
lattice 
lattice 
lattice 
lattice crystal
lattice energy
laue diffraction
launcher 
launching pad 
laundry chute 
Laurasia
lava
lava
lava cone 
lavage 
lava plateau
lava ridge
lavatory 
law 
law 
lawn
law of acceleration
law of areas
law of interaction 
law of reflection
laxative 
lay 
lay (counter) shaft 
layer (rock)
layer
layer
layer coloring
layering 
layering 
layering 
layer tinting 
L-beam
leaching (soil)
leaching 
leaching 
lead 
lead 
lead 
lead 
leading coefficent 
leaf(-ves)
leaf-axil 
leaf blade (lamina) 
leaf-blade
leaf-bud
leaf electroscope 
leaf-gap 
leaflet 
leaf-mosaic 
leaf premordium
leaf-scar 
leaf-stalk
leaf-trace 
leaf-vein
leak (leakage)
leakage 
lean-to roff 
leap year 
least 
least action perinciple 
least common multiple 
least element 
least integer function 
least squares method 
least uppper bound 
ledger 
lee ward 
left atrium
left-hand rule 
left-hand thread 
left limit 
left side 
left ventricle 
leg (of a right triangle) 
leg
legend (key)
legitimate birth 
legume
leguminous plants
leishmaniasis
lemma
length
length
length
lens
lens
lens
lens
lens eye 
lenticel
lenticular cloud 
Lenz's law
lepromatous 
leprosy
lepton
lequminous 
lesion 
lesser trochanter 
less than (<)
let-down reflex 
lethal
lethal dose 
lethal dose 
leucine 
leucocyte 
lecoplast 
leukemia
levator muscle
levee 
levee 
level 
level 
level 
leveling 
level of significance 
lever Bc
lever Em
lever p
lever arm 
LGV lymphogranuloma venerium)
liana 
libido 
libration
lichen
lichen 
life cycle 
life expectancy 
life table 
life time 
lift 
ligament 
ligament 
ligand 
light (breeze)
light
light air 
light-dead light 
light emitting diode
lightening
lightening arrester 
lightening conductor
ligheter
light house
light intensity 
light microscope
light pavement light 
light reaction
light soil 
light weight
light year 
light year 
lighnan 
lignin
lignite 
ligule 
likeness 
limb 
limb 
limbs 
lime
lime 
lime crust 
limestone 
limestone 
lime stone 
lime stone cavern 
liming 
limit
limit (in dimensioning)
limit
limit design 
limiter 
limiter 
limiting factor 
limiting reagent 
limiting resistor 
limit of proportionality 
limit of resolution 
limits of integration 
limnology 
limonite 
line 
line 
line base line 
line centre line 
line datum line 
linear 
linear 
linear algebra 
linear algebra combinaion 
linear algebra conductor 
linear equation
linear expansion 
linear form 
linear map (mapping)
linear model 
linear momentum
linear ordering 
linear relationship 
linear settlement 
linear transformation 
linear trend 
lineation 
line graph 
line of centres 
line segment 
lines of force 
lines spectrum 
line spectrum 
line squall 
lingual franca 
link 
linkage 
linkage 
linkage 
linkage of genes (gene linkage)
linked genes 
link relative 
lintel
lip seal 
lipase 
lipase 
lipid 
lipoma 
liquefaction 
liquefaction 
liquefiable 
liquefy 
liquid 
liquid 
liquid chromatography
liquidity 
liquid propelant 
liquid state 
list price 
lithification
lithification 
lithology 
lithorganic stone 
lithosol
lithosphere 
lithosphere 
lithostratigraphy 
lithotomy 
litmus 
litmus paper 
litmus solution 
litte 
littoral 
littoral 
live birth 
liver 
liverfluke 
liverwort 
livestock 
load 
load:design load 
load: fir load 
load: lateral load 
load: live load 
load: moving load 
load: safe load 
load: super imposed-load
load (of a river) 
load 
load stone 
load stone 
loam 
loam soil 
lobar 
lobe 
lobular 
lobule 
local 
local action
locality 
localized 
local time 
local wind 
loch 
lochia 
lock
lock-nut 
lock-pin 
lock-washer 
locomotion 
locomotion 
locomotive 
locus (ene locus)
lode 
lode 
loess
loess
log 
logarithm 
logarithmic function 
loggia 
logging saw 
logic 
logical connection 
logical reasoning
loin
loin
lone pair 
lont-day plant (s) 
longday plant 
longevity (seeds) 
long horn 
longitude 
longitudnal 
longitudinal 
longitudinal coast 
longitudinal muscle 
longitudinal valley 
lontitudinal vivration 
longitudinal wave 
longshore current 
longshore drift 
long span 
longwave radiation 
loom 
loop
loop 
loop of Henle 
lopolith 
loss 
loss 
lot
lot
lound speaker 
Love wave 
Love wave 
low carbon steel 
lower bound 
lower class boundary 
lower class limit
lower esophagus 
lower integral (lower Rieman's integral)
lower jaw 
lower limit 
lower limit of integration 
lower sum (lower Riemann's sum)
lowest form (reduced form)
low frequency (LF)
low latitude
low pass filter 
low pressure 
loxodrome 
lubricant 
lubricant 
lubricating oil
lubricating oil 
lug 
lumbar puncture 
lumbar vertebra 
lumbar vertebrae 
lumber 
lumbering 
lumen 
luminiferous 
luminosity 
luminous 
lumped (adj.)
lunar 
lunar eclipse
lunar month 
lunar year 
lunch 
lungfish
lungwarm
lustre 
lustre 
luteinizing hormone 
lycine 
Lyman series 
lymh 
lymph 
lymphadenitis
lymphangitis
lymphatic 
lymphatic capillary 
lymphatic circulaion 
lymphatic capillary circulation 
lymphatic systme 
lymphatic vessel
lymphedema 
lymph node 
lymph node 
lymhocytes 
lyophillic 
lyophobic 
lysis 
lysis 
lysosome 
macadam 
maceration 
machine(v)
machine 
machinist 
Maclaurin's series 
macro (prefix) 
macroenvironment 
macrofossils 
macronucleus 
micronutrient 
macrophage 
macro-pipette 
macroscopic 
macroscopic 
macroscopic 
macule 
made ground 
mafic 
mafic mineral 
maggot 
magma
magma 
magmatic segregation
magmatic stopping 
magmatic water (juvenial water) 
magnet 
magnet 
magnetic 
magnetic circuit 
magnetic declination 
magnitic field 
magnitic field 
magnietic flux 
magnetic force 
magnetic induction 
magnetic lines force 
magnetic material 
magnetic meridian 
magnetic motive force 
magnetic north 
magnetic north pode 
magnetic permeability 
magnetic ploe 
magnetic poles 
magnetic poles 
magnetic reversal
magnetic south pole 
magnetic suseptibility 
magnetic tape 
magnetic variation 
magnetism 
magnetite
magnetization 
magnetize 
magnetometer
magnetoshphere 
magnetoshphere 
magnetostatics 
magnification 
magnify 
magnifying glass
magnitude 
magnitude 
magnitude 
main effect 
mainfold 
mains 
mainshaft
maintenance 
main tie 
main vein 
major 
major arc 
major axis 
majority 
majority carriers 
makintosh 
malaena 
malaise 
malaria 
male sterility 
malfunction 
malignant 
malingerer 
malleabiltiy
malleable 
malleable 
malleable 
malleolus 
mallet 
mallet 
malleus (hammer)
malnourishment 
malnutrition 
malnutrition 
Malpighian layer 
Malpighian tubules 
malpresentation 
maltase 
maltose
maltose 
malty butter 
malunion 
mammal (s)
mammal 
mamary gland 
mammary gland 
mammary gland 
mammary vein 
mammiliary 
mandible 
mandible 
mandrel 
mane 
managanese nodule 
manhole 
manipulation 
manometer 
manometer 
manometer 
mantissa of a logarithm 
mantle 
mantle (of the earth)
mantle 
mantle 
mantle rock 
mantoux (test) 
manubrium 
manufacturing 
manure 
manure 
many electron atom 
manyplies 
map 
mapping 
maquis 
marasmus 
marble 
marbling 
margarine 
marginal probability density fumction 
marginal total 
marine 
marine 
marine algae 
marine climate 
marine terrace (plant form)
mark 
mark (n) 
mark (v)
marl 
marl 
marlstone 
marrow 
marrow cavity 
marsh 
marsh gas 
marsupial 
masculature 
maser 
mash 
mask 
masonary 
mass 
mass 
mass 
mass 
massaging 
mass-energy equation 
massif 
mass immuinzation 
massive bedding 
mass movement 
mass movement 
mass number 
mass of nucleus 
massonetta 
mass selection 
mass spectrograph 
mass spectroscopy 
mass wasting 
master cylinder 
mastitis 
match 
matching 
matching 
material 
material 
materializaion
materialize 
maternal 
mathematical discovery 
mathematics 
mating 
matrix 
matrix
matte 
matter 
matter 
matter waves 
mature rever 
mature soil 
mature valley 
maturity 
maxilla 
maxillae 
maxillary pulp
maximimzaion 
maximize 
maximize 
maximum
maximum
maximum thermometer 
MCH (maternal child health service)
mean 
mean 
mean absolute deviation 
mean absolute deviaion about the mean 
mean absolute deviaion about the median 
mean annual temperature 
mean daily temperatute 
meander 
meander 
mean deviation 
mean free path 
mean monthly temperaturte 
mean sea level 
mean sloar day 
mean square 
mean squqre error 
mean temperature 
mean value theorem
measles (rubella)
measurable 
measure (to)
measure of central tendency 
measure of dispersion (scatter) 
measure of relative variation 
measurement 
measurement 
measurement 
measurement 
measuring instrument 
meatus 
mechanic 
mechanical advantage 
mechanical digestion
mechanical energy 
mechanical equilibrium 
mechanical equivalent of heat
mechanical isolaion 
mechanical weathering 
mechanics 
mechanism
mechanism
mechanize
meconium 
median
medial moraine 
median 
median 
median 
median efective dose
median lethal dose
mediastinum 
medication 
medicine (as a medical profession)
medicine (as an educational discipline
medicine (substance in treating disease)
medico-legal 
Mediterranean climate
medium
medium wave
medium wave (light radiation)
medulla 
medulla oblongate
medualla oblongata 
mega 
mega cycle
megalopolis 
megascopic (macroscopic)
magaspor angium
megaspore 
megatherms 
megawatt
meiosis
meisosis
meissiner's corpuscle 
melanin 
melanocyte 
melt(n)
melt (to)
melt
melting 
melting point 
melting point 
membrance 
membrane 
memory 
memory 
menarche 
mendelism
meninges 
meninges 
meningitis
meniscus
meniscus 
meniscus
menopause 
menopause 
menustral cycle 
menustration (monthly cycle)
menustration 
Mercator's projection 
mercury 
mercury 
meridian
Merino sheep
meristem
mesa
measa
mesaphere 
mesentery 
mesentery 
mesh 
mesh 
mesh (of-loop) 
mesh (for gear) 
mesh reinforcement 
mesocarp
mesocolon 
mesoderm 
mesoderm
mesoglea
meson
mesonephric duct 
mesonephros
meson field 
mesopause
mesophyll
mesohyte 
mesophyte
mesophytes
mesosphere
mesosphere
mesotherms
mesothorax
Mesozoic
Mesozoci era
mesozone
metabolism
metabolism
metabolism
metabolite 
metacarpals 
metacarpals 
metal 
metalled road
metallergical process 
metallic
metallic
metalliferous deposit
metallurgy
metalurgy
metal works
metamere
metameter
metamorphic rock
metamorphie facies
metamorphism
metamorphism
metamorphosis
metanephros
metaphase
metaqaurtizite
metastability
metastable
metastable
metastatis
metatarsals
metatarsals
metathorax
metazoa
metazoa
meteor
meteor
meteor
meteoric water
meterorite
meteroid
meterology
metero swarm
meter (n)
meter (suffix)
meter
meter band
methanol
methionine
method
method
metric system
mica
micelle
Michelson Morley experiment
micrite
micro (prefix)
micro
microbe
microbiological assay
microbody
microclimate
microclimate
microclimate
microenvironment
microfarad
microfibril
microflora
microfossils
micrograin
microgranite
microgranular
micrometer
micron
micronucleus
micronutrient 
micronutrients soil
microorganism
micro-organism
micro paleontology
micro-pipette
microprocessor
microprogram
micropyle
microscope
microscope
microscope
microscope slide (glass slide)
microscopic
microscopic
microsporangium
microspore
microtherms
microwave
microwave
microwave
micturition
midbrain
midbrain
middle ear
middle finger
middle lammela
middle latitude
mideoceanic ridges
midget
midnight sun
mid point
mid-range
mid-rib
mid-span
midtide
mid-year population
migmatite
migraine
migrate
migration
migration
migration
migration of ions
migratory phase
mild (climate)
mile
milimeter
milk (cow's)
milk (powdered)
milk ducts
milk ejection
milk let down
milk of lime
milk of magnezia
milk of sulfur
milk products
milk replacer
milk teeth
milkway
milky way
millibar
millibar
Millikan's oil drop
milling
millipede
minature
minaturize (v)
mine
mineral
mineral
mineral
mineral
mineral
mineral acid
mineral deposity
mineral fuel
mineralization
mineral salts
mineral water
minerology
minimization
minimize
minimum
minimum
minimum
minimum deviation
minimum rate of increase
minimum thermometer
minimum variance estimator
mining geology
minor
minor arc
minor axis
minority
minuend
minus
minus
mirage
mirror
miscibility
miscible
miscros
misfit stream
misfit river
missile
mist
mistral
mitochondrion
mitochondrion
mitosis
mitosis
mitral valve
mitre block
mitre joint
mix
mix (to)
mixed bud
mixed culture
mixed farming
mixed farming 
mixer
mixing ration
mixotroph
mixture
mixture
mixture
MKS system
mobile
mobility
mock moon
mock sun
mode
mode
mode
mode of productiopn
model
midel
model
model
moderate breeze
moderate gale
moderate gradient
moderator
modern
modernize
modern physics
modulated wave
modulation
modulation
modulo arithmetic
modulus (of complex no)
modulus
modulus of elasticity
modulus of rigidity
mohair
Moho discontinuity
moist
moisture
moisture
moisture deficiency
moisture laden wind
moisture surplus
molality
molar
molar
molar heat
molar heat capacity
molarity
molars
molar volume
molasse
molasses
mold
mold
mold
mole
molecular
molecular biology
molecular formula
molecular weight
molecule
molecule
molecule
mole fraction
mole of break-water
mollusc
Mollweide's projection
molt
moybdenite
moment
moment
moment
moment distribnution
moment generating function
moment of
moment of a couple
moment of force
moment of inertia
momentum
momentum
monadnock
monadnock
monera
monetize
Mongolian race
monitor
monitor
mono-atomic
monochromatic
moniochromator
monocious
monocline
monocline
monoclinci
monoclinci
monoclinic sulfur
monocot (monocotyledon)
monoicotyledon
monocluture
monocluture
monoecious
monoecious
monoestrus
monogastric
monohybrid
monolith
monomer
monomial
monomorphism
monosaccharide
monostable
monothallic
monotonic function
monotremes
monozygotic twins
monsoon
monsoon forest
mons pubis
montmorillonite
monument
moor
mooring buoy
moraine
moraine
morbidity
mordant
morgue
moribund
morning sickness
moron
morphine
morphogenesis
morphognesis
morphogy
morphology
morphometry
mortadella
mortality
mortality
mortality
mortality rate
mortality rate
mortar
mortar
mortar
motise
mortise and tenon joints
mortise lock
morula
mosaic
mosaic
mosaic
moss
moss
motel
moth
mother cell
mother cell
mother liquoir
motile
motion
motional
motional electromotive  force
motor
motor end plate
motor nerve
motor neuron
motor starter
mould
mould
moulding
mound (of water table)
mountain breeze
mountain path
mounain (or altitude) sickness
mouth (of a river)
movable
movable pulley
move(v)
movement
moving average
mucin
mucus
mucus membrane
mucus secretion
mud
mudflat
mudflow
mud stone
mudstone
mud volcano
mud volcano
muff coupling
muffle
muffle furnace
mulch
mullato
mullion
mullions
multicellular
multicellular
multichannel
multi-colinearity
multigraida
multi-nomial
multinucleate
multiple
multiple
multiple birth
multiple correlation coefficient
multiple cropping
multiple fission
multiple integral
multiple proportion
multiple regression
multiplex (v)
multiplicand
multiplication
multiplication constant
multiplicative identity
multiplicative inverse
multiplicative model
multiplicative property (of derivatives)
multiplicity of a root
multiplier
multiplier
multiplier
multiply connected
multistage
multistage sampling
multi variate
multi-vibrator
mu-meson
mumps
muntin
muon
murmur
muscle
muscle
muscle cramps
muscle fatigue
muscle fibre
muscle spindle
musculalure
mushroom
mutagen
mutant
mutation
mutation
mutton
mutual
mutual inductance
mutual inductance
mutualism
mutually exclusive events
muzzle
muzzle velocity
mycelium
myco-bacterium
mycocardium
mycology
mycoplasma (pplo)
mycorrhiza
myelin sheath
mylonite
myometrium
myopia
myopia
myopia (near sightedness) (short sightedness)
myxomycetes
n!(n-factorial)
nacking
nadir
nadir
naevus
nagging
nailer
nails
naked bud
nand gate
nano tesla
naphta
nappe
nappe
narcotic
nasal cavity
nascent (adj)
nascent hydrogen
nasogastric
masopharynx
nastic movement
natality
national grid
national income
national income accounts
national park
national park
national product at market prices
native pasture
natrual
natural
natural axis
natural bridge
natural classification
natural cycle
natural enviroment
natural frequency
natural fuslon
natural gas
natural gas
natural gas
natural habitat
natural harbor
natural increase (of population)
naturalist
natural levee
natural logarithm
natural oil
natural partheno genesis
natural product
natural rate of increase
natural resource
natural resource
natural selection
natural setting
nature
nausea
nautical mile
n-dimensional
n-dimensional space
Neanderthal man
neap tide
neap tide
nebula
nebula
nebula
nebular hypothesis
neck
neck cut off
necrosis
necrosis
nectar
nectary
needle
needle leaf
needle valve
negation
negative
negative
negative
negative anagle
negative charge
negative geotropism
negative number
negative quantity
negative response
negative skewness
negative value
negativity
negatoron
nehring
nektonic
nematodes
neon
neonatal
neonatla death rate
neonate
neon bulb
neon tube
neoplasm
neophology
nephoscope
nepgridlum
nephritis
nephron
nephron
neptunium
neritic
nerve
nerve
nerve
nerve cell
nerve ending
nerve ending
nerve fibers
nerve impulse
nerve tissue
nervous system
nested (hierarchial) experiment
net
net increase (of population)
net mirgation
net migration
net prductivity
net profit
net-veined leaves
net venation
network
net work
neural
neural arch
neural fold
neural plate
neural spine
neural tube
neurilemma
neuron
neutral
neutral equilibrim
neutral flame
neutralization
neutralization
neutralize (to)
neutral line (wire)
neutral point
netural solution
neutrino
neutron
neutron
neturon  chopper
neve
newborn (neonate)
newl
new moon
Newton
Newton meter
niacin
niche
niche (in ecosystem)
niche (in rock)
nichrome
nickel
nictitating membrane
night blindness
night blindness
Nilotes
nimbostratus
nipper
nipple (teat)
nipple (grease)
nipple(s)
nipple
nit
nitration
nitrification
nitrification
nitrification
nitrogen cycle
nitrogen fixation
nitrogen-fixation
nitrogen fixation
nivation
nivation
nivation hollow
nocturia
nocturnal
nocturnal
nodal town
node
node
node
node
node
node
nodule
nodule
nodules (tubercles)
nosie
nosie
noise pollution
nomadic pastoralist
nomadism
nomenclature
nominal size
non-conductor
non-conformity
non-conservative
non-conservative force
non-defective
nondenumerability
non-destructive
non-detachable fastener
non-equilibrium
non-equivalent sets (non-matching)
non-essential aminoacid
non-essential fatty acid
non-feromagnesians
non-ferrous
non-fine concrete
non-flowering plant
non-homologous chromosomes
non-ideal
non-invertible matrix
non-linear
non-living
non-measurable
non-metal
non-parasitic factors
non-perfect square
non-periodic
non-polar
non-randomized test
non-reactive
nnon-reflecting
non-reflecting surface
non-renewable natural resources
non-return valve
non-salient pole
non-separable extension
non-simple polygon
non-simple region
non-signular matrrix
non-stationary
non-super charded
non-terminating
non-uniform
non-volatile
noon
Nordic race
nor gate
normal
normal
normal
normal
normal (unit)
normal
normal boiling point
normal distribution
normal equation
normal extension
normal fault
normality
normalization
normalize
normal liquid
normally-closed switch (NCS)
normal melting point
norm of a partition
norm of a vector
normal presentation
normal pressure
normal probabilty distribution
normal salt
normal solution
normal sub-group
normal temperature
normal view
norther
Northern Hemisphere
northing
North Pole
North Pole
North Star
nosing
nostril
nostril
notation
notation
notch (cut by wave)
notching
note (music)
not gate
notochord
nourishing food
nourishment
noxius
noxious weed
nozzle
nozzle
nuclear charge
nuclear membrane
nuclear energy
nuclear force
nuclear fusion
nuclear reactor
nucleated settlement
nucleated village
nucleolus
nucleon
nucleon
nucleonics
nucleophile
nucleophilic
nucleoplasm
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus
nucleus
nuclide
nuclide
nuding
nuse ardente
null
null
null hypothesis
nulipara
null method
number
number
numeral
numeration system
numerator
numerical relation
nummulite
nunatak
nunatak
nut
nut
nut
nutation
nutrient
nutrient
nutrient
nutrient allowance
nutrient analysis
nutrient content
nutrient intake
nutrient requirement
nutrition
nutrition
nutritional deficiency
nutritional diseases
nutrition institue
nutrition policy
nutritious food
nutritive value
nyctalopia
nymph
nystagmus
oasis
obelisk
obesity
obesity
object
objective lens
oblate
oblateness
oblateness
oblate spheroid
obligate parasite
obligate parasite
oblique
oblique cone
oblique cylinder
oblique line
oblique-parallel projection
oblique projection
obsequent drainage (stream)
observable
obseration
observe (to)
obsidian
obsidian
obstetrics
obsterics and gynaecology
obstruction
obtuse angle
obtuse triangle
occident
occipital
occipital
occipital condyle
occult
occupational mortality
ocean
ocean current
ocean current
occean deep
ocean deep
oceanic crust
ovrsnic deep
oceanic ridge
oceanic trench
oceanography
oceanography
ocean platform
ocean trench
ocellus
octahedron
octahedron
octal
octane number
octane rating
octave
octete rule
odd
odd function
odd permutation
odds
odds ratio
odeon
odontoid
odor
odour
oersted
oestrogen
oestrus
oestrus cycle
off set
offshore (coast)
offshore (wind)
offshore bar
off-spring
ogive
ohm
ohmmeter
oil
oil bath
oil capacitor
oil crops
oil niger
oil rig
oil seeds
oil shale
oil spill
ointment
oldland
old landscape
olecranon process
olfactory capsule
olfactory membrane
lofactory nerve
lofactory nerve
oligasaccharide
oligura
olivine
olivine
omasum
omasum
omentum
ommatidium
omnidirectional antenna
omnivore
omnivore
omnivorous
omycetes
onchocerciasis (river blindness)
one sided limit
one -tail -test (one -sided test)
one-to-one
one- to-one correspondence
on grade
onion peeling
onshore (wind)
onto
ontogeny
ontogeny
oocyte
oogamete
oogamous
oogamy
ooegenesis
oogonium
oolite
oolitic
ootheca
ootid
ooze
oozes
oplescence
opaque
opaque
opaque substance
open castration
open channel
open circuit
open circulation
open circulatory system
open covering
open cycle
open-end wrench
open fracture
open half-line
open-hearth furnace
open interval
open light
open proposition
open traverse
operant conditioning
operation
operation
operation
operculum
ophiolite
ophiolitic snite
ophitic
opposite angle
opposite leaves
opposite sides 
opthalmologist
opthalmology
opthalmoscope
optic
optical
optical aberration
optical bench
optical brightner
optical centre
optical density
optical glass
optical image
optical instrument
optical lever
optical nerve
optical resolution
optical chiasma
optic foramen
optic nerve
optic nerve
optics
optimum allocation
oral cavity
orbit 
orbit 
orbit 
orbit 
orbital
orbital capture
orbital velocity 
orbital year 
orchard (ing) 
orchitis 
order 
order 
order 
order 
ordered 
ordered field 
ordered group 
ordered-n- tuple 
ordered pair 
ordering
ordering relation 
order of a group 
order of reaction 
ordinal data 
ordinal number 
ordinance datum 
ordinate 
ore 
ore (metallic) 
ore 
ore 
oregensis 
organ 
organ 
organ 
organelle 
organic 
organic (soil) 
organic acid 
organic matter 
organic sediment 
organic soap builder 
organic soil 
organism 
organism 
organism 
organ of corti 
organ pipe 
organs 
organ system 
orgasm
orgate 
orgenh 
orient 
orient 
oriental 
orientation 
orientation 
orifice 
origin 
origin 
origin (of muscle) 
origins
o-ring 
ornithology 
orogenesis 
orogeny 
orographic (rain) 
orthocentre 
orthogeosyncline 
orthogonal complement (of a subspace)  
orthogonalization process 
orthographic 
orthographic curves 
orthographic projection 
orthographic projection 
orthoquartzite 
orthonormal basis 
orthonormalization process 
orthonormal vector 
orthopnea 
orthorhombic 
orthorhombic crystal system 
orthotropic 
os 
os cervical 
oscillate 
oscillating series 
oscillation 
oscillation 
oscillation 
oscillation 
oscillation of a function 
oscillator 
oscillator 
oscillatory motion 
oscilloscope 
osmolarity 
osmoregulation 
osmoregulator 
osmosis 
osmosis 
osmotic pressure 
ossicles 
osteichthyes 
osteomalacia 
osteomyelitis 
ostiopomyelitis 
otitis media 
otolith 
otorhinolarynol ogist 
otto cycle 
outbreeding  
outbreeding 
outcome (sample point ) 
out crop 
out crop 
outcross 
outer coat 
outer ear (external ear) 
outer sheel membrane 
out gassing 
out gassing 
outlier 
out migrant 
out of focus 
out of phase 
output 
output 
output impedance 
output transformer 
outwash plain 
outwash plain 
oval window 
ovary 
ovary 
ovary 
ovary 
oven 
over 
overburden 
over cropping 
over damped 
over damped vibration 
over dominance 
over drive 
over feed stoker 
over flow 
over fole 
over fold 
over grazing 
over hang 
over head camshaft engine 
over head sun 
over head-valve engine 
over land flow 
over land flow 
over flooring 
over load  
oer population 
over production 
over shoot 
over stock 
over thrust 
over thrust fold 
over thrusting 
over tone 
over turned fold 
over weight 
oviduct 
oviparous 
oviposition 
ovipositor 
ovoviviparous 
ovulate (ion) 
ovulation 
ovulation 
ovule 
ovum 
ovum 
ovum (egg) 
ox 
oxbow lake 
ox - bow lake 
oxidation 
oxdation 
oxidation 
oxidation 
oxidation potential 
oxide 
oxidize (to) 
oxidizing agent 
oxidizing flame 
oxisol 
oxyacetylene 
oxy acid 
oxygen 
oxy ion 
oxy ocetylene 
oxy salt 
oxytosin 
oxytocin reflex 
oyster reef 
ozone 
ozone 
ozone layer
ozonide 
ozonolysis 
pace maker 
pacinian corpuscle 
pack (v) 
packing 
packing fraction 
pad 
pad 
paddy field 
padlock 
pain 
paint 
paint roller 
pair 
paired terraces 
pair production 
palagonite 
palatability (forage) 
palate 
palate 
paleobotany 
paleocurrent 
paleoecology 
paleogeography 
paleolithic 
paleomagnetism 
paleomagnetism 
paleontology 
Paleozoic
palingenesis 
palisade mesophyll 
pallor 
palm 
palmately compound 
palmately veined (palmate veination) 
palmelloid 
palp 
palpation 
palpation 
palpitation 
palsy 
palynology 
pancreas 
pancreas 
pancreatic duct 
pancreatic juice 
pancreatic juice 
pandemic 
panel 
pangaea 
panicle 
pannus 
panorama
pantile 
papain 
papaya 
paper capacitor 
papillary muscle 
papula 
para 
parabola 
parabola 
parabolic dune 
parabolic reflector 
paraboloid 
paracentesis 
paracute 
parallax 
parallax error 
parallel (connection) 
parallel (of latitude) 
parallel 
parallel 
parallel bedding 
parallel connection 
parallel fault 
parallelism 
parallelogram 
parallelopiped 
parallel planes 
parallel range 
parallel resonant circuit 
parallel unconformity 
parallel veined leaves 
parallel venation 
paralysis 
paramagnetic 
paramagnetic material 
paramagnetism 
paramedian 
parameter 
parameter 
parametric equation 
parametric form (of a line) 
parametric function 
parapet 
parasite 
parasite 
parasites 
parasitic 
parasitic 
parasitic capture 
parasitic causes 
parasitic plant 
parasitism 
parasitology 
parasympathetic nervous system 
parasympathetic nervous system 
parathyroid gland 
parathyroid glands
parathyroid hormone 
paratyphoid 
paraxial 
parenchyma cell 
parenchymatous 
parent 
parental generation 
parent compound 
paranthesis 
parent material 
parent material 
parent population 
parent rock 
parent substance 
parietal bone 
parity 
park savanna 
paronychia 
parotid gland 
parquet 
parthenocarpy 
parthenogenesis 
parthenogenesis 
partial 
partial correlation coefficient 
partial differentiation 
partial digestion 
partial eclipse 
partial fraction 
partial ordering 
partial parasite 
partial pressure 
partial sum 
particle 
particle 
particle 
particle wave  probability 
partition 
partition 
partition 
parts per million (PPM)  
parturition 
parturition 
Paschen series
pass
passive (element) 
passive 
passive component
passive immunity
passive immunity
passive tranpsort
pasta
paste
pastern
pasturization
pastoral farming
pastoralist
pasture
pasture mating
pasture renovaiton
pasturizaiton
pasturize
patella
patella
path
path
path
pathogen
pathogenic
pathovenic
pathology (plant)
pathology
pathology
patio
pattern
pattern
pattern
patterned ground
pattern staining
pavement
pavilion
pawl
peak (of mountain)
peak inverse voltage
peak to peak (value)
peak value
pearl
pearly
peas
peat (soil)
peat 
peat 
pebble
pectoral fin
pectoral girdle
pectoralis major (muscle)
pedal
pedalfer
pedalfers
pedestal rock
pediatric
pediatrician
pedicle
pedigree
pedigree
pediment
pedocal
pedocals
pedogenesis
pedology
pedology
pedstal
pegmatite
pelagic deposit
Pelecypoda
pelitic
pellagra
pellet
pelleting
pelmet
pelvic bone
pelvic cavity
pelciv girdle
pelvis
pelvis (of the kidney)
pelvis
pendant
pendulum
peneplain
peneplanation
peneplanation
penetrate
peneteration
penicillin
penicillium
peninsual
penis
penis
penis
penstock
pentadactyl
pentadactyl limb
pentagon
penthouse
pentode
penumbra
penumbra
pepsin
pepsin
peptic ulcer
peptidase
peptides
peptones
percapita GDP
percent
percent
percentage
percentage
percetage (percent)
percentage by composition
percentage by wieght
percent change 
percent defective
percentile
percentile
percentile rank
perched block
percussion
percussion
percussion hammer
percutaneous
perennial
perennial
perennial
perennil stream
perfect flower
perfect flower
prefectly elastic collision
perfect radiaiton
prefect square
perforated
perforating punches
perforation
perianth
pericardial cavity
pericardium
pericadium
pericarp
pericline
pericycle
peridotite
perigee
periglacidal
perihelion
perihelion
perilymph
perimeter
perimetrium
perineum
period
period
period
period
period
periodic
periodic decimal
periodic funciton
periodicity
periodic motion
periodic movement
periodic table
period of interest
perioseum
peripheral nervous system
peripherial 
peripheric road
periphery
peristalic movement
peristalisis
peristalisis
peristalisis
peristomium
peristoneum
peristyle
peritoneium
peritonitis
perlite
permoafrost
permafrost
permnent
permannet adjustment
permanent hardness
permaent magnet
permanent magnet
permanent pasture
permanent sit
permanent teeth
permanent tooth
permeability
permeability
permeability
permeability
permeability constant
permeable
permeable (rock)
permeable
permeable
permeable rock
permeametere
ermineralizaiton
permitivity
permutatin
permutation
permutation group
pernicious anaemia
perpendicular
perpendicular bisector
perpendicular planes
perpednicular to a plane
prepends
perpetual
perpetual motion
perpetual motion machine
perpetuation
person month
person (household) sectrs
person year
perspective
persepctive (drawing)
perspiraton
perspire
perspire
perthite
perturb
perturbaiton
pertusis
per unit
per unit time
pervius rock
pest (s)
pest
pest
pesticide
pestle
pestle
petal
petechia
petiole
petile
petrificaiton
petrify
petrogenesis
petrography
petroleum
petroleum geology
petroleum traps
petrology
Peyer's galnd
phage
phagocyte
phagocytes
phagocytsis
phagotroph
phagotrophic
phagotraophism
phalanges
phalanx
phanerogam
phanerozoic
pharmacology
pharnyx
pharnyx
phase
phase
phase
phase angle
phase angle
phases (of the moon)
phase shift
phenocryst
phenology
phenomenon
phenotype
phenotype
phenotypic variation
phenylanine
phimosis
phlebitis
phloem
phloem
ph-meter
phobia
phonolite
phosphate diabetes
phosphorescence
phosphorescence
phosphorite
phosphorous cycle
phosphorylaiton
photic zone
photo
photo chemistry
photoautorophic
photoelectric
photoelectric effect
photogeology
photogrammetry
phoogrammetry
phoographic exposure
photographic film
photographic graininess
photographic paper
photolysis
photomeer
photometer
photometry
photomultiplier
photon
photon
photonasty
photoperiodic
photoperiodism
photoperiodism
photophobia
photophoshp-orylation
photorespiration
photosphere
photosynthesis
photosynthesis
photosynthesis
phototaxis
phototropism
phototropism
phototube
photovolatic cell
phreatic water
phreatophytes
phycocyanin
phycoerthrin
phyllite
phylogenetic
phylogenetic classificaiton
phylogeny
phylogeny
phylum
physical
phyiscal
physical change
physical component
physical configuration
physical constant
physical environment
physical feature
physical geopgraphy
physical geology
phyisical optics
physical property
physical unit
physician
physicist
physics
physiogeorgraphical factor
physiographic
physiographic diagram
physiography
physilogical amplitude 
physilology
physiology
phytobenthos
phytogeoprgaphy
phytoplankton
phytotoxic
piamater
piamater
pick axe
picking
pictogram
picture
picture rail
picture tube
pie chart
piedmont
piedmont glacier
piedmont glacier
piedmont lowlands
piegraph
pier
piezoelectric
pig-iron
pig-iron
pigment
pigment
pigmentaiton
pigments
pigmies
pilaster
pile
pile
pile bridge
pile cap
pile driver
pile extractor
pile hammer
pile head
pile helmet
pile shoe
pill
pillar
pilot assay
pilot survey
pi-meson
pin
pincer
pincers
pinch
pinch-cock
pinch effect
pinch-out trap
pineal body
pinfeather
pinion
pin joint
pinna
pinna
pinna
pinnacle
pinnate
pinnately compound 
pinocytosis
pin spanner
pin worm
pion
pioneer community
pioneer stage (in vegetation succession)
pipe
pipe (of land)
pipe
pipe clay triangle
pipe column
pipe cutter(s)
pipe line
pipette
pipette (to)
pipetting
pipe wrench
pirate (stream)
piscivorous
pisolite
pistil
pistillate flower
piston
piston
piston ring
pit
pit
pit crater
pitch
pitch
pitch
pitch circle
pitch gague
pitching fold
pitch of sound 
pith
pithecantropus
pith ray
pitot tube
pituitary
pituitary gland
pituitary gland
pituitary hormones
pivot
pivot joint
place
placenta
placenta
placneta
placenta
placenta abruption
placenta previa
placentation
placentation
placer
placer deposit
plain
plan
plan:foundaiton plan
plan: site plan 
plane
plane
plane
plane curve
plane geometry
plane joint
planes
planet
planet
planet
planetary wind
plane table
planet gear
planetion surface
planetisimals
planetoid
planetoid
planetetology
plane wave
planimeter
planimeter
planimeter
planimeter
planimetric
planimetry
plankton
plankton
planktonic
planktonic
plano-concave lens
plano-concave lens
plano-convex lens
plano-convex lens
planometer
plant
plant
plantation
plant community
planter
plant fat
plant kingdom
plant nutrient
plasma
plasma
plasma
plasma
plasma
plasmadesma (plasmadesmata)
plasmalemma
plasma membrane 
plasma sheath
plasmodium falciparum
plasmodium malariae
plasmodium ovale
plasmodium vivax
plasmogamy
plasmolysis
plaster
plastic
plastic
plastic
plastic flow
plasticiser
plasticity
plasticity
plasticizer
plastic sulfur
plastid
plate (anode)
plate (geophysics)
plate resistance
plate tectonics
plateau
plateau
platelet (throm-bocytes)
platelet (blood platelet)
plating
playa
pleochronic halo
pleura
pleura
pleura cavity
pleura cavity
pleura-pariental
pleura-visceral
pleuroperitoneal cavity
pliers
pliers
plinth
ploidy
plot
plot
plow
plug
plug
plumb-bob
plumbing
plumb line
plumb line
plume
plumule
plunge pool
plunger
plunger
plus
plutonic (rock)
plutonic rock
plutonium
pluvial lake
pluvial period
pluvial period
ply
ply wood
plywood
pneumatics
pneumatolysis
pneumonia
pod
pod (legume)
podsol
podzol
poikilotherm
point
point
point ellipse
point estimation
pointing
pointing trowel
point load
point mutation
point of division
point of inflection
point of tangency
point slope from (of a line)
point source
pointwise convergence 
poison
polar
polar
polar angle
polar axis
polar body
polar bond
polar coordinate
polar coordinate system
polar easterlies
polar form of a complex number
polar front
polaris
polarity
polarity
polarizabillity
polarizable
polarization
polarization
polarize
polarized light
polarized light
polarizer
polarizer
polarography
polaroid
polar wendering
polar winds
polar zone
polder
pole
pole
pole
pole face
poles
pole star
poliomyelitis
polished
polishing machine
polje
poljes
poll (space)
pollard 
pollen
pollen grain
Pollen mother cell
pollen sac 
pollen tube
pollinating agent 
pollination
pollination
pollinator
pollutant
pollutant
pollutants
pollute (to)
pollution
pollution
pollution
pollution
polyamide
polyandry
poly-atomic
polyconic projection
polycrystalline
polycyclic landscape
polydipsia
polyester
polyestrus
polygamy
polygon
polygonial region
polygny
polyhedron
polymer
polymerization
polymerize (to)
polymetam-orphism
polymorph
polymorph
polymorphic
polymorphism
polymorphism
polynomial
polypeptides
polyphase
polypus
polysaccharide
polyuria
pomegranate
ponding
ponding of segment
pons Varolli
pooled estimate
poot's disease
popliteal
population
population
population composition
population density
population mean
population pressure
population pyramid
population statistics
p-orbital
porcelain
porcelain
porch
pore
pork
pork
pork meat
porosity
porosity
porosity
porous
porous
porphyritic
porphyr-oblast
porphyry
port
portage
portal
portal circulation
portal system
portal vein
portico
porticullis
pos
position
position angle
position pin
positive
positive
positive
positive angle
positive charge
positive definite (quadratic form)
positive geotropism
positive number
positive quantity
positive rays
positive series
positive skewness 
positive value
positivity
positron
possiblism
Posson's ratio
post and beam construction
post-census
post-emergence (herbicide)
posterior
posterior
posterior
posterior venacava
postmerdidian
postmortem
post-mortem
post-natal
post natal mortality
post-operative
post-partum
postural
post-zygotic isolation
posture
potable water
potash
potassium argon dating
potato
potency
potential
potential
potential (adj.)
potential difference
potential difference
potential difference
potential energy
potential energy
potential gradient
potentiometer
potentiometer
potentiometry
pothole
pothole
pot lief
pound (to)
pounding
powder
powder technique
powdery mildew
power
power
power amplifier
power factor
power gain
power of a test
power of a lens
power rating 
power series
power set
pozzolana
PPD (purified protein derivative)
prairie
pratt truss
precambrian
precambrian era
precambrian rock
precaution
pre-census
precess
precession
precipitate
precipitate (to)
precipitation
precipitation
precipitator
precise
precision
precision
precooling
predation
predator
predicate
pre-eclaptic toxemia
pre-emergence (herbicide)
pre-exhaust 
prefabricated
pregnancyectopic
pregnant
preheater
preignition
pre-image
premature
premature infant
premature new born (nonate)
premise
premolar
premolars
prenatal  mortality 
preplanting (herbicide)
prepuce
prepuce 
preservation 
preservation 
preservative
preservative
preservative
preserve (to)
preserve 
preserved food
press (n)
pressfit 
pressure
pressure
pressure
pressure 
pressure belt 
pressure cell
pressure gauge
pressure gradient
pressure plate 
pressure ridge
presumptive area 
prevailing wind 
preventable
prevention 
prevention 
prey
pre-zygotic isolation 
price (selling)
price index (number)
price index construction 
price relative (relative price)
primary
primary activity
primary arc
primary cell
primary cell
primary coil
primary color
primary consumer
primary cosmic rays
primary current 
primary economic resource 
primary oocyte
primary ore deposit
primary plant body
primary producer 
primary product
primary prducton
primary rainobow
primary ray
primary root 
primary root 
primary sampling unit
primary sexual characteristics 
primary shaft
primary source
primary spermatocyte
primary standard
primary tillage
primary wall 
primate city
primates
prime factor 
prime factorizaion
prime meridian 
prime number 
primeval
primipara
primitive
principal
principal
principal axis
principal focus
principal quantum nubmber
principal ray
principle 
principle 
principle of countinuity
printed circuit 
printed circuit 
printed circuit 
priori probability
prism
prism
prism
prism 
prismatic compass
probability
probability
probability density function 
probability distribution 
probability sampling 
probable (adj.) 
probe
probe
probing 
problem
problem
probosics
procedure
procedure
process
process 
process average
process control
processed food 
processing 
process variabilityq
prodromal 
producer 
producer (in nature) 
producer gas (air gas)
producer's risk 
product
product
product
production 
production index
production inspection 
production process 
production testing 
productivity (soil)
productivity 
profile (soil)
profile 
profit 
progeny
progeny
progestrone
progestrone
proglottides
prognosis
progradation 
progressive
progressive metamorphism
progessive wave
project (v)
projectile
projection 
projection (drawing)
projection 
projecion 
projection 
projection
projection of a line segment
projector
prokaryote (akaryote)
prokaryotic 
prolactin 
prolactin reflex
prolamines
prolapse
proline
prominence
prominent
promontory
promoter
prompt (adj.)
prompt neutron
pronation 
pronator muscle
prone
pronephros
proof
proof
proof
proof plane
propagate
propagate
propagation q
propagation q
propagaon 
propagation of light 
propagation ratio
propagules
propel
propeller 
proper fraction 
proper integral 
properly cured (blocks)
proper subset 
property 
prophase
prophylaxis
proplastid
proportion 
proportion 
proportion 
proportion 
proportional 
proportionality
proportional sampling 
proportioning
proposition (sentenc; statement)
propped-cantilever
proppet valve (lift valve)
proprioceptor
prop  root
propulsion 
prospective study
prostate
prostate gland 
prostate gland 
prostomium
prostration 
protandrous
protease
protective tissues
protectorate 
protein 
protein 
protein 
protein 
protein calorie malnutrition (PCM)
protein quality 
protein synthesis 
proteoses
proterozoic
prothallus
prothorax
prothrombin
prothrombin
protista
protium 
protocooperaion 
protogynous
proton 
proton 
protonema
protophilic
protoplasm
protoplasm
protoplasm
protoplasmic
protozoa
protozoa
protractor
protracor 
protractor 
protractor 
protruding 
protruding 
provenance 
proventriculus
proximal 
proximal 
proximal convoluted tubule 
proximity 
pruning 
pruritis
pseudoform 
pseudomorph
psilopsida 
psychiatry 
pteriodophyta 
pteropod ooze 
pteropsida 
ptyalin
ptyalin 
p-type 
puberty
puberty
puberty 
pubis 
pubis 
puddle
puddled soil 
puerperium 
puffballs 
pull (n)
pullet 
pulley
pulley
pulmonary artery 
pulmonary circulaion 
pulmonary respiration 
pulmonary tuberculosis 
pulmonary vein 
pulp
pulp 
pulp cavity 
pulsar 
pulsating quantity 
pulse 
pulse (botanical)
pulse
pulse
pulse
pulse rate
pulse train 
pulverizaion 
pulverize (to) 
pulverizer
pumice (stone)
pumice
pump
pump (to)
pump
pump
pumping
pumping
pumpkin
punch
punching
puncture
pupa
pupation
pupil
pupil
pure
pure breed
pure breeding 
pure culture 
pure imaginary number 
pure line 
pure mathematics
purifier
purify (to)
purity 
purlin
purposive sampling 
purulent
pus
pus cell 
push button (switch) 
push moraine
push-rod
pustule
puterfaction
putlog
putrifaction 
putty 
pyconometer
pygmies
pylong
pyloric sphincter
pylorus
pyogenic
pyramid
pyramid
pyramid 
pyramid (of the kidney)
pyramidal peak
pyramid of biomass 
pyramid of energy 
pyramid of number 
pyrenod 
pyrexia
pyrhelometer
pyridoxine
pyrite
pyritization 
pyroclastic rock 
pyrolysis 
pyrometer
pyroxene
pyroxenite
pyuria
quadrangle
quadrant
quadrant
quadrat
quadratic 
quadratic form
quadratic formula
quadrative equation 
quadriceps femorie 
quadrilateral
quadrinomial
quagmire
qualitative
qualitative analysis
quality 
quality control (food) 
quality control
quality level 
quantal response
quantifier 
quantitative 
quantitative analysis 
quantity 
quantity 
quantity 
quantity 
quantity 
quantity (quantum) index
quantity of heat 
quantity surveyor 
quantum
quantum (n)
quantum number 
quantum number 
quantum theory 
quantum yield 
quarantin (control)
quarantine
quarry 
quarry 
quarry 
quarter (udder)
quartermoon 
quartic 
quartic equation 
quartile
quartizite
quartz
quartz
quartz
quartz monzonite 
quasar 
quaternary 
queen (bee)
queen post 
queen's substance
quench 
questionnaire
quick lime
quicksand
quiescent point
quiet sun 
quill
quoin
quota sampling 
quotient
quotient group (factor group) 
quotient property (of derivative etc) 
quotient ring
Raabe's test
rabbet
rabies
rabies 
race (plant)
race
race
race
raceme
racemouse
rachis 
rack
rack 
rack and pinion 
racking 
radar 
radar 
radar 
radial (drainage) 
radial  
radial 
radial acceleration 
radial symmetry 
radian
radian
radiant energy 
radiating  body 
radiation 
radiation 
radiation 
radiation 
radiation 
radiation dose 
radiation fog 
radiation hazaed 
radiation laws 
radiation pressure
radiation shield 
radiative capture 
radiator 
radiator 
radical
radical sign 
radicand
radicle 
radicle 
radio
radioactive
radioactive decay 
radioacitivity
radiocarbon dating 
radio communication 
radio isotope 
radiology 
radiosond
radio-ulna
radio-wave 
radium 
radius
radius 
radius of convergence
radius of gyration 
radon 
radon seeds
rafter 
rafter: common rafter
rafter: principal rafter 
raft foundation 
rail 
rain 
rainbow
rainbow 
rain fall 
rainflall regime 
rainfall region 
rainforest 
rainforest 
rainguage
rain prints 
rainshadow 
rainspell 
raised beach 
raised beach 
rake
raked joint 
ram 
ram 
rammer (punner)
ramp 
ramp 
ranch
ranching
rancid 
random 
random (at)
random access memory (RAM)
random effect 
randomization 
randomize 
randomized design
randomized test
random model 
random movement 
random sample (simple random sample)
random variable variate 
raneid 
range
range (oፈ temperature) 
range 
range 
range 
range (n) 
range(v)
range of mountains 
range spece 
rank correlation 
Rankine cycle 
Rankine's cycle 
rank of matrix 
rapidograph
rapids 
rarefaction 
rare species 
rarefy 
rash (n)
rasp
ratchet 
ratchet wheel 
rate
rate
rate 
rate 
rate 
rate constant 
rate determing step 
rate equation 
rate of gain 
rate of natural increase 
rate of reaction 
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio
ratio estimation 
ratio estimator 
ration 
rational function 
rationlize 
rationalize the dinominator 
rational number 
ratio test 
ravine 
raw 
raw data 
raw materials 
rawlplug 
ray 
ray 
rayleight wave 
rayon 
rays 
ract (to)
react (v)
reactance 
reactance 
reactance 
reactant 
reaction 
reaction 
reaction
reaction 
reaction in magma 
ractionrim
reactive
reactive
reactive force 
reactive power 
reactiveity 
reactor
reactor
read & write memory
read only memory
reagent 
real 
real axis 
real gas (non-ideal gas) 
real image
real income
realm
real number
real object
real part of complex number 
real solution 
reamer 
rearrangement 
Reason (n)
Reason (v)
reasoning
rebound
recapitulation
receiver
receiver
recent(epoch)
receptacle
receptacle
reception
receptor
receptor organ
recessional moraine
recessive (gene)
recessive
recessive(gene)
recharge (of ground water)
recharge
Recipe
Recipient 
reciprocal
Reciprocating (Engine)
recoil
recoiless
recombinant
recombination 
recombination 
recorder 
recorder 
recording instrument 
recrudescence 
recrystallization 
recrystallization 
recrystallize (to)
recrystallized 
rectangle 
rectangular drainage 
rectification 
rectification 
rectifier
rectify(v)
rectilinear
rectilinear motion 
rectilinear propagation of light 
rectum
rectum 
rectum 
rectus 
recumbent fold 
recuperation 
recuperator 
recurrent 
recycle (to)
recycle
recycling 
red algae
red blood cell (RBC)
red blood cell (corpuscle) erythrocyte
red clay
red shift
reduce(to)
reduce
reduced mass
reducer
reducible 
reducing agent
reducing flame 
reducing power 
reduction 
reduction 
reduction 
reduction gears 
Reduction potetnial 
Reduzate
reef 
Reef 
Re-entrant
reentry
refactory
refactory bricks 
reference 
reference 
reference electrode 
reference frame
reference period 
reference protein 
Reference value 
referred 
refine (to)
refined
refinement of a partion 
refinery
reflectance
reflection 
reflection 
reflectionin a line 
reflection in a plane 
reflector 
reflector 
reflex 
reflex 
reflex action 
reflex arc
reflexive relation 
reflexivity 
reflex-more
reflux(n)
reflex(to)
reflux condenser
reforstation
refraction
refraction
refractive
refractiveindex
refractibve index
refractometer
refractory
refractory(material) 
refractory material 
refrigerant
refrigerate(to)
refrigeration
refrigeration
refrigerator
refrigerator
refrigerator
refuse
regalith
regenerate(to)
regeneration
regeneration
regeneration
regimen
regime of a river 
region 
region 
regional metamorphism
regional metamorphism
register
register
registration system 
regolith
regression (of plant succession)
regression
regression 
regression of the sea 
regular 
regular flower 
regular partition
regular polygon
regular polyhedron 
regular pyramid 
regular reflection 
regulate 
regulated current
regulating cock
regulator
regulator
regurgitation
rehydration
reinforced concrete 
reinforcement 
Re-intrant corner 
rejection region
rejuvenated
rejuvenation
relapsing 
relapsing fever
related angles 
relation 
relation 
relative cumulative frequency 
relative density
relative extremum(local extremum
relative extremum points(local extremum)
relative frequency 
Relative humidity
relative maximum 
relative minimum 
relative permeability
relative permeability
reltive potency
relative prime
relative velocity
relativity
relaxation
relay 
relay 
reliability(of rainfall)
relic mountian
relic sediment
relict(relic)
relief
relief
relief
relief map
relief rainfall
remainder
remanence
remanent magnetism
remission
remittent 
remote sensing
renal artery
renal circulation
renal portal vein
renal vein 
rendering 
renewable natural resoruces 
renial (tubula
renin
rennin(milk)
replant
repellent
replacement
replacement
replacement
replication
replication
representative
representative element 
reproducibility
reproducible
reporduction
reproduction
reporduction rate
reproductive age 
reproductive cell
reproductive isolation
reproductive organ 
reproductive organ 
reptiles 
repulse
repulsion 
repulsion 
research
resection
reserve
reserve
reserve
reservoir
reservoir
reservior
reservoir rock 
residual(magnetism
residual 
residual
residual
residual boulder
residual error
residual herbicide
residual hill 
residual regolith
residual rediment
residual soil 
residue
resinous
resist
resistance
resistance
resistance 
resistance
resisitance-capacitance coupling(recoupling)
resistance welding 
resistant varieties 
resistivity
resistivity
resistor
resistor
resistor in series
resolution 
resolution 
resolution of force 
resolving power 
resonance
resonance
resoruce 
respiration
respliration 
respiration
respiratory organ 
Respiratory organ 
Respiratory pigment 
respiratory root 
respiratory system
respiratory system
respiratory tree
respirometer
response 
response 
response 
response 
response metameter
rest
restitution
restless
rest mass
rest of the world sector 
restore(v)
restoring force 
restraint 
result 
result 
resultant force 
resultant vector
resultant velocity
resuscitation 
retall price index 
retained placenta
retained placenta 
retaining spring 
retaining wall 
retardation
retarder
retentivity
retentivity
reticulate
reticulum
reticulum 
reticulum 
retina 
retina 
retinol
retort flask 
retractor
retreating coast
retrogradation
retrograde
retrograde metamoprhism
retrograde motion 
retospective study
return
return spring 
reveal 
reverberation
reverse(bias)
reverse 
reversed curve 
reversed door 
reversed epoch
reverse drainage 
reverse fault
reverse fault
reversibility
reversible
reversible
\reversible 
revetment
revolution (of the earth)
revolution 
revolve 
reworked alluvium 
rheology 
rheostat
Rheusis factor
rhinitis 
rhizoid 
rhizome 
rhizome 
rhizopus
Rh negative 
Rh positive 
rhomatic fever
rhombic
rhombic antenna 
rhombic sulfur
rhombus 
rhyolite
rhythm
Rhythm
ria 
ria 
ria coast 
rib(web)
rib(web)
rib 
rib 
ribbed 
ribbon development 
riboflavin(vitamin B3)
ribosome
rice
richettsia
richter scale 
richter scale 
Ricter's sacle 
rickets
rickets 
rider 
rider scale 
ridge
ridge
ridge
ridge board 
Riemann integral
riffler 
rift
rift(rift valley)
rift valley
right angle
right ascension
right atrium
right circular cylinder 
right cone 
right cylinder
right hand rule
right hand thread 
right limit 
right prism
right side 
right triangle 
right ventricle 
rigid 
rigid 
rigid 
rigid body
rigidity
rigidity
rigidity
rigid joint 
rigidily fixed 
rigor 
rill 
rill erosion  
rim
ring
ring counter
Ringer's solution
rign finger
ring gear(annulus)
ring of fire
ring spanner
ring with unity
ring womr
ring worm 
rinse (to)
rinsing
rion lock 
rip-current
ripening
ripping
ripple
ripplemark
ripple tank
ripsaw
rise
risk
risk group 
risk of dying
river basin
rivr capture(Piracy)
riverine forest
riverine vegetation
river plain
river port 
river profile
river terrace
river terrace
river web
rivet 
rivet 
rivulet
road stead
robot
robust test
roche moutonnee
rock 
rock 
rock cycle
rocker arm
rocket
rock fall
rock flour(of glacier)
rock flour(of glacier)
rock glacier
rock pedestal
rock salt
rock slide
rock step
rock terrace
rod(see axle)
rod(see axle)
rod
rodent
rodents
rogue
roguing
roll(v)
roll(v.trans.)
roller bearing
rolling friction
roll sulfur
roof
roof; butterfly roof 
roof; shade roof 
roof; single framed roof 
roof; suspension roof 
roof; tin roof 
roof caping 
roofing frame work 
roofing tiles 
room and pillar method 
roost 
root
root(for thread or gear)
root 
root (of the teeth)
root apex 
root cap
root cap
root crops 
root extraction
root hair
root hair
root-mean square
root(radical)nth 
root(zero) of a polynomial
root pressure
root system
root test
root wedging
rope 
rosemary
rosi-forel scale
rotate
rotating magnetic field
rotation 
rotation 
rotation 
rotation about a line 
rotation about a point
rotational equilibrium
rotational grazing 
rotational motion
rotation of crops 
rotation pasture
rota vapor(rotary evaporator)
rotor
rotor
roughage
roughage
roughages
rough cast
rough endoplasmic reticulum
round
round bottomed flask
round ligament
rounding off
roundness 
round window
roundworm
routine 
row
row
row lock (brick on edge)
row of a matrix
row rank of a matrix 
royal jelly 
rubber bulb
rubber crops (plant)
rubble 
rubella
rubies
rubra
ruby
rudite
rue
rule
rule of thumb
romen
rumen
ruminant
rumination
rump
runner
runner
runoff(of rain)
runoff(of rain)
runway
rupture
rupture(n)
rust
rusting
rusts
Rutherfords'nuclearatom
rydberg constant
Sabkha
sac
sacchroidal
sacculus
sacral vertebrate
sacred basil
sacrum
saddle(landform)
saddle nose
safety bottle
safety factor 
safety glass
safety goggle
safety valve
safety valve(relief valve)
sag(to)
Sahel
salient corner 
salient pole 
saline 
saline 
saline soil
Saline soil
salinity
salinity
salinization 
salinization 
saliva
saliva
saliva
salivary amylase
salivary gland 
salivary galands
salmonella
salmonella 
salon 
salpingitis
salpinx
salt
saltation
salt dome 
salt hydrate
salting out 
salt iodization
salt lake 
salt marsh
alt pans
salt plug
salt plug
salty butter
salty marsh
salty water
sample 
sample 
sample(to)
sample 
sample applicator 
sample design
sampled population
sample point
sample size
sample space 
sample survey
sampling 
sampling 
sampling 
sampling bias
sampling distribution 
sampling fraction 
sampling frame
sampling plan
sampling spoon 
sampling unit
sanctuary
sanctuary
sand 
sand 
sand 
sand bank
sandbar
sand beach
sand blast
sand blast
sand blasting 
sand dune 
sand filter
sanding
sand paper
sand spit
sand stone
sand stone
sand storm
sand storm
sandwich
Sanidine
sanitation (control)
sanitation 
sanking 
saphire
saponification
sapping
sapropel
saprophite
saprophyte
saprophyte
sap wood 
sardines
sartorius
sash
sash bars
satellite
satellite
satiety
saturate(to)
saturated(adj)
saturated fats
saturated solution 
saturation
saturation(colour)
saturation
saturation
saturation
sauce
sausage
savanna
savanna
savanna parkland
savanna woodland
saw mill
saw timber
sawtooth wave
scab 
scabbies
scaffold
scalar
scalar(inner)product
scald
scale
scale
Scale
scale
scale
scale
scale
scaledrawing
scalp
scalpel 
scan 
scaphoid
scapula
scapula
scar
scarp(escarpment)
scarp 
scarp metal
scarp slope
scatter
scatter diagram
scattering
scavenge
scavenger
scheelite
schist
schistocity
schistose clerage
schistosoma
schwarz inequality
sciatic
sciatic
sciatic nerve
science of measurment
scion
scion
scissors
sclera
sclera
sclerenchyma
sclerophyll forest 
scoraceous
scoria
scoria
scraper
scraper
scratch coat
scree
screed
screeding
screen
screen grid 
screening
screw
screw 
screw
screw clamp
Screw driver 
screw stud
Scriber
scribing block 
scrotum 
scrotum 
scrotum 
scrub
scum
scurvy
scurvy
scutellum
sea base
sea breeze
sea fish
seal(n)
sea level 
sea mile (nautical mile)
sea mountain 
search coil
season
seasonal component
seasonal isolation 
seasonal river
seasoning of wood
sea weeds
sebaceous gland 
sebaceous gland 
sebum 
sebum 
secondary
secondary activity
secondary coil 
secondary consumer 
secondary era 
secondary manufacturing 
secondary Oocyte
secondary plant body
secondary producer 
secondary production 
secondary radiation
secondary road 
Secondary root 
secondary sexual characterstics 
Secondary source 
Secondary spermatocyte
secondary tillage 
secondary tuberculosis
secondary wall 
secondary wave
secondary wood 
secondary derivative test 
secondary polar body (secondary polar body)
secret nailing (blind nailing: concealed nailing)
secretion 
secretion 
secretion 
Secretory
secretory cell 
section
section 
section (of a cylinder)
section drawing 
section view 
sector(economic)
sector(of a circle)
sector accounts 
sedative
sedentary farmers 
sediment
sediment (to)
sediment
sediment
sediment
sedimentary rock 
sedimentary rocks
sedimentation
sedimentation
sedimentation 
seed
seed
seed
seed bed 
seed borne (disease)
seed-coat
seed dispersal 
seed dispersal 
seed extraction
seed germination
seedling 
seedling 
seeds
seepage
segment
segment
segment(bogy segment)
segregation 
segregation 
segregation of genes (factors)
seif dunes 
seismic
seismic waves
seismogram
seismogram
seismograph
seismography
seismology
seismometer
seizure
selection
selection 
selection 
selection index 
selection process 
selective 
Selective cutting 
selectively permeable membrane 
selective reflection  
selectivity 
selector 
selector fork 
selector rod 
selfed (self pollinated) 
self inductance 
self inductance 
self fertilization 
self ignition (spontaneous ignition) 
self-locking plIers 
self pollination 
self pollination 
self-weighting design
self-weighting sample 
sella turcica 
selva 
semen 
semen 
semen 
semi circle 
semi-circular canal 
semiconductor 
semidecidious 
semidesert 
semi-group 
semilunar valve 
seminal receptacle 
seminal vesicle 
seminal vesicle 
seminiferous tubules 
semipermeable 
Semi-permeable membrane 
semi-ring 
semolina 
senesce 
senescence
senility
sensation
sense organ 
senses
sesible heat
sensitive
sensitivity
sensitivity
sensor
sensory
sensory nerve
sensory neurons 
sensory receptor 
sepal 
separable extension 
separate (to)
separation 
separation of isotopes 
separatory funnel 
sepsis (septicemia)
septic tank 
septum
septum
septum
sequelae
sequence
sequence
sequential
sequential acceptance sampling plan
sequantial sampling plan
sequestrum
serial correlation 
sericulture 
series 
series(connection)
series 
series 
series connection
series resonant circuit 
series winding 
serir(reg(erg)
serology
serosa
serpentine
serpentine bends
serpentinite
serum
serum
sesame
sessile
sessile
sessile
set
set back 
set builder method
set builder notation 
set screw
set square 
setting out 
setting time 
settlement
settlement 
sewage
sex 
sex 
Sex chromosome
sex  composition 
sex determination
sex distribution
sexing 
sex linked 
sex linked inheritance 
sex ratio
sextant
sexual characterstics 
sexual infatation (infatuation)
sexual reproduction
sexual reproduction
seynite
shadow
shadow line 
shaft
Shaft 
Shaft 
shaft and drift mining
shaker
shale
Shale
shank
Shank 
shape 
shape 
shaping 
share
Shatter belt 
shear (ing)
shear(v)
shear
shear deformation
shearer
shearing
shearing of soil 
shearing of strenght
shear stress
shear wave 
sheath
sheat(boot)
sheep brain
sheep-shear
sheet
sheet erosion
sheet erosion
shell
shell(botanical)
shell
shell 
shell(sea shell)
shellac
shell fish
shell membrane
shell structure 
shelter belt 
sheltered gulf
shield(to)
shield(to)
shield (of land)
shield
shielding
shielding effect 
shift(no_
shifting cultivation
shifting cultivation
shift regsiter
shigellosis 
shingle
shingles
shizocarp
shoal(of water)
shock
shock 
shock 
shock absorber
shock wave 
shoot(s) 
shoot
shoot apex 
shooting star
shoot system
shore 
shoreline
shoring
short circuit
short-day plant(s)
short-day plant
short growing season 
short horn 
short span
short wave
shortwave radition 
shoulder
shoulder(landform)
shovel 
show
shower
shrinkage
shrinkage limit
shrub
shrub
shrubs
shunt(n)
shunt(v)
shunt winding
shunt wound motor
shutter
sial
sick 
sickle
sickle
sickle-cell
sickle cell anaemia
side
side-dressing
side reaction
sidereal
sidereal time 
siderite
sidesway
side-valve engine
side view
siding 
sieve
sieve
sieve(to)
sieve
sieve cell 
sieve element 
sieve plate 
sieve pore 
sieve tube
sieve tube element 
sieving 
sigh distance 
sighing 
sigma notation
sigmoid colon 
sign
sign 
signal 
signal conditioning 
signal generator 
signuificance
significant digit (figure) 
sign of grouping 
silage
silal
silica gel 
silicate
siliceous sinter
silicification
silk(corn)_
silk(corn)_
silky 
sill(cill)
sill(cill)
sill(cill)
sillimanite
silo 
silstone
silt
silt
silt
silver
silver
silviculture 
sima
sima
similar
similar cones 
similar cylinders
similarity
simmoon 
simple
simple aggregate
simple closed curve
simple curve 
simple event
simple eye
simple fruit
simple group 
simple harmonic motion 
simple interest 
simple leaf 
simple machine 
simple microscope 
simple microscope 
simple pendulum
simple polygon
simple plyhedron
simple region 
simple ring 
simulate
simulate 
simultaneity
simultaneous 
simultaneous equation
simultaneous inequalities 
simultaneous linear equation
sine series 
sine wave 
single acceptance sampling plan 
single acting engine 
single bond 
single circulation 
single cross 
single phase 
single sampling plan 
single slit diffraction 
singular matrix 
sinistral
sinistral fault 
sink 
sink 
sink 
sinkhole 
sinkhole or swallowhole 
sinter
sintered glass filter 
sintering 
sinus 
sinus 
sinusoidal  wave 
sinus venosus
siphon
siphon (to)
siphon
siphoneous (siphonaceous)
siphoning
sire
siren
sirocco
sister chromatids 
site
site
situation map
size
size
skeletal muscle
skeletal system
skeletal system
skeleton 
skeries 
sketch
sketch
sketch(n)
sketch(v)
skew
skew lines 
skew nailing 
skewness
skim milk 
skimmed milk 
skin cholestrol 
skin cholestrol 
skin cholestrol 
skiting 
skull 
skull 
sky factor 
sky light frame 
skyline 
sky scraper 
slab 
Slack water 
slag 
slaked lime 
slaking of lime 
slant height 
slate 
slate 
slaty cleavage
slaughter
sledge
sleepers
sleep movement 
sleet 
sleeve
slickenside
slide(n)
slide (v)
slide casts 
slide rule 
slide vavle
sliding bearing 
sliding friction 
sling 
slip(v) 
slipface(of dune)
slip face
slip ring 
slit
slope 
slope 
slope 
slope 
slope intercept form(of a line)
slope wash
slotted nut
slough
slug(unit)
slump
slump test 
slurry
small circle 
small intestine 
small intestine 
small intestine 
smallpox 
smash
smasher
smelting 
smelting 
smog
smoking crest (of dunes)
smooth curve 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum
smoothing 
smoothing trowel 
smooth muscle 
smut 
smuts
snack 
snapping lines 
sneeze
snips 
snout 
snow
snow
snow
snow drift
snow filed 
snow field 
snow guage
snow line 
snuffles
soak(to)
soaking 
soap
soapstone
socket
socket
socket wrench
sodic plagioclase 
soft
soft acid 
soft drinks 
softening
softit
soft magnetization
softness 
soft palate
softwater
soft wood 
soft wood 
soil
soil
soil-borne(disease)
soil creep
soil erosion
soil flares
soil fluction
soil horizon
soil horizon
soil mantle
soil PH
soil phase
soil profile
soil profile
soil profile
soil profile
soil ridge
soil series 
soil stack
soil texture 
soil type 
solar
solar
solar cell 
solar day 
solar eclipse
solar energy
solarium
solar radiation
solar radiation
solar system
solar system
solar year 
soldering 
sole
solenoid 
solenoid 
solid 
solid 
solid 
solidification
solidifcation
Solidify 
Solid medium 
Soild state 
Solifluction 
Solifiuctionrobe 
solistice 
solitary flower 
solitary phase 
solitary phase 
solubility
solubility product
soluble 
solum
solute
solute
solution
solution
solution
solution set
solvate
solvate(to)
solvatd
solvation
solve
solvent
somatic cell 
somites
sonic
sore
sorting (of sediment)
sorting (of sediment)
sorus
sound(of the sea) 
sound 
Sound absorbing 
sounding 
sounding balloon (balloon sonde)
sound-insulating
sour milk
source 
source(of a river)
source
south latitutde
south pole
south pole
sow
soy bean oil meal
space
space
space
space 
space charge
pace charge 
space curve
space dimensions
space lattice
space time
spade
spadix
spallation
spalling
span 
spandrel
spanner
sparite
spark
spark gap 
spsark ignition (S.I.)
spark plug 
sparse (population)
spasm 
spate 
spathe 
spatter cone 
spatula 
spatula 
spaying 
spacial 
special theory of relativity 
specialtion 
species 
speies 
species 
species hybridization 
specification 
specific gravity 
specific gravity 
specific heat 
specific heat capacity 
specific humidity 
specimen 
specimen 
specimen 
spectral 
spectrall line 
spectral series of hydrogen 
spectorometer
spectrometer 
spectrophotometer 
spectroscopy 
spectrum 
spectrum 
speculum 
speed 
speedometer 
sperm 
sperm (semen)
spermatheca
spermatid 
spermatocyte 
spermatogenesis 
spermatogonium 
spermatophore 
spermatophyte 
spermatophyte 
spermatozoa 
spermatozoa (sperm)
sperm nucleus 
sphenoidal 
sphere 
sphere 
sphere 
sphere of influence 
spherical
spherical abberation 
spherical angle 
spherical coordinates 
spherical coordinates system 
spherical geometry 
spherical mirror 
spherical triangle 
spherical wave 
sphericity 
spheroid 
spheroid 
spherulite 
sphincter 
sphincter 
sphygmomanometer
spices and herbs 
spigot 
spike 
spike 
spikelet 
spikelet 
spill way 
spin 
spinach
spinal canal 
spinal column
spinal cord 
spinal cord 
spinal ganglia 
spinal nerves 
spinal nerves 
spinal tap 
spindle (in general ) 
Spindle (in textile) 
Spindle 
spindle fiber 
spine 
Spinel
Sp[inneretes 
spinning (in metal working)
spinning (in textile) 
spiracle 
spiral arm 
spiral or coiled condenser 
spiral spring 
spirifer 
spirillum 
spirit lamp 
spirit level 
spirit level 
spirometer 
spit 
spit 
spleen 
splenomegally (spleen enlargement)
splice 
splined shaft 
splint
split 
split 
split bearing 
split level house 
split phase motor 
splitting 
splitting field 
sply 
spodumene 
sponge 
spongr
spongy mesophyll
spontaneous 
spontaneous wxpansion 
spontaneus reaction 
spoon degorent 
sporadic 
sporadic meteor 
sporangium
spore 
spore 
sporophyll 
sporophyte 
sporophyte generation 
sporulation 
spt height 
spot welding 
sprain 
spraye 
sprayer or atomizer 
spraying 
sprays (insecticide)
spreading rise 
spring
spring
spring 
spring 
spring balance 
spring balance 
spring scale 
spring tide 
spring tide 
spring washer 
spring washers 
spring water 
sprocket
sprout 
spur 
spur 
spur settlement 
sputum 
squall 
square 
square (of a number) 
square 
square matrix 
square road pattern 
square root 
square wave 
squared deviation 
squared deviation about the mean 
squared thread 
squaring 
squint 
squirrel cage rotor 
stability 
stability constant 
stable 
stable 
stable equilibrium 
stable population 
stack 
stacking out  
stain 
stain 
staining 
stianless steel 
stair cases
stairs 
stalactite 
stalactite 
stalagmite 
stalagmite 
stamen
stmen 
staminate 
staminate flower 
stand (plant)
stand 
standard 
standard conditions
standard deviation 
standard error of the mean
standard form 
standardization 
standardize (to)
standardize 
standardized rate 
standard petal 
standard position of an angle 
standard preparation 
standard solution 
standard time 
standard unit 
sandard units 
stnding 
standing wave 
stapes (stirrup) 
staphylococcus 
staple food 
staple food 
staple length 
staples 
star (v) connection 
starch 
starch 
starch 
starfish 
starter 
starvation 
statcouluomb 
sstate
state 
static electricity 
static friction 
statics
stationarity 
stationary 
stationary 
stationary wave 
statistic 
statistical control 
statistical data 
statistical design 
statistical hypothesis 
statistical inference 
statistical map 
statistical mechanics 
statistical method 
statistical quality control 
Statistics 
Stator 
Statue mile 
staurolite 
steady 
steady current 
steady state
steady state
steem
steam
steam distillation
Steam engine
steam point
steam turbine
steam turbine
steel 
steel 
steel 
steel wool 
steep gradient
steeple
steer
steering box 
steering column 
steering gear
steering wheel
stefan-Boltzman constant
stele
steelar
stellar dynamics
stellar evolution
stem
stenosis 
step(function)
step(down)
step-down transformer
step function 
step-up(adj)
step pu transofmrer
steppe
stepped slope 
steptoe
stereo
stereography
stereoscopic vision 
stereotomy
steric 
sterile
sterile
sterility
Sterility 
sterilization
sterilization
sterilization (methods)
sterilization
sterilize(to)
sterilize(to)
steriling cycle
sternum
sternum
steroid
steroid
stertorous
stethoscope
stevenson screen
stibnite
stiff
stiffness
stiffness
stiffness
stiffness 
stifle
stigma
Stigma 
stile 
still birth 
stillborn
stimulant 
stimulants 
stimulate (stimulation)
stimulate(to)
stimulate
stimulus
stimulus
stimulus
sting
sting
sting
stinging cell
stinging cell 
stipule
stirrer
stirring rod
stirr up 
stirrup 
stitch
stochastic(probabilistic)
stochastic model(Probablistic model; non-deterministic model)
stock 
stock 
stock 
stock 
stock 
stock raising
stock solution
stoichiometry
stoke's law
stolon
stolon
stomach 
stomach 
stomata 
stomatitis 
stone:bond stone 
stone: cast stone 
ston: dressed stone 
stone age 
stone ring 
stool 
stopper 
stopping 
stopping 
storage 
storage root 
storey 
storm tracks 
stormy beach 
stabismus 
strabismus (cross eye) 
straight angle 
straight chain 
straight fertilizers 
strain 
strain 
strain 
strain 
strain 
straining 
strait 
strange 
strangeness 
strangeness number 
strange particles 
strangler 
stranglers (on trees) 
strap joint 
strap wrench 
strata 
strategic area 
stratification 
stratification 
stratification 
stratification plane 
stratified drift 
stratified sample 
stratified sampling 
stratify 
stratigraphy 
stratigraphy 
stratocumulus 
stratosphere 
stratosphere 
stratosphere 
stratovolvanoes 
stratum 
stratum 
stratum 
stratus 
straw 
strawberry 
straws 
streak 
stream 
stream 
stream erosion 
stream-lined body 
stream line flow 
stream order 
stream order 
stream piracy  
stream terrace 
strength 
strength 
strengthm
strength of material 
stress 
stress 
stress 
stress 
stress 
stress 
stretch (v.trans. 
stretcher 
stretcher 
stretch modulus 
stretch receptor 
striae 
strlated muscle (striped muscle) 
striations 
strictly decreasing function 
strictly increasing funcation 
strictly monotonic funcation 
stricture 
stridor 
stridulation 
stridulatory organ 
strike (of land)  
strike 
strike-slip fault 
string 
string course 
stringer 
stringer 
strip cropping 
strip cropping 
strip cultivation 
strip mining 
strobilus 
stroboscope 
stroke 
stroke 
stroke 
stromatolite 
strong acid 
strong breeze 
strong gale 
strong interaction 
stongyloides 
structural clay tile 
structural formula 
structural geology 
structure (soil) 
Structure 
structure 
structure (algebraic) 
structure 
structure section 
strut 
stuble 
stucco 
stud 
stud 
stuffiness 
stuffing box 
stump 
stump 
stunted growth 
stupor 
style 
style 
styolite 
sub 
subclass 
subclavian 
subclavian artery 
subclavian artery 
subclavian vein 
subconchoidal 
subcontinent 
subcritical 
subctaneous 
subcutaneous 
subcutaneous 
subcutaneous fat 
subduction 
subduction zone 
suberin 
suberization 
subfamily 
sub-field 
subgenus 
sub-group 
subhedral 
subject 
subjective probability 
subkingdom 
sublimate 
sublimation 
sublimation 
sublimation 
sublime (to) 
sublingual gland 
sublittoral 
submarine 
submarine bar 
submarine canyon 
submerged coast 
submergence 
submucous 
suborder 
subphylum 
subpolar low 
sub-ring 
sub-routine 
sub-saharaan 
subscript 
subsequent stream 
subsequent stream 
subset 
susidence 
subsistence farming 
sub-soil 
subsoil 
subsoil 
subsoil 
subsoiling 
sub-space 
subspecies 
substance 
substance 
substitutent 
subnstitute (to) 
substitute 
substitute 
substitution 
substitution 
substrate 
substratum 
substratum 
sub-structure 
subtemperate 
subtend 
subteranean (water) 
subtraction 
subtractor 
subtrahend 
subtropical 
subtropical highs 
succession 
succession (of vegetation) 
succulence 
succulent 
suculent 
succulent feed 
succulent fruit 
succulent plant 
suck 9to) 
sucker 
sucrase 
sucrose 
suction 
suction filter 
sufforcation 
sugar 
sugar crops 
sugars 
sulous 
sulfonation 
sulfur 
sulphide enrichment 
sulphur 
sum 
sum of squares 
summation 
summation sign ( ) 
summer 
summer solistice 
summit (of mountain) 
sundial 
sunflower seed 
sun gear 
sunrise 
sunset 
sunset 
Sun shading 
sunshine 
sunshine recorder 
sun sport 
sunspot 
super charging 
super class 
supercooled 
supercritical 
super dense theory 
super elevation 
super family 
superficial 
superfocation 
supergenus 
superheated 
super heater 
superheterodyne (receiver) 
supernatant lquid 
suerimposed drainage 
superior ovary 
superior venacava 
super rder (infra class) 
super phyium 
super pose 
super postion 
super position principle 
supersaturated 
supersaturation 
superscript 
superset 
superstructure 
supination 
supinator muscle 
supine 
supper 
supplementary 
supplementary angles 
supplementary feeding 
supplymentary food 
support 
suppository 
suppuration 
suprapubic 
supressor grid 
surcharge 
surf 
surface 
surface 
surface 
surface 
surface adsorpation 
surface detention 
surface film 
surface flow 
surface level 
surface of a cylinder 
surface tension 
surface tension 
surface wave 
surface wave 
surfactant 
surform plane 
surgeon 
surgery 
survey 
survey 
survey design 
surveying 
surveying instrument 
survey population 
survival rate 
survival rate 
suseptibility 
susceptibility 
susceptible 
susceptible 
suspended load 
suspending celling 
suspendsion 
suspension (in streams) 
suspension 
suspensory ligment 
suspensory ligaments 
suture 
swallow hole 
swamp 
swamp 
swan 
swarm 
swash (of the sea) 
sweat 
sweat gland 
sweating 
sweep (n) 
sweep (v) 
sweeet potato 
swell (of land) 
swine 
swiss chard 
switch  
switch 
swtitch (n)
switch board 
switch off (v)  
switch on (v) 
swivel vice 
sword dune 
symbiont 
symbiosis 
symbiosis 
symbiotic-nitrogen fixation 
symbole 
symbol 
symmetric 
symmetric difference 
symmetric group 
symmetric matrix 
symmetric relation 
symmetrical fold 
symmetrical fold 
symmetry 
symmetry 
symmetry 
symmetry 
symmetry 
symmetry 
symmetry 
sympathetic nervous system 
sympathetic nervous system 
symphysis 
symphysis pubic 
symtom 
symptom 
synapse 
synapsis 
synarthrosis 
synchronization 
synchronization 
synchronize 
sychronize 
synchronous 
syncline 
synncline 
synclinorium 
syncope 
syndactyle 
syndrome 
syngamy 
synoptic 
synoptic chart 
synoptic chart 
synovial fluid 
synthesis 
synthesis 
synthesis 
synthesis 
synthesize 
synthetic 
synthetic cohort 
synthetic dye 
syphilis 
syringe 
syrinx (song box) 
syrup 
syrup 
system 
system 
system 
system 
system 
system 
systematic errors 
systematic sample 
systematic sampling 
systems of equations 
systole 
systole 
syzoygy 
table 
table land 
table salt 
tablet 
tabulate 
tabulation 
tachometer 
tachycardia 
tacks 
tadpole 
tagging 
taiga 
tail 
tail (of a coin) 
tailhed 
tailstock 
talc 
tallow 
tally 
tally (to) 
tally sheet 
talus creep 
tamepasture 
tamper 
tandom selection 
tangent 
tangent circles 
tangent externallyy 
tangential velocity 
tangent internally 
tangent line to a sphere 
tangent of a circle 
tangent plane (to a cone) 
tangent plane (to a sphere) 
tangent spheres 
tangerine 
tank 
tank
tannin 
tanning 
tap 
tap (valve) 
tape 
tape 
tap extractor 
taper 
tape recorder 
tapering 
tapeworm 
tape-worm 
tappet 
tap root 
tap root 
tap wrenches 
tar (asphalt) 
tar 
tar 
tare
target population
tar macadam
tarmacadam
tarn
tarn
tarnish (to)
tarnish
taro
tarsal
tarsals
tar sand
tartar
tassel
tassel
taste
taste bud
taste buds
T.A.T.(Tetanus Anti Toxin)
tatto-ing
tautology
taxis
taxon
taxonomic
taxonomist
taxonomy
taxonomy
Taylor's series 
T.B.
T-connecting tube
tear fault
teat orfice
technical drawing
technique
technique
technology
tectonic
tectonic depression
tectonic movement
tectonics
tectonism
telemeter
telescope
television
television tubes
telluride
telophase
temper (v)
temperate
temperate desert
temperate forest
temperate grassland
temperate low
temperate zone
temperature
temperature
 temperature anomaly
temperature equator
temperature in version
temperature zone
template (templet)
templet
temporal
temporary pasture
tender
tenderil
tendon
tenement
tenesums
tenon
tenon saw
tensile
tensile force
tensile strength
tensile strength
tensile strength
tensile strength 
tensile test
tension
tension
tension
tension
tension
tensional force
tensional force
tentacle
tephra
terace
term
term
terminal
terminal
terminal
terminal bud
terminal delta
terminal moraine
terminal side of an angle
terminal velocity
terminal velocity
terminating decimal
termite
terrace
terrace
terrace farming
terraced slope
terracing
terrain
terrain
terrarium
terrestrial
terrestrial
terrestrial
terrestrial animals
terrestrial life
terrestrial magnetism
terrigenous deposites
territorial 
territorial behaviour
territoriality
territory
tertiary
tertiary
tertiary acid
tesla
test
test(to)
test
test(n)
test(v)
testa
testa (seed coat)
testestrone
testestrone 
test for convergence
testicles
testing
testis 
testis 
test of hypothesis or hypothesis testing
test preparation
test rig
test of significance
test solution
test specimen
test statistic
test tube
tetanus (sock jaw)
tetanus 
tetany
tetragonal
terahedral angle
tertahedron
tetrode 
texture
texture
thallophyta
thallus
thalweg (valley line)
thatch
thaw (to)
thaw 
thawing
T-head bolt
theatre
the existential quantifier
thematic map
theodolite
theorem
theorem
theoretical physics
theory
theory
theory
theory
therapy
thermal
thermal decomposition
termal dissociation
thermal equator
thermal expansion
thermal insulator
thermal metamorphism
thermal pollution
thermal pollution
thermal radiation
thermal value
thermo chemistry
thermocline
thermocouple
thermocouple 
thermodynamics
thermocouple 
thermocouple 
thermodynamics
thermodynamics 
thermodynamics surface
thermograph
thermoionic 
thermoionic emission
thermometer
thermometer 
thermometer 
thermometer 
thermometry
thermomineral water
thermonasty
thermonuclear
thermonuclear reaction
thermoplastic
thermoset
thermosflask
thermosphere
thermostat
thermostat
thermosflask
thermosphere
thermostat
thermostat
the universal quantifier
thiamin (vitamin B1) 
thick
thicken (to) 
thickening
thicket
thickness
thigh
thigh
thigmonasty
thigmostroposim
thin(to)
thin (to)
thinner
thinning
third angle projection
third law of thermodynamics 
thistle funnel
thoracentesis
thoracic cavity
thoracic vertebrae
thorax
thorax
thorium series
thornbush
thorn scrub
thread
thread
threaded 
 thread worm (pin or seat worm)
three dimensional space
three phase 
threonine
threshold
threshold
threshold frequency
thriftness
throat
throat
throat
thrombin
thrombocyte
thrombosis
thrombosis
thrombus
throttle (V)
throttle valve
throttling process
thrust
thrust (n) 
thrust bearing
thrust fault
thumb
thumus gland
thunder cloud 
thunder storm
thurl
thyroid gland
thyroid gland
thyroid gland
thyroid hormone 
thyroid stimulating hormone
thyrotrophic hormone
thyroxin
thyroxine 
thyroxine 
tibia
tibia
tibio-fibula
tick
tick
tidal bore
tidal current
tidal flat
tidal oscillation
tidal volume
tidal wave
tide
tide(tidalcurrent)
tide
tie
tile
till
till
till
tillage
tiller
tillite
tilth
timber
timber
timber line
time (n)
time (v)
time series
time series model
time zone
timing gears
tin 
tinnitus 
tint
T-iron
tissue (s)
tissue
tissue
tissue
tissue respiration
titer
title
titrand
titrant
titrate (to)
titration
T-joint 
toe
toilet
toilet
tolerance
tolerance
tolerance
tolerance 
tolerance distribution
tolerant 
tolerate
tomato
tombola
tommy bar
tone
tong
tonges
tongue
tongue
tongue
tongue and groove
tongue depressor
tonsil
tonsil
tonsilitis
tool
tool
tool
tool box 
tool post
tooth
top
top dead centre 
top-dressing
topical map 
top land (for gears)
topography
topping
top-soil
top soil
top-soil
top view
tor
torch
tornado
toroid
toroidal
torque
torque
torque (moment of force)
torque converter
torque divider
torque wrench
torrent
torrential shower
torrid zone
torsion
torsion
torsion
torsion modulus
total 
total fertility rate
total internal reflection
total lung volume
toral ordering
to the power of (caluclation)
toughness
toughness
tourism
tourniquet
towel
tower
tower crane
town
township
toxicity
toxicity
toxicology
toxin
toxin
toxoid
trrabeated
trace
trace (of a matrix)
transistor 
trace element
tracer
tracer
tracer technique
trachea
trachea
tracheid
tracheopyta
trachoma
trachyte
track rod
tracking
trade wind
trading enterpirse sector
traditional medicine
tragus
trails
trajectory
tramp freighter
trans
transcendental 
transcendental equation
transcendental extension
transcendental plane curve
transcuovent fault
transducer (electomechnical)
transfer
transfer
transference
transfer of heat
transform (v)
transformation
transformation
transformation
transformation of energy
transformer
transformer
transfusion
transgression (of the sea)
transgression (of the sea)
transhumance
translent
transient
transient current 
transit
transit
transit statistics
transistor 
transition
transitioanl zone
transiton elements 
tranition state
transitive relation
transitivey
translation 
translation 
translational equilibrium
translational motion
translocated herbicide
translocation
translucent
translucent
translucent substance
transmission lines
transmission lines
transmision of light
transmit (v)
transmittance
transmitted light
transmitter
transmitter
transmutation
transome
transparency
transparent
transparent
transparent
transpiration 
transpiration 
transpiration pull
transpire
transplane
transplanation
transplanting
transportation
transpose of a matrix
transuranic
transversal 
transversal 
transversal axis of a hyperbola
transverse
transverse coast
transverse colon
transverse colon
transverse duen
transverse postion
transverse river valley
transverse vibration 
transverse wave
trap 
trap 
trapdor
trapezium 
trappean lava
trappean series
traumatic shock 
travel 
travelling 
travelling wave 
travertine (tufa)
travertine 
tread 
treatement 
treatement (factor)
treatment combination 
treatment sum of squares 
tree
treeline
trellis draingage
tremor
tremor
trenches (of ocean)
trend
trend component 
trial 
trial 
triangle 
triangular bandage
triangular facets 
triangualr prism 
triangular region
triangulation
triangulation
triatomic 
tributary 
triceps
triceps
trichuris (whipworm)
triclinic
tricuspid
tricuspid valve
tricuspid valve
triglycerides
trigonal 
trigone
trigonometric function 
trigonometirc ration
trigonmetry 
thihedal angle 
trihybrid
trillings 
trim 
triminer 
trinomial 
trinomial 
triode
tripe
tri-peptides
triple bond
triple integral 
triple junction 
triple point 
triple point 
triploblastic 
tripod
tripod
tritium 
trioton
triturate (to)
trituration 
tri-variate 
trivial name 
trocar 
trocar and canula
trochanter
trochanter
trochlea
trolley 
trolley 
tropic level 
trophozoit
tropic level 
tropic of cancer 
tropic of capricorn 
tropical 
tropical cyclone 
tropicl grassland 
tropical hot desert 
tropical latitudes 
tropical rain forest 
tropical rain forest
tropical revolving storm 
tropical thornbush 
tropical time 
tropical ulcer 
tropical zone 
tropism 
tropopause 
tropophytes 
troposphere 
troposphere
troposhpere
trough
trough
trough
trowel
truck farming
true digestible energy
true fruit
true hypothesis
true north
true ribs
truncate
truncated spur
truncated spur
trunk
truss
trust terriroty
truth table 
truh value (of a proporton)
truth value funtion
try (to)
try square
tryponosmiasis
trypsin
trypsin
tryptophan
T-Square
T-Square
Tsunant
tube
tube 
tube 
tube dehorent
tube feet
tube neculeus
tube wrench
tuber
tuber
tubercle bacillus
tuberculin
tuberclouid leprosy
tuberculosis
tuck pointing
tuff
tuff
tuffa
tumor
tumulus
tundra 
tundra soil
tune 
tune 
tued circuit
tuning fork
tunnel
tunnel
tunnel effect
turbid
turbidity current
turbine
turbulence (in streams) 
turbulenceg
turbulent flow
turbulent flow
turgid
turgor
turgor pressure
turn (v)
tureric
turning point
turnstile
turpentine
tusk
twilight
twin
twin
twinning stem
twins
twist
twist drill
two-handed saw
two-phase sampling
two points form (of a line)
two sided limit
two stroke engine
two-tail test (two-sided test)
two-way switch
tympanum
type
type area
type I error
type II error
type seciton
type species
types of food
typhoid/typhoid fever (enteric fever)
typhoon
typhus fever (lowe\se borne)
U-bolg
uddr
uder edma
udder pressure
U-iron
ulcer
ulna
ulna
ulnar artery
ulotrichy
ultimate
ultimate strength
ultra
ultra basic rocks
ultra-high frequency (UHF)
ultrasonic
ultrasonic wave
ultraviolet
ultravioletcastastrophe
ultraviolet radiaiton
ultraviolet radiation
umbel
Umbilical artery
umbilical cord
umblical cord
umblical cord
umblicus 
umblicus 
umbra
umbra
unaerobic
unambigious
unary
unbalnced force
unbiased
unbalsed estimator
unbounded
unbounded fucniton
unbounded interval
unbounded sequence
uncerainity
uncertainity principle
unconformity
unconsciousness
uncountable
uncountably infinite set
undamed
undefined
udefined (for the case of a funciton),
undercut slop
underfeed stoker
undergrowth
underpin
undershot wheel
undertow
under weight
undulant fever
undulating peneplain
unemployment index
unestrus
uneven
unexplained variability (regression)
ungraded shading
ungrouped data
ungulates
unicell
unicellular
unicellular
unifor
uniform acceleration
uniform circular
uniform convergence
uniformitarianism
uniformity
uniform retardation
uniformly continous
uniformly convergent
uniform velocity 
unilateral
Union (joint)
Union
union
Unions
unipara
uniqe
unique factorization domain
uniqueness
unisexual
unisexual
unit
unit
unit
unit
unit matrix
unit membrace
unit step
unity
univariate
universal constant
universal donor
universal indicator
universal jong
universal law
universal law of gravitation
universal quantifier (A) 
Universal  recipient
Universal et
universe
Universe
universe
unsanitary
unsaturated
unsaturated fasts
unstability
unstable
unstable
unstable equilibrium
updraft
upgrade 
upland
uplift
uplifting
upper arm
upper bound 
upper class boundary
upper class limit
upper-esophagus
upper extremity
upper integral (upper Riemann's integal)
upper jaw
upper limit of integration
upper mantle
upper sandstone
upper sum (upper Riemann's sum)
upright 
upwelling
uranium enrichment
urbanization
urea
uremia
ureter
ureter
urethra
urethra
urethral meatus
urinal
urinalysis
urinary bladder
urine
urinogenital system
urticaria
uterine inertia
uerus
uterus
uterus-body
uterus-fundus
utriculus
U-tube
U-valley
uvula
vacancy
vacant
vaccination
vaccination
vaccination tool
vaccine
vaccine
vacuolar sap
vacuole
vacuum
vacuum
vaccum brake
vaccum drying oven
vacuum pump
vacuum pump
vacuum tube
vadose water
vagina
vagina
vagina
aginitis
vagus nerve
valence
valence
valley
valley breeze
valley terraes
valley trains
value
value added (value of produciton)
value of output
valve
valve
valve
valve
valve
van de Graaf generator
vanishing point 
vapor 
vapor density
vaporization
vaporization
vaporize (to)
vapour
vapour
vapour power
vapour pressure
vapour seal
vapor state
variability
variable
variable
variable
variables process control
vaiables testing
varaicne
variation
variation
variation
variation
varicouse vein
varicouse vein
varegated leaf
varety
varnish
varandah
varriation
vas deferense
vas deferense
vas efferentia
vascular boundle
vascular cylinder
vascular plant
vasci;ar syste,
vasculr tissue
ascular tissues
vasectomy
vaslin gauze
vasoconstriction
vasodilation
vats
vault
V-belt
V.D.R.L
veal
vector
vector
vector
vector
vector funciton
vector geometry
vector product
vector space
vegtable
vegetable
vegetables
vegetal pole
vegetation
vegetation
vegetation formation
vegetarian
vegetatie reproducion (propagation)
vein
vein
vein (in a rock)
ein
ein
eld
velocity
velocity
vena cava
venation
venation
veneer
venereal disease
venetian blind
venn diagram
venom
ent
vent
vent
ventilation
ventilation
ventral
ventral
ventral
ventral fissure
ventral root
ventricle (of heart)
ventricle (of heart)
ent stack
enturi tube
venule
venule
verge
Verification
verification
verify (to)
verify (n)
vermiculaiton
vernal equinox
vernalization 
vernalizaton
vernier
vernier caliper
vernier scale 
vernix caseosa
versatile clamp
vertebra
vertebrae
verteral column
verterbal column
vertebrate
vertex 
vertex 
vertical
vertical
verical axis
verical axis
vertical component
vertical corression
vertical curve
vertical displacement
vertical errosion
vertical exaggeration
vertical interval
verically opposite angle
vertigo
vertisol
very high frequency (VHF)
very low fequency (VLF)
Vesicle
vesicle
vesicorpuscle
vesicular
vesicular
vessel (xylem)
vessel
vestige
vestigiatl organ
vetch
viability
vial
vial
vibration
vibraton
vibration
vibraton of membrance
vibratory motion
vice
victim
victim stream
view
village
villi
villus
vine
vino
viral
virgin soil
virilism
virtual
virtual image
virtual object
virtual work
virulence
virus
virus
viscera
visceral muscles
viscera
viscid
viscometer
viscosity
viscosity
viscotity
viscosity
viscous
viscous
viscous fluid
visibility
visible
visibel radiation
visible spectrum
vission
vision
visualization
visual pigment
visual purple
visual texture
vital center
vital evnt
vital rate
vital registration system
vital sign
vital statistics
virtamin
Vitamin
vitamin
vitamin A
vitamin B
vitamin B1
Vitamin B2
Vitamin B6
vitelline membrane
viticulature
vitiligo
vireous
vitreous
vitreous humor
viparous 
viviparous
vocal cord
vocal sac
voice
void ratio
voids
volatile
volatile
volatile
volatility
volcanic activity
volcanic breccia
volcanic cone
volcanic eruption
volcanic neck
volcanic rock
volcanic soil
volcanic vent
volcanism
volcanism
volcano
volcano
volt
voltage
voltage
voltage regualtor
voltic cell
coltemeter
voume
Volume
volume (capacity)
voulme 
volumetric analysis
volumetric flask
volumetric strain
voluntary muscle
volvuls
vomit (n)
voussoir
V-shaped valley
V-thread
vulcanization
vulcanize (to)
vulva
VVF (vesico viginal fistula 
wadi
wainscot
walkup apartment
walk boardm
wall board
well: cavity wall
well:common wall
wall : curtain wall
wall:enclosure wall
wall:exterior wall
wall:faced wall
wall:fire division wall
wall: fire wall
wall: foundation wall
wall: non-bearning wall
wall: parapet wall
wall: panel wall
wall:pasty wall
wall:wall bearing construciton
wankel engine (rotary engine)
waping
warden
warm
warm front
warp (n+v)
wart (s)
wart 
wash (to)
wash bottle
washer
washer (plan) 
washers
washing
washout (oof pollution)
wasserman test
waste disposal
waste pipe
waste product
watch glass
water
water closet
water-cooled engine
water equivalent
waterer
water fall
water fall
water gap
water gas
water head
water hemisphere
water-logged (plain)
water logged land
water of hydration
water pollution
water-pollution
water potential
water power
water repellent
watershed 
water soluble
water soluble vitamin
water spot
water supply
water table
water table 
water tight
water vapor
water vapour
water wheel
watt
watt hour
watt hour capacity
wattle
wave
wave
wave
wave
wave cut bench
wave cuit plotform
wae guide
wave length
wave number 
wave reraction
wave shaping
wave theory of light 
wave train
wavee trap
wavicle
wax
Wax
Wax
W.B.C (white blood cell)
weak acid
weak interaction
weaning food
weaning food
weaning food demonstration
weaning period
weaning weight
weather
weather
weather boading
weather chart
weathering
weathering
weatehring
weathering 
weatering station
web
weber
webbs
wedge
weed
weed
weed control
weep hole
weft
weight
weight
weigghted aggregate 
weighted mean (weighted avarage)
weighing bottle
weightlessness
weight scales
Weil Felix test
welded joint
welded tuff (ignimbrite)
welding
welding shield
well (well hole)
well
well-ordering
weterlies
weterlies
wet adiabatic lapse rate
wet and dry bulb hygrometer
wet bulb temperature
wet buld thermometer
weather
wet liner
wepoint settleemnt
wet spell
wettin agent
wet weight
wharf
wheal
wheat
wheat belt
wheat brain
wheat shorts
wheatstome bridge
wheel
wheel
wheel barrow
whell base
wheel brace
wheel graph
wheel tractor
weel chair
wheezing
whetting
whey
whipworm
whirl pool
whirl wind
whisky
whistlers
white blood ceels (Leucocyte)
white matter
white wash
whole gale
whole milk
whole milk
whooping cough
whorl
whorled
wick
wicket
Widal test
width
width
width
wildlife
wilt (to)
wilting
wilting
wilting point
winch
wind bag
wind breace
wind break
wind break
winder
windgap
wind mill
window
window: blank window
window blinds
window: bow window
window:dormer window
window:orieel window
window: picture window
window: sashless window
windrose
windscreen (windsheld)
windvane
windwardside
wing
wing petal
winter
winter solistice
wire
wire cutters
wire rope
wsdom tooth
wood
wood
wood screws
wood vaner
wood work
wool
wool worting
word
work
work
work-energy principle
worker bee
working mean
workshop
worm
worm (screw)
worm wheel
wound
wrench (spanner)
wrenches
wrist
wrogh iron
xanthophyl
x-chromosome
x-coordiante
xeromorphic
xeromorphism
xerophilous
xerophyte
xerophytes
xerophtes
xerosis
xerox
x-intercept
X-ray
x-ray
x-ray
x-ray diffraction
x-ray does
xylem
xylem
xylem sap
yard
yazoo stream
y-chromosome
y-connecting tube
y-coordiante
yearling
yeast
yeast
yellow fever
yellow spot (Mascula lutea)
yield
yield
yield point
y-intercept
yol
young valley
young's moduulus
zener diode
zenith
zenith
zenithal equal area projection
zenithal equidistance projection
zenithal (azimuthal) projection
zeolite
zero
zero divisor
zero matrix
zero of a function
zero-point energy
zigzag rule (folding rule)
zodiac
zodiac
zodical light
zonal noon
zone
zone
zone of ablation
zoobenthos
zoo geographical region
zoo geographical region
zoogeography
zoologist
zoology
zoo plankton
zoo sporangium
zoo spore
zygomatic bone
Zygomorphic
zygomycetes
zygpspore
zygote
zygote
zygote
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“You must not take a wife for yourself, and you must not have sons and daughters in this place.
For this is what Jehovah says concerning the sons and daughters who are born here and concerning their mothers who give birth to them and concerning their fathers who cause their birth in this land:
‘They will die of deadly diseases, but no one will mourn them or bury them; they will become like manure on the surface of the ground. They will perish by the sword and by famine, and their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.’
For this is what Jehovah says,‘Do not enter a house where a mourners’ feast is held,And do not go to wail or offer sympathy.’ ‘For I have taken away my peace from this people,’ declares Jehovah,‘As well as my loyal love and mercy.
Both the great and the small will die in this land. They will not be buried,No one will mourn them,Nor will anyone cut himself or make himself bald for them.
And no one will provide food for those in mourning,To comfort them over their dead;Nor will anyone give them the cup of consolationTo drink over the loss of their father or mother.
And do not enter a house of feastingTo sit down with them to eat and drink.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Here in this place, in your days and before your very eyes, I will put an end to the sounds of exultation and rejoicing, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.’
“When you tell this people all these words, they will ask you, ‘Why has Jehovah spoken of all this great calamity against us? What error and what sin have we committed against Jehovah our God?’
You must reply to them, ‘“Because your forefathers abandoned me,” declares Jehovah, “and they kept following other gods and serving them and bowing down to them. But me they abandoned, and my law they did not keep.
And you have behaved far worse than your forefathers, and each one of you follows the stubbornness of his wicked heart instead of obeying me.
So I will hurl you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your forefathers have known, and there you will have to serve other gods day and night, because I will show you no favor.”’
“‘However, the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when they will no longer say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!”
but rather: “As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which he had dispersed them!” and I will bring them back to their land, which I gave to their forefathers.’
‘Here I am sending for many fishermen,’ declares Jehovah,‘And they will fish for them. After that I will send for many hunters,And they will hunt them down on every mountain and every hillAnd out of the clefts of the crags.
For my eyes are on everything they do. They have not been hidden from before me,Nor has their error been hidden from my eyes.
First, I will repay the full amount due for their error and their sin,For they have profaned my land with the lifeless figures of their disgusting idolsAnd have filled my inheritance with their detestable things.’”
O Jehovah, my strength and my stronghold,My place to flee in the day of distress,To you the nations will come from the ends of the earth,And they will say: “Our forefathers inherited utter falsehood,Futility and useless things of no benefit.”
Can a man make gods for himselfWhen they are not really gods?
“So I will make them know,At this time I will make them know my power and my might,And they will have to know that my name is Jehovah.”
Roam the streets of Jerusalem. Look around and take note. Search her public squares to seeWhether you can find a man who acts with justice,One who seeks to be faithful,And I will forgive her.
Even if they say: “As surely as Jehovah is alive!” They would still swear to what is false.
O Jehovah, do your eyes not look for faithfulness? You struck them, but it made no impact on them. You exterminated them, but they refused to accept discipline. They made their faces harder than a rock,And they refused to turn around.
But I said to myself: “Surely these must be the lowly. They act foolishly, for they do not know the way of Jehovah,The judgment of their God.
I will go to the prominent men and speak with them,For they must have taken note of the way of Jehovah,The judgment of their God. But they had all broken the yokeAnd torn apart the restraints.”
That is why a lion of the forest attacks them,A wolf of the desert plains keeps ravaging them,A leopard lies awake at their cities. Everyone going out from them is torn to pieces. For their transgressions are many;Their acts of unfaithfulness are numerous.
How can I forgive you for this? Your sons have abandoned me,And they swear by what is no God. I satisfied their needs,But they kept committing adultery,And they flocked to the house of a prostitute.
They are like eager, lustful horses,Each neighing after another man’s wife.
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?”
“Come up against her vineyard terraces and bring ruin,But do not make a complete extermination. Take away her spreading shoots,For they do not belong to Jehovah.
For the house of Israel and the house of JudahHave been utterly treacherous with me,” declares Jehovah.
“They have denied Jehovah, and they keep saying,‘He will do nothing. No calamity will come upon us;We will not see sword or famine.’
The prophets are full of wind,And the word is not in them. Let this happen to them!”
Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, says: “Because these men are saying this,Here I am making my words a fire in your mouth,And this people is the wood,And it will consume them.”
“Here I am bringing in on you a nation from far away, O house of Israel,” declares Jehovah. “It is an enduring nation. It is an ancient nation,A nation whose language you do not know,And whose speech you cannot understand.
Their quiver is like an open grave;All of them are warriors.
They will devour your harvest and your bread. They will devour your sons and your daughters. They will devour your flocks and your herds. They will devour your vines and your fig trees. They will destroy with the sword your fortified cities in which you trust.”
“But even in those days,” declares Jehovah, “I will not carry out a complete extermination of you.
And when they ask, ‘Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us?’ you should answer them, ‘Just as you abandoned me to serve a foreign god in your land, so you will serve foreigners in a land that is not yours.’”
Declare this in the house of Jacob,And proclaim it in Judah, saying:
“Hear this, you foolish and senseless people: They have eyes but cannot see;They have ears but cannot hear.
‘Do you not fear me?’ declares Jehovah,‘Should you not tremble before me? It is I who placed the sand as the boundary for the sea,A permanent regulation that it cannot pass over. Although its waves toss, they cannot prevail;Although they roar, they still cannot pass beyond it.
But this people has a stubborn and rebellious heart;They have turned aside and gone their own way.
And they do not say in their heart: “Let us now fear Jehovah our God,The One who gives the rain in its season,Both the autumn rain and the spring rain,The One who guards for us the appointed weeks of the harvest.”
Your own errors have prevented these things from coming;Your own sins have deprived you of what is good.
For among my people there are wicked men. They keep peering, as when birdcatchers crouch down. They set a deadly trap. It is men whom they catch.
Like a cage full of birds,So their houses are full of deception. That is why they have become powerful and rich.
They have grown fat and smooth;They overflow with evil. They do not plead the legal case of the fatherless,That they may gain success;And they deny justice to the poor.’”
“Should I not call them to account for these things?” declares Jehovah. “Should I not avenge myself on such a nation?
Something appalling and horrible has occurred in the land:
The prophets prophesy lies,And the priests dominate by their own authority. And my own people love it that way. But what will you do when the end comes?”
This is the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations:
For Egypt, concerning the army of Pharʹaoh Neʹcho the king of Egypt, who was along the Eu·phraʹtes River and was defeated at Carʹche·mish by King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon in the fourth year of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah:
“Prepare your bucklers and large shields,And advance to the battle.
Harness the horses and mount, you horsemen. Take your positions and put on your helmets. Polish the lances and put on your coats of mail.
‘Why do I see them terror-stricken? They are retreating, their warriors are crushed. They have fled in panic, their warriors have not turned around. There is terror all around,’ declares Jehovah.
‘The swift cannot flee, and the warriors cannot escape. In the north, by the bank of the Eu·phraʹtes River,They have stumbled and fallen.’
Who is this coming up like the Nile River,Like the rivers of surging waters?
Egypt comes up just like the Nile River,Like rivers of surging waters,And it says, ‘I will go up and cover the earth. I will destroy the city and those inhabiting it.’
Go up, you horses! Drive madly, you chariots! Let the warriors advance,Cush and Put, who handle the shield,And the Luʹdim, who handle and bend the bow.
“That day belongs to the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, the day of vengeance for taking revenge on his adversaries. And the sword will devour and satisfy itself and take its fill of their blood, for the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies, has a sacrifice in the land of the north by the Eu·phraʹtes River.
Go up to Gilʹe·ad to get balsam,O virgin daughter of Egypt. In vain you have multiplied your remedies,For there is no cure for you.
The nations have heard your dishonor,And your outcry has filled the land. For warrior stumbles against warrior,And they both fall down together.”
This is the word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet regarding the coming of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon to strike down the land of Egypt:
“Declare it in Egypt, proclaim it in Migʹdol. Proclaim it in Noph and in Tahʹpan·hes. Say, ‘Take your positions and prepare yourselves,For a sword will devour all around you.
Why have your powerful men been swept away? They did not stand their ground,For Jehovah has pushed them down.
In great numbers they are stumbling and falling. They are saying to one another: “Get up! Let us return to our people and our homelandBecause of the cruel sword.”’
There they have proclaimed,‘Pharʹaoh king of Egypt is just a meaningless noiseWho has let the opportunity pass by.’
‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies,‘He will come in like Taʹbor among the mountainsAnd like Carʹmel by the sea.
Prepare your baggage for exile,O daughter inhabiting Egypt. For Noph will become an object of horror;It will be set afire and left without an inhabitant.
Egypt is like a good-looking heifer,But stinging flies will come against her from the north.
Even her hired soldiers in her midst are like fattened calves,But they have also turned back and fled together. They could not stand their ground,For the day of their disaster has come upon them,Their time of reckoning.’
‘Her sound is like that of a slithering serpent,For they come after her in force, with axes,Like men cutting down trees.
They will cut down her forest,’ declares Jehovah, ‘though it seemed impenetrable. For they are more numerous than locusts, without number.
The daughter of Egypt will be put to shame. She will be handed over to the people of the north.’
“Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Now I am turning my attention to Aʹmon from No, to Pharʹaoh, to Egypt, to her gods, and to her kings—yes, to Pharʹaoh and all those trusting in him.’
“‘And I will hand them over to those seeking to take their life, to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and his servants. But afterward she will be inhabited as in times past,’ declares Jehovah.
‘As for you, do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,And do not be terrified, O Israel. For I will save you from far awayAnd your offspring from the land of their captivity. Jacob will return and be calm and undisturbed,With no one to make them afraid.
So do not be afraid, my servant Jacob,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I am with you. I will make an extermination among all the nations where I dispersed you,But you I will not exterminate. I will discipline you to the proper degree,But I will by no means leave you unpunished.’”
This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts:
Judah mourns, and its gates have faded away. They sink to the ground dejected,And a cry goes up from Jerusalem.
And their masters send their servants for water. They go to the water holes and find no water. They return with their vessels empty. They are ashamed and disappointed,And they cover their heads.
Because the ground is cracked,For there is no rain on the land,The farmers are dismayed and cover their heads.
Even the doe in the field forsakes her newbornBecause there is no grass.
The wild donkeys stand on the bare hills. They pant for air like jackals;Their eyes fail because there is no vegetation.
Although our own errors testify against us,O Jehovah, act for the sake of your name. For our acts of unfaithfulness are many,And it is against you that we have sinned.
O hope of Israel, his Savior in times of distress,Why are you like a stranger in the land,Like a traveler who stops only to spend the night?
Why are you like a man who is stunned,Like a mighty man who cannot save? For you are among us, O Jehovah,And your name has been called on us. Do not abandon us.
This is what Jehovah says concerning this people: “They love to wander about; they have not restrained their feet. So Jehovah finds no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and call them to account for their sins.”
Then Jehovah said to me: “Do not pray for good to come to this people.
When they fast, I do not listen to their entreaties, and when they offer whole burnt offerings and grain offerings, I take no pleasure in them, for by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence, I will do away with them.”
At this I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here the prophets are saying to them, ‘You will not see the sword, and famine will not come upon you, but I will give you true peace in this place.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “The prophets are prophesying lies in my name. I have not sent them or commanded them or spoken to them. A lying vision and a worthless divination and the deceit of their own heart is what they are prophesying to you.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning the prophets who are prophesying in my name, though I did not send them, and who say that no sword or famine will occur in this land: ‘By sword and by famine those prophets will perish.
And the people to whom they are prophesying will be cast out into the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, with no one to bury them—them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters—for I will pour out on them the calamity they deserve.’
“You must speak this word to them,‘Let my eyes stream with tears night and day, let them not cease,For the virgin daughter of my people has been completely crushed and broken,With an extremely severe wound.
If I go out into the field and look,I see those slain by the sword! And if I come into the city,I see the diseases from the famine! For both the prophet and the priest have gone around in a land that they do not know.’”
Have you completely rejected Judah, or have you abhorred Zion? Why have you struck us, so that there is no healing for us? There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came,For a time of healing, but there is terror!
We acknowledge our wickedness, O Jehovah,And the error of our forefathers,For we have sinned against you.
For the sake of your name, do not reject us;Do not despise your glorious throne. Remember, and do not break your covenant with us.
Can any of the worthless idols of the nations give rain,Or can even the heavens send showers of rain on their own? Are you not the only One, O Jehovah our God? And we hope in you,For you alone have done all these things.
In that same year, in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, the prophet Han·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur from Gibʹe·on said to me in the house of Jehovah in the presence of the priests and all the people:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Within two years I am bringing back to this place all the utensils of the house of Jehovah that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon took from this place and brought to Babylon.’”
“‘And I will bring back to this place Jec·o·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, and all the exiles of Judah who have gone to Babylon,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’”
Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Han·a·niʹah the prophet in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the house of Jehovah.
Jeremiah the prophet said: “Amen! May Jehovah do this! May Jehovah fulfill your words that you prophesied by bringing back from Babylon to this place the utensils of the house of Jehovah and all the exiled people!
However, hear, please, this message that I am speaking in your ears and in the ears of all the people.
Long ago the prophets who were prior to me and prior to you used to prophesy concerning many lands and great kingdoms, about war, calamity, and pestilence.
If a prophet prophesies about peace and the word of that prophet comes true, then it will be known that Jehovah truly sent that prophet.”
At that Han·a·niʹah the prophet took the yoke bar off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and broke it.
Han·a·niʹah then said in the presence of all the people: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Just like this I will break the yoke of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two years.’” And Jeremiah the prophet went on his way.
After Han·a·niʹah the prophet had broken the yoke bar from off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet, this message of Jehovah came to Jeremiah:
“Go and say to Han·a·niʹah, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “You have broken yoke bars of wood, but instead of them you will make yoke bars of iron.”
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “I will put an iron yoke bar on the neck of all these nations, to serve King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and they must serve him. Even the wild beasts of the field I will give him.”’”
Jeremiah the prophet then said to Han·a·niʹah the prophet: “Listen, please, O Han·a·niʹah! Jehovah has not sent you, but you have caused this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Look! I am removing you from the face of the ground. This year you will die, for you have urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”
So Han·a·niʹah the prophet died in that year, in the seventh month.
This is what Jehovah says: “Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and deliver this message.
You must say, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah who sits on the throne of David, you with your servants and your people, those who enter through these gates.
This is what Jehovah says: “Uphold justice and righteousness. Rescue the one being robbed from the hand of the defrauder. Do not mistreat any foreign resident, and do not harm any fatherless child or widow. And do not shed any innocent blood in this place.
For if you are careful to carry out this word, then the kings who sit on the throne of David will enter through the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses, they with their servants and their people.”’
“‘But if you will not obey these words, by myself I do swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that this house will become a devastated place.’
“For this is what Jehovah says concerning the house of the king of Judah,‘You are as Gilʹe·ad to me,Like the summit of Lebʹa·non. But I will make you a wilderness;Not one of your cities will be inhabited.
And I will appoint destroyers against you,Each with his weapons. They will cut down your choicest cedarsAnd make them fall into the fire.
“‘And many nations will pass by this city and say to one another: “Why did Jehovah do this to this great city?”
And they will reply: “Because they abandoned the covenant of Jehovah their God and bowed down to other gods and served them.”’
Do not weep for the dead one,And do not sympathize with him. Instead, weep profusely for the one going away,For he will return no more to see the land of his birth.
“For this is what Jehovah says concerning Shalʹlum son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah who is reigning instead of his father Jo·siʹah and who has gone out of this place: ‘He will return there no more.
For he will die in the place where they have taken him into exile, and he will see this land no more.’
Woe to the one who builds his house without righteousnessAnd his upper rooms without justice,Who makes his fellow man serve him for nothing,Whose wages he refuses to pay;
The one saying, ‘I will build for myself a roomy houseWith spacious upper rooms. I will fit it with windowsAnd panel it with cedar and paint it with vermilion.’
Will you continue reigning because you outdo others in your use of cedar? Your father also ate and drank,But he upheld justice and righteousness,And it went well with him.
He defended the legal claim of the afflicted one and the poor one,So that it went well. ‘Is that not what it means to know me?’ declares Jehovah.
‘But your eyes and heart are set only on your dishonest gain,On shedding innocent blood,And on committing fraud and extortion.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says concerning Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah,‘They will not mourn him: “Alas, my brother! Alas, my sister!” They will not mourn him: “Alas, O master! Alas, his majesty!”
With the burial of a donkey he will be buried,Dragged about and thrown away,Outside the gates of Jerusalem.’
Go up to Lebʹa·non and cry out,Raise your voice in Baʹshan,And cry out from Abʹa·rim,For all your passionate lovers have been crushed.
I spoke to you when you felt secure. But you said, ‘I will not obey.’ This has been your course since youth,For you have not obeyed my voice.
A wind will shepherd all your shepherds,And your passionate lovers will go into captivity. Then you will be put to shame and humiliated because of all your calamity.
O you who dwell in Lebʹa·non,Nestled among the cedars,How you will groan when pangs come on you,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth!”
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares Jehovah, ‘even if Co·niʹah son of Je·hoiʹa·kim, the king of Judah, were the seal ring on my right hand, I would pull you off from there!
I will give you into the hand of those seeking to take your life, into the hand of those whom you fear, into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.
And I will hurl you and your mother who gave birth to you into another land where you were not born, and there you will die.
And they will never return to the land they yearn for.
Is this man Co·niʹah just a despised, broken pot,A vessel that nobody wants? Why are he and his descendants hurled downAnd thrown into a land they do not know?’
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah says: ‘Write down this man as childless,As a man who will not have any success during his lifetime,For none of his descendants will succeedIn sitting on David’s throne and ruling again in Judah.’”
Then Jehovah said to me: “Even if Moses and Samuel were standing before me, I would show no favor toward this people. Drive them out from before me. Let them go.
And if they say to you, ‘Where should we go?’ you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Whoever is for deadly plague, to deadly plague! Whoever is for the sword, to the sword! Whoever is for the famine, to the famine! And whoever is for the captivity, to the captivity!”’
“‘And I will appoint over them four calamities,’ declares Jehovah, ‘the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the earth to devour and to destroy.
And I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of Ma·nasʹseh the son of Hez·e·kiʹah, the king of Judah, for what he did in Jerusalem.
Who will show compassion to you, O Jerusalem,Who will sympathize with you,And who will stop to ask about your welfare?’
‘You have deserted me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘You keep turning your back on me. So I will stretch out my hand against you and destroy you. I am tired of feeling pity for you.
And I will winnow them with a fork in the gates of the land. I will bereave them of children. I will destroy my people,Since they refuse to turn back from their ways.
Their widows will become more numerous before me than the sand of the seas. I will bring a destroyer against them at midday, against mothers and young men. I will bring agitation and terror upon them suddenly.
The woman who bore seven children has grown faint;She struggles for breath. Her sun has set while it is yet day,Causing shame and humiliation.’ ‘And those few remaining ones of themI will give to the sword before their enemies,’ declares Jehovah.”
Woe to me, O my mother, because you gave birth to me,A man subject to quarrel and strife with all the land. I have neither loaned nor borrowed;But all of them curse me.
Jehovah said: “I will surely minister to you for good;I will surely intercede for you in the time of calamity,In the time of distress against the enemy.
Can anyone break iron in pieces,Iron from the north, and copper?
Your resources and your treasures I will give as plunder,Not for a price, but because of all your sins throughout all your territories.
I will give them to your enemiesTo take to a land you do not know. For a fire has been ignited by my anger,And it is burning against you.”
You know, O Jehovah,Remember me and turn your attention to me. Take vengeance on my persecutors for me. Do not let me perish because of your slowness to anger. Know that for your sake I bear this reproach.
Your words were found, and I ate them;And your word became to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart,For your name has been called on me, O Jehovah God of armies.
I do not sit in the company of merrymakers and rejoice. Because your hand is upon me, I sit alone,For you have filled me with indignation.
Why is my pain chronic and my wound incurable? It refuses to be healed. Will you become to me like a deceptive water supplyThat cannot be relied on?
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “If you return, then I will restore you,And you will stand before me. If you separate what is precious from what is worthless,You will become like my own mouth. They will have to turn to you,But you will not turn to them.”
“I am making you a fortified copper wall to this people. They will certainly fight against you,But they will not prevail against you,For I am with you, to save you and to rescue you,” declares Jehovah.
“And I will rescue you from the hand of the wickedAnd redeem you from the palm of the ruthless.”
For the Amʹmon·ites, this is what Jehovah says: “Does Israel have no sons? Does he have no heir? Why has Malʹcam taken possession of Gad? And why are his people living in Israel’s cities?”
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah,‘When I will cause the alarm signal of war to be heard against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites. She will become a desolate mound,And her dependent towns will be set on fire.’ ‘And Israel will take possession of those who dispossessed him,’ says Jehovah.
‘Wail, O Heshʹbon, for Aʹi has been destroyed! Cry out, O dependent towns of Rabʹbah. Put on sackcloth. Wail and rove about among the stone pens,For Malʹcam will go into exile,Together with his priests and his princes.
Why do you brag about the valleys,About your flowing plain, O unfaithful daughter,Who trusts in her treasuresAnd who says: “Who will come against me?”’”
“‘Here I am bringing something dreadful on you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies,‘From all those around you. You will be dispersed in every direction,And no one will gather those who flee.’”
“‘But afterward I will gather the captives of the Amʹmon·ites,’ declares Jehovah.”
For Eʹdom, this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Is there no longer any wisdom in Teʹman? Has good advice perished from those with understanding? Has their wisdom rotted?
Flee, turn back! Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Deʹdan! For I will bring disaster on EʹsauWhen the time comes to turn my attention to him.
If grape gatherers came in to you,Would they not leave some behind for gleaning? If thieves came in by night,They would cause only as much ruin as they wanted.
But I will strip Eʹsau bare. I will uncover his places of concealment,So that he cannot hide. His children and his brothers and his neighbors will all be destroyed,And he will be no more.
Leave your fatherless children,And I will preserve them alive,And your widows will trust in me.”
For this is what Jehovah says: “Look! If those not sentenced to drink the cup must drink it, should you be left completely unpunished? You will not be left unpunished, for you must drink it.”
“For by myself I have sworn,” declares Jehovah, “that Bozʹrah will become an object of horror, a reproach, a devastation, and a curse; and all her cities will become perpetual ruins.”
I have heard a report from Jehovah,An envoy has been sent among the nations, saying: “Gather yourselves together and come against her;Prepare for battle.”
“For look! I have made you insignificant among the nations,Despised among men.
The shuddering you caused has deceived you,The presumptuousness of your heart,O you who reside in the retreats of the crag,Occupying the highest hill. Although you build your nest high up like an eagle,I will bring you down from there,” declares Jehovah.
“And Eʹdom must become an object of horror. Everyone passing along by her will stare in horror and whistle on account of all her plagues.
Just as in the overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and of their neighboring towns,” Jehovah says, “no one will dwell there, and no man will settle there.
“Look! Someone will come up against the secure pastures like a lion from the dense thickets along the Jordan, but in a moment I will make him run away from her. And I will appoint over her the chosen one. For who is like me, and who will challenge me? What shepherd can stand before me?
Therefore hear, O men, the decision that Jehovah has made against Eʹdom and what he has thought out against the inhabitants of Teʹman: Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away. He will make their dwelling place desolate because of them.
At the sound of their falling, the earth has quaked. There is an outcry! The sound has been heard as far as the Red Sea.
Look! Just like an eagle he will ascend and swoop down,And he will spread out his wings over Bozʹrah. In that day the heart of the warriors of EʹdomWill become like the heart of a woman in childbirth.”
For Damascus: “Haʹmath and Arʹpad have been put to shame,For they have heard a bad report. They melt in fear. There is anxiety in the sea that cannot be calmed.
Damascus has lost courage. She has turned to flee, but panic has seized her. Distress and pain have taken hold of her,Like a woman who is giving birth.
How is it that the city of praise has not been abandoned,The town of exultation?
For her young men will fall in her public squares,And all the soldiers will perish in that day,” declares Jehovah of armies.
“I will set the wall of Damascus on fire,And it will consume the fortified towers of Ben-haʹdad.”
For Keʹdar and the kingdoms of Haʹzor, which King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon struck down, this is what Jehovah says: “Rise up, go up to Keʹdar,And destroy the sons of the East.
Their tents and their flocks will be taken,Their tent cloths and all their goods. Their camels will be carried off,And they will cry out to them, ‘Terror is all around!’”
“Flee, go far away! Go and dwell down in the depths, O inhabitants of Haʹzor,” declares Jehovah. “For King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon has devised a strategy against you,And he has thought out a plan against you.”
“Rise up, go up against the nation that is at peace,Dwelling in security!” declares Jehovah. “It has no doors or bars; they live in isolation.
Their camels will become plunder,And their abundant livestock a spoil. I will scatter them to every wind,Those who clip their hair at the temples,And I will bring their disaster from every direction,” declares Jehovah.
“And Haʹzor will become a lair of jackals,A perpetual desolation. No one will dwell there,And no man will settle in her.”
This is the word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Eʹlam in the beginning of the reign of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am breaking the bow of Eʹlam, the source of their mightiness.
I will bring in on Eʹlam the four winds from the four extremities of the heavens, and I will scatter them to all these winds. There will not be a nation to which the dispersed ones of Eʹlam will not go.’”
“I will shatter the Eʹlam·ites before their enemies and before those seeking to take their life; and I will bring calamity on them, my burning anger,” declares Jehovah. “And I will send the sword after them until I have exterminated them.”
“And I will set my throne in Eʹlam, and I will destroy from there the king and the princes,” declares Jehovah.
“But in the final part of the days, I will gather the captives of Eʹlam,” declares Jehovah.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the 10th year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, that is, the 18th year of Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
At that time the armies of the king of Babylon were besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard in the house of the king of Judah.
For King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah had confined him, saying, “Why do you prophesy like this? You say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it,
and King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah will not escape from the Chal·deʹans, for he will surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will speak to him face-to-face and see him eye to eye.”’
‘He will take Zed·e·kiʹah to Babylon, and there he will remain until I turn my attention to him,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Although you keep fighting against the Chal·deʹans, you will not succeed.’”
Jeremiah said: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
‘Here Hanʹa·mel the son of Shalʹlum your uncle will come to you and say: “Buy for yourself my field in Anʹa·thoth, because you have the first right to repurchase it.”’”
Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle came to me, just as Jehovah had said, into the Courtyard of the Guard, and he said to me: “Please buy my field in Anʹa·thoth, in the land of Benjamin, for you have the right to take possession of it and to repurchase it. Buy it for yourself.” At that I knew that this was by the word of Jehovah.
So I bought the field in Anʹa·thoth from Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle. I weighed out the money to him, seven shekels and ten silver pieces.
Then I recorded it in a deed, affixed the seal, called in witnesses, and weighed the money in the scales.
I took the deed of purchase, the one that was sealed according to the commandment and legal requirements, as well as the one that was left unsealed,
and I gave the deed of purchase to Barʹuch son of Ne·riʹah son of Mah·seiʹah in the presence of Hanʹa·mel the son of my uncle, the witnesses who wrote in the deed of purchase, and all the Jews who were sitting in the Courtyard of the Guard.
I now commanded Barʹuch in their presence, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Take these deeds, this deed of purchase, the sealed one and the other deed left unsealed, and put them into an earthenware vessel, so that they may be kept for a long time.’
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Houses and fields and vineyards will again be bought in this land.’”
Then I prayed to Jehovah after giving the deed of purchase to Barʹuch the son of Ne·riʹah, saying:
“Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Look! You made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. Nothing is too wonderful for you,
the One showing loyal love to thousands, but repaying the error of the fathers to their sons after them, the true God, the great and mighty One, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
You are great in counsel and mighty in deed, you whose eyes observe all the ways of men, to give to each one according to his ways and according to what he does.
You have performed signs and miracles in the land of Egypt, which are known down to this day, and thus you have made a name for yourself in Israel and among mankind, as it is today.
And you brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt, with signs, with miracles, with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with terrifying deeds.
“In time you gave them this land that you swore to give to their forefathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they came in and took possession of it, but they did not obey your voice or walk in your law. They did not do anything you commanded them to do, so that you caused all this calamity to befall them.
Look! Men have come with siege ramparts to capture the city, and because of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, the city will certainly fall into the hands of the Chal·deʹans who are fighting against it; what you said has all happened, as you now see.
But you have told me, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Buy for yourself the field with money and call in witnesses,’ although the city will certainly be given into the hand of the Chal·deʹans.”
At that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Here I am, Jehovah, the God of all mankind. Is there anything too wonderful for me?
So this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am handing this city over to the Chal·deʹans and into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will capture it.
And the Chal·deʹans fighting against this city will come in and set this city on fire and burn it down along with the houses on whose roofs the people offered sacrifices to Baʹal and poured out drink offerings to other gods to offend me.’
“‘For the people of Israel and of Judah have done only what was bad in my eyes, from their youth on; the people of Israel keep offending me by the work of their hands,’ declares Jehovah.
‘For this city, from the day that they built it down to this day, has been nothing but a cause of anger and wrath to me, so that it must be removed from before my face,
because of all the evil that the people of Israel and of Judah have done to offend me—they, their kings, their princes, their priests, their prophets, and the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They kept turning their backs to me, not their faces; although I tried to teach them again and again, none of them would listen to receive discipline.
And they put their disgusting idols in the house that bears my name, in order to defile it.
Furthermore, they built the high places of Baʹal in the Valley of the Son of Hinʹnom, in order to make their sons and their daughters pass through the fire to Moʹlech, something that I had not commanded them and that had never come into my heart to do such a detestable thing, causing Judah to sin.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says concerning this city that you are saying will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, the famine, and the pestilence,
‘Here I will gather them together from all the lands where I dispersed them in my anger and in my wrath and in great indignation, and I will bring them back to this place and let them dwell in security.
And they will be my people, and I will be their God.
And I will give them one heart and one way so that they may always fear me, for their own good and the good of their children after them.
And I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, so that they will not turn away from me.
I will exult over them to do good to them, and I will firmly plant them in this land, with all my heart and with all my soul.’”
“For this is what Jehovah says, ‘Just as I have brought on this people all this great calamity, so I will bring on them all the goodness that I am promising them.
And fields will again be bought in this land, though you are saying: “It is a wasteland without man and beast, and it has been handed over to the Chal·deʹans.”’
“‘Fields will be bought with money, deeds of purchase will be recorded and sealed, and witnesses will be called in the land of Benjamin, in the areas around Jerusalem, in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the mountainous region, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the south, because I will bring back their captives,’ declares Jehovah.”
“If you will return, O Israel,” declares Jehovah,“If you will return to meAnd if you will remove your disgusting idols from before me,Then you will not be a fugitive.
And if you swear,‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ in truth, justice, and righteousness,Then the nations will obtain a blessing for themselves by him,And in him they will boast.”
For this is what Jehovah says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem: “Plow for yourselves arable land,And do not keep sowing among thorns.
Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah,And remove the foreskins of your hearts,You men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem,So that my wrath may not blaze up like a fireAnd burn with no one to extinguish it,Because of your evil deeds.”
Declare it in Judah, and proclaim it in Jerusalem. Shout and blow a horn throughout the land. Call out loudly and say: “Gather together,And let us flee into the fortified cities.
Raise a signal toward Zion. Seek shelter, and do not stand still,” For I am bringing in calamity from the north, a great crash.
He has emerged like a lion from his thicket;The destroyer of nations has set out. He has gone out from his place to make your land an object of horror. Your cities will be reduced to ruins, without an inhabitant.
Therefore, put on sackcloth,Mourn and wail,Because the burning anger of Jehovah has not turned away from us.
“In that day,” declares Jehovah, “the heart of the king will fail him,Also the heart of the princes;The priests will be horrified, and the prophets will be amazed.”
Then I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Truly you have utterly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You will have peace,’ when the sword is at our throats.”
At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem: “A scorching wind from the barren hills of the desertWill sweep down on the daughter of my people;It is not coming to winnow or to cleanse.
The full wind comes from these places at my bidding. Now I will pronounce judgments against them.
Look! He will come like rain clouds,And his chariots are like a storm wind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us, for we are ruined!
Wash your heart clean of wickedness, O Jerusalem, in order to be saved. How long will you harbor wicked thoughts?
For a voice tells the news from Dan,And it proclaims disaster from the mountains of Eʹphra·im.
Report it, yes, to the nations;Proclaim it against Jerusalem.” “Sentinels are coming from a distant land,And they will raise their voices against the cities of Judah.
They come against her on all sides like guards of the open field,Because she has rebelled against me,” declares Jehovah.
“Your own ways and your actions will be brought upon you. How bitter is your disaster,For it reaches clear to your heart!”
O my anguish, my anguish! I feel great pain in my very heart. My heart pounds within me. I cannot keep silent,For I have heard the sound of the horn,The alarm signal of war.
Disaster after disaster has been reported,For the whole land has been destroyed. Suddenly my own tents are destroyed,In a moment my tent cloths.
How long will I keep seeing the signal,Keep hearing the sound of the horn?
“For my people are foolish;They take no note of me. They are stupid sons, with no understanding. They are clever enough when it comes to doing bad,But they do not know how to do good.”
I saw the land, and look! it was empty and desolate. I looked at the heavens, and their light was no more.
I saw the mountains, and look! they were quaking,And the hills were shaking.
I saw, and look! there was no man,And the birds of the heavens had all fled.
I saw, and look! the orchard had become a wilderness,And its cities had all been torn down. It was because of Jehovah,Because of his burning anger.
For this is what Jehovah says: “The whole land will become desolate,But I will not carry out a complete extermination.
For this reason the land will mourn,And the heavens above will become dark. It is because I have spoken, I have decided,And I will not change my mind, nor will I turn back from it.
At the sound of the horsemen and the archers,The entire city flees. They enter into the thickets,And they climb the rocks. Every city is abandoned,And no man dwells in them.”
Now that you are devastated, what will you do? You used to clothe yourself with scarlet,To deck yourself with gold ornaments,And to enlarge your eyes with black paint. But it is in vain that you beautified yourself,For those lusting after you have rejected you;They are now seeking to take your life.
For I have heard the sound like that of a sick woman,The distress like that of a woman giving birth to her first child,The voice of the daughter of Zion who keeps gasping for breath. She says as she spreads out her palms: “Woe to me, for I am exhausted because of the killers!”
In the ninth year of King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, in the tenth month, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army came to Jerusalem, and they besieged it.
In the 11th year of Zed·e·kiʹah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, they broke through the city wall.
And all the princes of the king of Babylon went in and sat down in the Middle Gate, namely, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Samʹgar, Neʹbo-Sarʹse·chim the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
When King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and all the soldiers saw them, they fled, going out of the city by night by way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the double wall, and they continued by the way of the Arʹa·bah.
But the Chal·deʹan army chased after them, and they overtook Zed·e·kiʹah in the desert plains of Jerʹi·cho. They captured him and brought him up to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon at Ribʹlah in the land of Haʹmath, where he passed sentence on him.
The king of Babylon had the sons of Zed·e·kiʹah slaughtered before his eyes there at Ribʹlah, and the king of Babylon had all the nobles of Judah slaughtered.
Then he blinded the eyes of Zed·e·kiʹah, after which he bound him with copper fetters to bring him to Babylon.
The Chal·deʹans then burned down the king’s house and the houses of the people, and they tore down the walls of Jerusalem.
Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard took into exile to Babylon the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had defected to him, and anyone who remained.
But Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard left in the land of Judah some of the poorest people, those who had nothing at all. On that day he also gave them vineyards and fields to work.
Now King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon gave Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard these orders concerning Jeremiah:
“Take him and look after him; do him no harm, and grant whatever he asks of you.”
So Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard, Neb·u·shazʹban the Rabʹsa·ris, Nerʹgal-shar·eʹzer the Rabʹmag, and all the principal men of the king of Babylon sent
and had Jeremiah taken out of the Courtyard of the Guard and handed him over to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan to be brought to his house. So he lived among the people.
While Jeremiah was confined in the Courtyard of the Guard, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying:
“Go and tell Eʹbed-melʹech the E·thi·oʹpi·an, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Here I am fulfilling my words on this city for calamity and not for good, and in that day you will see it happen.”’
“‘But I will rescue you in that day,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and you will not be handed over to the men you fear.’
“‘For I will surely provide you with escape, and you will not fall by the sword. You will have your life as a spoil, because you trusted in me,’ declares Jehovah.”
Now Pashʹhur the son of Imʹmer, the priest, who was also the leading commissioner in the house of Jehovah, was listening when Jeremiah prophesied these things.
Then Pashʹhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the stocks that were at the Upper Gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
But on the following day when Pashʹhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him: “Jehovah has named you, not Pashʹhur, but Terror All Around.
For this is what Jehovah says, ‘I will make you an object of terror to yourself and to all your friends, and they will fall by the sword of their enemies while your eyes are looking on; and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take them into exile in Babylon and put them to death by the sword.
And I will give all the wealth of this city, all its resources, all its precious things, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their enemies. And they will plunder them and seize them and take them to Babylon.
And as for you, Pashʹhur, and all who live in your house, you will go into captivity. You will go off to Babylon and die there, and you will be buried there with all your friends, because you have prophesied lies to them.’”
You have fooled me, O Jehovah, and I was fooled. You used your strength against me, and you prevailed. I have become a laughingstock all day long;Everyone ridicules me.
For whenever I speak, I must cry out and proclaim,“Violence and destruction!” For me the word of Jehovah has been the cause of insults and jeering all day long.
So I said: “I am not going to make mention of him,And I will speak no more in his name.” But in my heart it became like a burning fire shut up in my bones,And I was tired of holding it in;I could no longer endure it.
For I heard many evil rumors;Terror surrounded me. “Denounce him; let us denounce him!” Every man wishing me peace was watching for my downfall: “Perhaps he will make a foolish mistake,And we can prevail and take our revenge against him.”
But Jehovah was with me like a fearsome warrior. That is why those persecuting me will stumble and will not prevail. They will be put to great shame, for they will not succeed. Their everlasting humiliation will not be forgotten.
But you, O Jehovah of armies, are examining the righteous one;You see the innermost thoughts and the heart. Let me see your vengeance on them,For to you I have committed my legal case.
Sing to Jehovah! Praise Jehovah! For he has rescued the poor one from the hand of evildoers.
Cursed be the day I was born! May the day my mother gave birth to me not be blessed!
Cursed be the man who brought good news to my father, saying: “A son has been born to you, a boy!” Making him rejoice greatly.
May that man become like cities that Jehovah overthrew without regret. May he hear an outcry in the morning and the sound of alarm at midday.
Why did he not put me to death in the womb,So that my mother would become my burial placeAnd her womb would always remain pregnant?
Why did I have to come out of the wombTo see trouble and grief,To end my days in shame?
You are righteous, O Jehovah, when I make my complaint to you,When I speak about matters of justice with you. But why is the way of wicked ones successful,And why are the treacherous unworried?
You planted them, and they have taken root. They have grown and produced fruit. You are on their lips, but far away from their innermost thoughts.
But you know me well, O Jehovah, you see me;You have examined my heart and found it in union with you. Single them out like sheep for slaughtering,And set them apart for the day of killing.
How much longer should the land wither awayAnd the vegetation of every field dry up? Because of the evil of those dwelling in it,The beasts and the birds have been swept away. For they have said: “He does not see what will happen to us.”
If you get tired running with footmen,How can you run a race against horses? Even if you are confident in the land of peace,How will you fare among the dense thickets along the Jordan?
For even your own brothers, the household of your own father,Have dealt treacherously with you. They have raised a loud cry against you. Do not put faith in them,Even if they speak good things to you.
“I have abandoned my house; I have deserted my inheritance. I have given my dearly beloved one into the hand of her enemies.
My inheritance has become to me like a lion in the forest. She has roared against me. So I have come to hate her.
My inheritance is like a multicolored bird of prey to me;The other birds of prey surround it and attack it. Come, gather together, all you beasts of the field,Come to eat.
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard;They have trampled my portion of land. They have turned my desirable portion of land into a desolate wilderness.
It has become a wasteland. It has withered;It is desolate before me. The whole land has been made desolate,But no man takes it to heart.
On all the worn paths through the wilderness the destroyers have come,For the sword of Jehovah is devouring from one end of the land to the other end. There is no peace for anyone.
They have sown wheat, but they have reaped thorns. They have worn themselves out, but to no benefit. They will be ashamed of their produceBecause of the burning anger of Jehovah.”
This is what Jehovah says against all my wicked neighbors, who are touching the inheritance that I caused my people Israel to possess: “Here I am uprooting them from their land, and I will uproot the house of Judah from among them.
But after I uproot them, I will again have mercy on them and bring each of them back to his inheritance and to his land.”
“And if they make sure to learn the ways of my people and to swear by my name, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’ just as they taught my people to swear by Baʹal, they will then be built up among my people.
But if they refuse to obey, I will also uproot that nation, uprooting and destroying it,” declares Jehovah.
For Moʹab, this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Woe to Neʹbo, for she has been destroyed! Kir·i·a·thaʹim has been put to shame and captured. The secure refuge has been put to shame and shattered.
They no longer praise Moʹab. In Heshʹbon they have plotted her downfall: ‘Come, let us put an end to her as a nation.’ You too, O Madʹmen, should keep silent,For the sword is following you.
There is the sound of an outcry from Hor·o·naʹim,Of destruction and great collapse.
Moʹab has been broken down. Her little ones cry out.
On the ascent of Luʹhith they weep continually as they climb. And on the way down from Hor·o·naʹim they hear cries of distress over the catastrophe.
Flee, escape for your lives! You must become like a juniper tree in the wilderness.
Because you trust in your works and in your treasures,You will also be captured. And Cheʹmosh will go into exile,Together with his priests and his princes.
The destroyer will come in on every city,And no city will escape. The valley will perish,And the level land will be annihilated, just as Jehovah has said.
Set up a marker for Moʹab,For as she falls into ruins she will flee,And her cities will become an object of horror,Without an inhabitant.
Cursed is the one who carries out the mission of Jehovah neglectfully! Cursed is the one who holds back his sword from bloodshed!
The Moʹab·ites have been undisturbed since their youth,Like wine that has settled on the dregs. They have not been poured from one vessel into another,And they have never gone into exile. That is why their taste has remained the same,And their aroma has not changed.
“‘Therefore look! the days are coming,’ declares Jehovah, ‘when I will send men to overturn them. They will turn them over and empty out their vessels, and they will smash their large jars to pieces.
And the Moʹab·ites will be ashamed of Cheʹmosh, just as the house of Israel is ashamed of Bethʹel, which was their confidence.
How dare you say: “We are mighty warriors, ready for battle”?’
‘Moʹab has been destroyed,Her cities have been invaded,And their choicest young men have been slaughtered,’ Declares the King, whose name is Jehovah of armies.
The disaster on the Moʹab·ites is coming soon,And their downfall is approaching quickly.
All those around them will have to sympathize with them,All those knowing their name. Tell them: ‘O how the mighty rod has been broken, the staff of beauty!’
Come down from your glory,And sit down in thirst, O daughter inhabiting Diʹbon,For the destroyer of Moʹab has come against you,And he will bring your fortified places to ruin.
Stand by the road and watch, inhabitant of A·roʹer. Ask the man fleeing and the woman escaping, ‘What has happened?’
Moʹab has been put to shame and struck with terror. Wail and cry out. Proclaim in Arʹnon that Moʹab has been destroyed.
“Judgment has come to the level land, against Hoʹlon, Jaʹhaz, and Mephʹa·ath;
against Diʹbon, Neʹbo, and Beth-dib·la·thaʹim;
against Kir·i·a·thaʹim, Beth-gaʹmul, and Beth-meʹon;
against Keʹri·oth and Bozʹrah; and against all the cities of the land of Moʹab, those far and near.
‘The strength of Moʹab has been cut down;His arm has been broken,’ declares Jehovah.
‘Make him drunk, for he has exalted himself against Jehovah. Moʹab wallows in his vomit,And he is an object of ridicule.
Was Israel not an object of ridicule to you? Was he found among thieves,So that you should shake your head and speak against him?
Leave the cities and live on the crag, inhabitants of Moʹab,And become like a dove that nests along the sides of the gorge.’”
“We have heard about the pride of Moʹab—he is very haughty—About his arrogance, his pride, his haughtiness, and the loftiness of his heart.”
“‘I know his fury,’ declares Jehovah,‘But his empty talk will come to nothing. They will do nothing.
That is why I will wail over Moʹab,For all Moʹab I will cry outAnd moan for the men of Kir-heʹres.
With more than the weeping for Jaʹzer,I will weep for you, O vine of Sibʹmah. Your flourishing shoots have crossed the sea. To the sea, to Jaʹzer, they have reached. Upon your summer fruit and your grape harvestThe destroyer has descended.
Rejoicing and joyfulness have been removed from the orchardAnd from the land of Moʹab. I have caused the wine to stop flowing from the winepress. No one will be treading with shouts of joy. The shouting will be different shouting.’”
“‘There is an outcry from Heshʹbon clear to E·le·aʹleh. They raise their voice clear to Jaʹhaz,From Zoʹar to Hor·o·naʹim to Egʹlath-she·liʹshi·yah. Even the waters of Nimʹrim will become desolate.
I will cause to cease from Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah,‘The one bringing an offering on the high placeAnd the one making sacrifices to his god.
That is why my heart will moan for Moʹab like a flute,And my heart will moan for the men of Kir-heʹres like a flute. For the wealth he has produced will perish.
For every head is bald,And every beard is clipped. There are cuts on every hand,And there is sackcloth on their hips!’”
“‘On all the roofs of MoʹabAnd in all her public squares,There is nothing but wailing. For I have broken MoʹabLike a discarded jar,’ declares Jehovah.
‘How she is terrified! Wail! How Moʹab has turned his back in shame! Moʹab has become an object of ridicule,Something terrifying to all those around him.’”
“For this is what Jehovah says: ‘Look! Just like an eagle that swoops down,He will spread his wings over Moʹab.
The towns will be captured,And her strongholds will be seized. In that day the heart of Moʹab’s warriorsWill be like the heart of a woman in childbirth.’”
“‘And Moʹab will be annihilated from being a people,For it is against Jehovah that he has exalted himself.
Terror and the pit and the trap are before you,O inhabitant of Moʹab,’ declares Jehovah.
‘Anyone fleeing the terror will fall into the pit,And anyone coming up from the pit will be caught in the trap.’ ‘For I will bring on Moʹab the year of their punishment,’ declares Jehovah.
‘In the shadow of Heshʹbon, those fleeing stand powerless. For a fire will come out of HeshʹbonAnd a flame from within Siʹhon. It will consume the forehead of MoʹabAnd the skull of the sons of tumult.’
‘Woe to you, O Moʹab! The people of Cheʹmosh have perished. For your sons have been taken captive,And your daughters have gone into exile.
But I will gather the captives of Moʹab in the final part of the days,’ declares Jehovah. ‘Down to this point is the judgment on Moʹab.’”
This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah:
“Rise up and go down to the house of the potter, and there I will cause you to hear my words.”
So I went down to the house of the potter, and he was working on the potter’s wheels.
But the vessel that the potter was making with the clay was spoiled in his hand. So the potter reworked it into another vessel, just as he saw fit.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“‘Can I not do to you just as this potter did, O house of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Look! As the clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel.
Whenever I may speak about uprooting and pulling down and destroying a nation or a kingdom,
and that nation abandons its wickedness that I spoke against, I will also change my mind concerning the calamity that I intended to bring against it.
But whenever I speak about building up and planting a nation or a kingdom,
and it does what is bad in my eyes and does not obey my voice, I will change my mind concerning the good that I intended to do for it.’
“Now say, please, to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am preparing a calamity and devising a scheme against you. Turn back, please, from your bad ways, and reform your ways and your practices.”’”
But they said: “It is hopeless! For we will walk after our own thoughts, and each of us will act according to the stubbornness of his wicked heart.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Ask for yourselves, please, among the nations. Who has heard anything like this? The virgin of Israel has done a most horrible thing.
Does the snow of Lebʹa·non disappear from the rocks on its slopes? Or will cool waters flowing from afar dry up?
But my people have forgotten me. For they make sacrifices to something worthless,And they make men stumble in their ways, the ancient paths,To walk on back roads that are not smooth and level,
In order to make their land an object of horrorAnd something to whistle at forever. Every last one passing by it will stare in horror and shake his head.
Like the east wind, I will scatter them before the enemy. I will show them my back, not my face, in the day of their disaster.”
And they said: “Come, let us devise a plot against Jeremiah, for the law will not perish from our priests or counsel from the wise men or the word from the prophets. Come and let us speak against him and pay no attention to what he says.”
Do pay attention to me, O Jehovah,And listen to what my opponents are saying.
Should good be repaid with bad? For they have dug a pit for my life. Remember how I stood before you to speak good about them,To turn your wrath away from them.
So give their sons over to the famine,And hand them over to the power of the sword. May their wives become bereaved of children and widowed. May their men be killed with deadly plague,Their young men struck down with the sword in battle.
Let a cry be heard from their housesWhen you bring marauders on them suddenly. For they have dug a pit to capture meAnd have laid traps for my feet.
But you, O Jehovah,Well know all their schemes against me to kill me. Do not cover their error,And do not wipe out their sin from before you. Let them stumble before youWhen you take action against them in your anger.
“Woe to the shepherds who are destroying and scattering the sheep of my pasture!” declares Jehovah.
Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of Israel says against the shepherds who are shepherding my people: “You have scattered my sheep; you kept dispersing them, and you have not turned your attention to them.” “So I will turn my attention to you because of your evil deeds,” declares Jehovah.
“Then I will gather together the remnant of my sheep from all the lands to which I have dispersed them, and I will bring them back to their pasture, and they will be fruitful and become many.
And I will raise up over them shepherds who will really shepherd them. They will no longer be afraid or be terrified, and none will be missing,” declares Jehovah.
“Look! The days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when I will raise up to David a righteous sprout. And a king will reign and show insight and uphold justice and righteousness in the land.
In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will reside in security. And this is the name by which he will be called: Jehovah Is Our Righteousness.”
“However, the days are coming,” declares Jehovah, “when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt!’
but rather, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive, who brought out and brought back the descendants of the house of Israel from the land of the north and from all the lands to which I had dispersed them,’ and they will dwell in their own land.”
Concerning the prophets: My heart is broken within me. All my bones are shaking. I am like a man who is drunkAnd like a man overcome by wine,Because of Jehovah and because of his holy words.
For the land is full of adulterers;Because of the curse the land has gone into mourningAnd the pastures of the wilderness have dried up. Their course is evil, and they abuse their power.
“Both the prophet and the priest are polluted. Even in my own house I have found their wickedness,” declares Jehovah.
“So their path will become slippery and dark;They will be pushed and will fall. For I will bring calamity on themIn the year of reckoning,” declares Jehovah.
“And in the prophets of Sa·marʹi·a I have seen what is repulsive. Their prophecies are incited by Baʹal,And they lead my people Israel astray.
And in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen horrible things. They commit adultery and walk in falsehood;They encourage evildoers,And they do not turn away from their wickedness. To me they are all like Sodʹom,And her inhabitants are like Go·morʹrah.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah of armies says against the prophets: “Here I am making them eat wormwoodAnd giving them poisoned water to drink. For from the prophets of Jerusalem apostasy has spread throughout the land.”
This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Do not listen to the words of the prophets who are prophesying to you. They are deluding you. The vision they speak is from their own heart,Not from the mouth of Jehovah.
They are saying again and again to those who disrespect me,‘Jehovah has said: “You will enjoy peace.”’ And to everyone who follows his own stubborn heart they say,‘No calamity will come upon you.’
For who has stood in the inner circle of JehovahTo see and hear his word? Who has paid attention to his word in order to hear it?
Look! The windstorm of Jehovah will burst out in fury;Like a whirling tempest it will whirl down on the head of the wicked.
The anger of Jehovah will not turn backUntil he has carried out and accomplished the intentions of his heart. In the final part of the days you will clearly understand this.
I did not send the prophets, yet they ran. I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my inner circle,They would have made my people hear my wordsAnd would have caused them to turn back from their bad way and their evil deeds.”
“Am I only a God nearby,” declares Jehovah, “and not a God also from far away?”
“Can any man hide in a concealed place where I cannot see him?” declares Jehovah. “Do I not fill the heavens and the earth?” declares Jehovah.
“I have heard the prophets who are prophesying lies in my name say, ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’
How long will this continue in the heart of the prophets, to prophesy lies? They are prophets of the deceit of their own heart.
They intend to make my people forget my name by the dreams they relate to one another, just as their fathers forgot my name because of Baʹal.
Let the prophet who has a dream relate the dream, but the one who has my word should speak my word truthfully.” “What does the straw have in common with the grain?” declares Jehovah.
“Is not my word just like a fire,” declares Jehovah, “and like a forge hammer that smashes the crag?”
“So here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “who steal my words from one another.”
“Here I am against the prophets,” declares Jehovah, “those who use their tongue to say, ‘He declares!’”
“Here I am against the prophets of lying dreams,” declares Jehovah, “who relate them and lead my people astray because of their lies and their boasting.” “But I did not send them or command them. So they will not benefit this people at all,” declares Jehovah.
“And when this people or a prophet or a priest asks you, ‘What is the burden of Jehovah?’ you should reply to them, ‘“You people are the burden! And I will cast you off,” declares Jehovah.’
As for the prophet or the priest or the people who say, ‘This is the burden of Jehovah!’ I will turn my attention on that man and on his household.
This is what each of you is saying to his fellow and to his brother, ‘What has Jehovah answered? And what has Jehovah spoken?’
But the burden of Jehovah you should mention no more, for the burden is each one’s own word, and you have changed the words of the living God, Jehovah of armies, our God.
“This is what you will say to the prophet, ‘What answer has Jehovah given you? And what has Jehovah spoken?
And if you keep saying, “The burden of Jehovah!” this is what Jehovah says: “Because of your saying, ‘This word is the burden of Jehovah,’ after I told you, ‘You must not say: “The burden of Jehovah!”’
look! I will lift you up and throw you away from my presence, both you and the city that I gave to you and your forefathers.
And I will bring on you everlasting disgrace and everlasting humiliation, which will not be forgotten.”’”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, saying:
“Go to the house of the Reʹcha·bites and speak with them and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the dining rooms; then offer them wine to drink.”
So I took Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Jeremiah the son of Hab·az·zi·niʹah, his brothers, all his sons, and the entire house of the Reʹcha·bites
into the house of Jehovah. I brought them to the dining room of the sons of Haʹnan the son of Ig·da·liʹah, a man of the true God, which was next to the dining room of the princes that was above the dining room of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of Shalʹlum the doorkeeper.
Then I put cups and goblets full of wine before the men of the house of the Reʹcha·bites and said to them: “Drink wine.”
But they said: “We will not drink wine, because Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab, our forefather, gave us this command, ‘Neither you nor your sons must ever drink wine.
And you must not build a house, sow seed, or plant or obtain a vineyard. Instead, you must always dwell in tents, so that you may live for a long time in the land where you are residing as foreigners.’
So we continue to obey the voice of Je·honʹa·dab the son of our forefather Reʹchab in all that he commanded us, by never drinking any wine—we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters.
And we do not build houses to dwell in, nor do we have vineyards or fields or seed.
We keep living in tents and obeying all that Je·honʹa·dab our forefather commanded us.
But when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came up against the land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chal·deʹans and of the Syrians,’ and now we are living in Jerusalem.”
And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Were you not continually urged to obey my words?” declares Jehovah.
“Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab commanded his descendants not to drink wine, and they have carried out his words by not drinking it to this day, thus obeying the order of their forefather. However, I have spoken to you again and again, but you have not obeyed me.
And I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again, saying, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways, and do what is right! Do not walk after other gods and serve them. Then you will keep dwelling in the land that I gave to you and your forefathers.’ But you did not incline your ear or listen to me.
The descendants of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab have carried out the order that their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to me.”’”
“Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I am bringing on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the calamity that I have warned them about, for I have spoken to them, but they would not listen, and I kept calling to them, but they would not answer.’”
And Jeremiah said to the household of the Reʹcha·bites: “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have obeyed the order of your forefather Je·honʹa·dab and you continue to observe all his orders, doing exactly what he ordered you,
this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “There will never fail to be a descendant of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab to serve in my presence.”’”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth under his dominion and all the peoples were fighting against Jerusalem and all her cities:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘Go and speak to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and tell him: “This is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.
And you will not escape out of his hand, for you will without fail be caught and handed over to him. And you will see the king of Babylon eye to eye, and he will speak to you face-to-face, and you will go to Babylon.’
However, hear the word of Jehovah, O King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning you: “You will not die by the sword.
In peace you will die, and they will make a burning ceremony for you as they did for your fathers, the former kings who were before you, and they will mourn you, ‘Alas, O master!’ for ‘I have spoken the word,’ declares Jehovah.”’”’”
Jeremiah the prophet then spoke all these words to King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah in Jerusalem,
when the armies of the king of Babylon were fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Laʹchish and against A·zeʹkah; for they were the only fortified cities that remained of the cities of Judah.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after King Zed·e·kiʹah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim liberty to them,
that everyone should free his Hebrew slaves, male and female, so that no one would keep a fellow Jew as his slave.
So all the princes and all the people obeyed. They had entered into the covenant that everyone should free his male and female slaves and not keep them as slaves any longer. They obeyed and let them go.
However, they later brought back the male and female slaves whom they had freed, and they again forced them back into slavery.
So the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says, ‘I made a covenant with your forefathers in the day I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying:
“At the end of seven years, each of you should free his Hebrew brother who was sold to you and who has served you six years; you must set him free.” But your forefathers did not listen or incline their ears to me.
And recently you yourselves turned around and did what was right in my eyes by proclaiming liberty to your fellow men, and you made a covenant before me in the house that bears my name.
But then you turned around and profaned my name by bringing back your male and female slaves whom you had freed according to their desire, and you forced them back into slavery.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘You have not obeyed me in proclaiming liberty, each one to his brother and to his fellow man. So I will now proclaim liberty to you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to the sword, to pestilence, and to famine, and I will make you an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
And this is what will happen to the men who violated my covenant by not carrying out the words of the covenant that they made before me when they cut the calf in two and passed between the halves,
namely, the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the halves of the calf:
I will hand them over to their enemies and to those seeking to take their lives, and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the heavens and for the beasts of the earth.
And I will give King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah and his princes into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those seeking to take their lives and into the hand of the armies of the king of Babylon, who are withdrawing from against you.’
“‘Here I will give the order,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will bring them back to this city, and they will fight against it and capture it and burn it with fire; and the cities of Judah I will make a wasteland, without an inhabitant.’”
Take shelter, O sons of Benjamin, away from Jerusalem. Blow the horn in Te·koʹa;Light a fire signal over Beth-hac·cheʹrem! For a calamity looms from the north, a great disaster.
The daughter of Zion resembles a beautiful and delicate woman.
The shepherds and their droves will come. They will pitch their tents all around her,Each grazing the flock in his care.
“Prepare for war against her! Rise up, and let us attack her at midday!” “Woe to us, for the day is declining,For the shadows of evening are getting longer!”
“Rise up, and let us attack during the nightAnd destroy her fortified towers.”
For this is what Jehovah of armies says: “Cut down wood and raise up a siege rampart against Jerusalem. She is the city that must be held to account;There is nothing but oppression within her.
As a cistern keeps its water cool,So she keeps her wickedness cool. Violence and destruction are heard in her;Sickness and plague are constantly before me.
Be warned, O Jerusalem, or I will turn away from you in disgust;I will make you desolate, a land without inhabitants.”
This is what Jehovah of armies says: “They will thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as the last grapes on a vine. Pass your hand again like one gathering grapes from the vines.”
“To whom should I speak and give warning? Who will listen? Look! Their ears are closed, so that they are unable to pay attention. Look! The word of Jehovah has become something they scorn;They find no pleasure in it.
So I am filled with the wrath of Jehovah,And I am tired of holding it in.” “Pour it out on the child in the street,On the groups of young men gathered together. They will all be captured, a man along with his wife,The old men along with the very old.
Their houses will be turned over to others,Together with their fields and their wives. For I will stretch my hand out against the inhabitants of the land,” declares Jehovah.
“For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain;From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.
And they try to heal the breakdown of my people lightly, saying,‘There is peace! There is peace!’ When there is no peace.
Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done? They feel no shame at all! They do not even know how to feel humiliated! So they will fall among the fallen. When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,” says Jehovah.
This is what Jehovah says: “Stand at the crossroads and see. Ask about the ancient roadways,Ask where the good way is, and walk in it,And find rest for yourselves.” But they say: “We will not walk in it.”
“And I appointed watchmen who said,‘Pay attention to the sound of the horn!’” But they said: “We will not pay attention.”
“Therefore hear, O nations! And know, O assembly,What will happen to them.
Listen, O earth! I am bringing calamity on this peopleAs the fruitage of their own schemes,For they paid no attention to my wordsAnd they rejected my law.”
“What do I care that you bring frankincense from SheʹbaAnd sweet cane from a distant land? Your whole burnt offerings are not acceptable,And your sacrifices do not please me.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Here I am setting for this people stumbling blocks,And they will stumble over them,Fathers and sons together,A neighbor and his companion,And they will all perish.”
This is what Jehovah says: “Look! A people is coming from the land of the north,And a great nation will be awakened from the remotest parts of the earth.
They will grab hold of the bow and the javelin. They are cruel and will have no mercy. Their voice will roar like the sea,And they ride on horses. They draw up in battle order like a man of war against you, O daughter of Zion.”
We have heard the report about it. Our hands fall limp;Distress has seized us,Anguish like that of a woman giving birth.
Do not go out into the field,And do not walk on the road,For the enemy has a sword;There is terror all around.
O daughter of my people,Put on sackcloth and roll in the ashes. Mourn as for an only son, with bitter wailing,For suddenly the destroyer will come upon us.
“I have made you a metal tester among my people,One making a thorough search;You must take note and examine their way.
All of them are the most stubborn men,Walking about as slanderers. They are like copper and iron;All of them are corrupt.
The bellows have been scorched. Out from their fire there is lead. One keeps refining intensely simply for nothing,And those who are bad have not been separated.
Rejected silver is what people will certainly call them,For Jehovah has rejected them.”
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah after Neb·uʹzar·adʹan the chief of the guard let him go free from Raʹmah. He had taken him there bound with handcuffs, and he was among all the exiles of Jerusalem and of Judah who were being deported to Babylon.
Then the chief of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him: “Jehovah your God foretold this calamity against this place,
and Jehovah has brought it about just as he said, because you people sinned against Jehovah and did not obey his voice. That is why this has happened to you.
Now I am releasing you today from the handcuffs that were on your hands. If it seems good to you to come with me to Babylon, come, and I will look after you. But if you do not want to come with me to Babylon, do not come. See! The entire land is before you. Go wherever you choose.”
While Jeremiah still had not turned back, Neb·uʹzar·adʹan said: “Return to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed over the cities of Judah, and stay with him among the people; or go wherever you choose.” The chief of the guard then gave him a food allowance and a gift and let him go.
So Jeremiah went to Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam at Mizʹpah and stayed with him among the people who were left in the land.
In time all the army chiefs who were in the field with their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam over the land and that he had appointed him over the men, women, and children from the poor people of the land who had not been deported to Babylon.
So they came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. They were Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, Jo·haʹnan and Jonʹa·than the sons of Ka·reʹah, Se·raiʹah the son of Tan·huʹmeth, the sons of Eʹphai the Ne·tophʹa·thite, and Jez·a·niʹah the son of the Ma·acʹa·thite, together with their men.
Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan swore an oath to them and to their men, saying: “Do not be afraid of serving the Chal·deʹans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.
As for me, I will stay in Mizʹpah to represent you to the Chal·deʹans who come to us. But you should gather wine, summer fruits, and oil and put them in your storage containers and settle in the cities that you have taken over.”
And all the Jews who were in Moʹab, Amʹmon, and Eʹdom, as well as those who were in all the other lands, also heard that the king of Babylon had let a remnant stay in Judah and that he had appointed over them Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam the son of Shaʹphan.
So all the Jews began returning from all the places to which they had been dispersed, and they came into the land of Judah, to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah. And they gathered wine and summer fruits in very great quantity.
Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah and all the army chiefs who were in the field came to Ged·a·liʹah at Mizʹpah.
They said to him: “Do you not know that Baʹa·lis, the king of the Amʹmon·ites, has sent Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah to kill you?” But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam did not believe them.
Then Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah secretly told Ged·a·liʹah in Mizʹpah: “I want to go and strike down Ishʹma·el the son of Neth·a·niʹah, and no one will know. Why should he kill you, and why should all the people of Judah who have gathered to you be scattered and the remnant of Judah perish?”
But Ged·a·liʹah the son of A·hiʹkam said to Jo·haʹnan the son of Ka·reʹah: “Do not do this, for what you are saying concerning Ishʹma·el is a lie.”
These are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the rest of the elders among the exiled people, the priests, the prophets, and all the people, whom Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon,
after King Jec·o·niʹah, the queen mother, the court officials, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen and the metalworkers had gone out of Jerusalem.
He sent the letter by the hand of El·aʹsah the son of Shaʹphan and Gem·a·riʹah the son of Hil·kiʹah, whom King Zed·e·kiʹah of Judah sent to Babylon to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon. It said:
“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says to all the exiled people, whom I have caused to go into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon,
‘Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit.
Take wives and have sons and daughters; take wives for your sons and give your daughters in marriage, so that they too may have sons and daughters. Become many there, and do not decrease.
And seek the peace of the city to which I have exiled you, and pray in its behalf to Jehovah, for in its peace you will have peace.
For this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Do not let your prophets and your diviners who are among you deceive you, and do not listen to the dreams that they are dreaming.
For ‘they are prophesying lies to you in my name. I have not sent them,’ declares Jehovah.”’”
“For this is what Jehovah says, ‘When 70 years at Babylon are fulfilled, I will turn my attention to you, and I will make good my promise by bringing you back to this place.’
“‘For I well know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope.
And you will call me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.’
“‘You will seek me and find me, for you will search for me with all your heart.
And I will let you find me,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will gather your captives and collect you together out of all the nations and places to which I have dispersed you,’ declares Jehovah. ‘And I will bring you back to the place from which I caused you to go into exile.’
“But you have said, ‘Jehovah has raised up prophets for us in Babylon.’
“For this is what Jehovah says to the king sitting on the throne of David and to all the people dwelling in this city, your brothers who have not gone with you into exile,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here I am sending against them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and I will make them like rotten figs that are so bad they cannot be eaten.”’
“‘And I will pursue them with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence, and I will make them an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth, and a curse, and an object of astonishment, something to whistle at, and a reproach among all the nations to which I disperse them,
because they have not listened to my words that I sent to them with my servants the prophets,’ declares Jehovah, ‘sending them again and again.’ “‘But you have not listened,’ declares Jehovah.
“Therefore, hear the word of Jehovah, all you exiled people, whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.
This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says concerning Aʹhab the son of Ko·laiʹah and concerning Zed·e·kiʹah the son of Ma·a·seiʹah, who are prophesying lies to you in my name, ‘Here I am giving them into the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will strike them down before your eyes.
And what happens to them will become a curse spoken by all the exiles of Judah in Babylon: “May Jehovah make you like Zed·e·kiʹah and like Aʹhab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire!”
for they have acted disgracefully in Israel, committing adultery with the wives of their neighbors and speaking false words in my name that I did not command them. “‘“I am the One who knows, and I am a witness,” declares Jehovah.’”
“And to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam you will say,
‘This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “Because you sent in your name letters to all the people who are in Jerusalem, to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Ma·a·seiʹah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying,
‘Jehovah has made you priest instead of Je·hoiʹa·da the priest to become the overseer of the house of Jehovah, to be in charge of any madman who acts like a prophet and to put him into the stocks and into the pillory;
why, then, have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anʹa·thoth, who is acting as a prophet for you?
For he even sent to us at Babylon, saying: “It will be a long time! Build houses and live in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit,—”’”’”
When Zeph·a·niʹah the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the prophet,
the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying:
“Send to all the exiled people, saying, ‘This is what Jehovah says concerning She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam: “Because She·maiʹah prophesied to you, though I did not send him, and he tried to make you trust in lies,
therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am turning my attention to She·maiʹah of Ne·helʹam and his descendants. Not one man of his will survive among this people, and he will not see the good that I will do for my people,’ declares Jehovah, ‘for he has urged rebellion against Jehovah.’”’”
“At that time,” declares Jehovah, “the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of its princes, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem will be taken from their graves.
They will be spread out to the sun and to the moon and to all the army of the heavens that they loved and served and followed and sought after and bowed down to. They will not be gathered, nor will they be buried. They will become like manure on the surface of the ground.”
“And the remnant of this evil family who survive will choose death over life in all the places where I disperse them,” declares Jehovah of armies.
“And you must say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Will they fall and not get up again? If one would turn back, will the other not also turn back?
Why is this people, Jerusalem, unfaithful with an enduring unfaithfulness? They hold fast to deception;They refuse to turn back.
I paid attention and kept listening, but the way they spoke was not right. Not a man repented over his wickedness or asked, ‘What have I done?’ Each one keeps returning to the popular course, like a horse dashing into the battle.
Even the stork in the sky knows its seasons;The turtledove and the swift and the thrush keep to the time of their return. But my own people do not understand the judgment of Jehovah.”’
‘How can you say: “We are wise, and we have the law of Jehovah”? For in fact, the lying stylus of the scribes has been used only for falsehood.
The wise have been put to shame. They have become terrified and will be caught. Look! They have rejected the word of Jehovah,And what wisdom do they have?
So I will give their wives to other men,Their fields to other owners;For from the least to the greatest, each one is making dishonest gain;From the prophet to the priest, each one is practicing fraud.
And they try to heal the breakdown of the daughter of my people lightly, saying,“There is peace! There is peace!” When there is no peace.
Do they feel ashamed of the detestable things they have done? They feel no shame at all! They do not even know how to feel humiliated! So they will fall among the fallen. When I bring punishment on them they will stumble,’ says Jehovah.
‘When I gather them, I will bring them to their end,’ declares Jehovah. ‘There will be no grapes left on the vine, no figs on the fig tree, and the leaves will wither. And what I gave to them will be lost to them.’”
“Why are we sitting here? Let us gather together and enter the fortified cities and perish there. For Jehovah our God will do away with us,And he gives us poisoned water to drink,Because we have sinned against Jehovah.
There was a hope for peace, but nothing good came,For a time of healing, but there is terror!
From Dan is heard the snorting of his horses. At the sound of the neighing of his stallions,The whole land quakes. They come in and devour the land and everything in it,The city and its inhabitants.”
“For here I am sending in serpents among you,Poisonous snakes that cannot be charmed,And they will certainly bite you,” declares Jehovah.
My grief is incurable;My heart is sick.
From a distant land there is a cry for helpFrom the daughter of my people: “Is Jehovah not in Zion? Or is her king not in her?” “Why have they offended me with their graven images,With their worthless foreign gods?”
“The harvest has passed, the summer has ended,But we have not been saved!”
I am shattered over the breakdown of the daughter of my people;I am dejected. Horror has seized me.
Is there no balsam in Gilʹe·ad? Or is there no healer there? Why has the daughter of my people not been restored to health?
How she now sits all alone, the city that was full of people! How she has become like a widow, she who was populous among the nations! How she who was a princess among the provinces has been put to forced labor!
She weeps profusely during the night, and her tears cover her cheeks. Not one of all her lovers is there to comfort her. All her own companions have betrayed her; they have become her enemies.
Judah has gone into exile under affliction and harsh slavery. She must dwell among the nations; she finds no resting-place. All her persecutors have overtaken her in her distress.
The roads to Zion are mourning, because no one is coming to the festival. All her gates are desolate; her priests are sighing. Her virgins are grieving, and she is in bitter anguish.
Her adversaries are now her master; her enemies are carefree. For Jehovah has brought grief to her because of her many transgressions. Her children have gone into captivity before the adversary.
All the splendor has departed from the daughter of Zion. Her princes are like stags that have found no pasture,And they walk exhausted before the pursuer.
In the days of her affliction and her homelessness, Jerusalem remembersAll the precious things that were hers in the days of long ago. When her people fell into the hand of the adversary and she had no helper,The adversaries saw her and laughed over her collapse.
Jerusalem has sinned greatly. That is why she has become something abhorrent. All who used to honor her now treat her as something contemptible, for they have seen her nakedness. She herself groans and turns away in shame.
Her uncleanness is in her skirts. She gave no thought to her future. Her downfall was astounding; she has no one to comfort her. O Jehovah, see my affliction, for the enemy has magnified himself.
The adversary has laid his hands on all her treasures. For she has seen nations enter her sanctuary,Those whom you commanded should not enter into your congregation.
All her people are sighing; they are looking for bread. They have given their valuable things for something to eat, just to stay alive. Look, O Jehovah, and see that I have become as a worthless woman.
Is it nothing to all of you who pass along the road? Look and see! Is there any pain like the pain that was dealt out to me,Which Jehovah made me suffer in the day of his burning anger?
From on high he has sent fire into my bones, and he subdues each one. He has spread out a net for my feet; he has forced me to turn backward. He has made me a desolate woman. All day long I am ill.
My transgressions are bound as a yoke, fastened together by his hand. They have been placed on my neck, and my strength has failed. Jehovah has given me into the hand of those whom I cannot resist.
Jehovah has tossed aside all the powerful men in my midst. He has summoned an assembly against me to crush my young men. Jehovah has trodden the virgin daughter of Judah in the winepress.
I am weeping because of these things; my eyes flow with tears. For anyone who could comfort me or refresh me is far away from me. My sons are desolate, for the enemy has prevailed.
Zion has spread out her hands; she has no one to comfort her. Jehovah has given an order against Jacob to all his adversaries around him. Jerusalem has become to them an abhorrent thing.
Jehovah is righteous, for it is against his commands that I have rebelled. Listen, all you peoples, and see my pain. My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.
I have called out to my lovers, but they have betrayed me. In the city my priests and my elders have perished,While they searched for food in order to stay alive.
See, O Jehovah, for I am in great distress. My insides are churning. My heart has turned over within me, for I have been completely rebellious. Outside the sword bereaves; inside the house it is like death.
People have heard my sighing; there is no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my calamity. They are joyful, because you brought it about. But you will bring about the day that you proclaimed, when they will become like me.
May all their badness come before you, and may you deal harshly with them,Just as you have dealt harshly with me because of all my transgressions. For my sighs are many, and my heart is sick.
I am the man who has seen affliction because of the rod of his fury.
He has driven me out and makes me walk in darkness, not in light.
Indeed, he repeatedly brings his hand against me all day long.
He has worn away my flesh and my skin;He has broken my bones.
He has besieged me; he has surrounded me with bitter poison and hardship.
He has forced me to sit in dark places, like men who died long ago.
He has walled me in, so that I cannot escape;He has bound me with heavy copper fetters.
And when I cry out desperately for help, he rejects my prayer.
He has blocked up my paths with hewn stones;He has made my roadways crooked.
He waits to ambush me like a bear, like a lion in hiding.
He has forced me off the paths and torn me to pieces;He has made me desolate.
He has bent his bow, and he sets me up as the target for the arrow.
He has pierced my kidneys with the arrows of his quiver.
I have become a laughingstock to all the peoples, the theme of their song all day long.
He has filled me with bitter things and saturated me with wormwood.
He breaks my teeth with gravel;He makes me cower in the ashes.
You deprive me of peace; I have forgotten what is good.
So I say: “My splendor has perished, as well as my expectation in Jehovah.”
Remember my affliction and my homeless state, the wormwood and the bitter poison.
You will surely remember and bow low over me.
I recall this in my heart; that is why I will show a waiting attitude.
It is because of Jehovah’s loyal love that we have not come to our finish,For his mercies never end.
They are new each morning; your faithfulness is abundant.
“Jehovah is my share,” I have said, “that is why I will show a waiting attitude for him.”
Good is Jehovah to the one hoping in him, to the person who keeps seeking him.
Good it is to wait in silence for the salvation of Jehovah.
Good it is for a man to carry the yoke during his youth.
Let him sit alone and keep silent when He lays it upon him.
Let him put his mouth in the very dust; there may yet be hope.
Let him give his cheek to the one striking him; let him have his fill of insults.
For Jehovah will not cast us off forever.
Although he has caused grief, he will also show mercy according to his abundant loyal love.
For it is not in his heart to afflict or grieve the sons of men.
To crush beneath one’s feet all the prisoners of the earth,
To deprive a man of justice in the presence of the Most High,
To defraud a man in his legal case—Jehovah does not tolerate such things.
Who, then, can speak and have it happen unless Jehovah commands it?
From the mouth of the Most High,Bad things and good things do not go out together.
Why should a living person complain about the consequences of his sin?
Let us examine and scrutinize our ways, and let us return to Jehovah.
Let us lift up our hearts along with our hands to God in the heavens:
“We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven.
With anger you have blocked our approach;You have pursued and killed us without compassion.
You have blocked approach to yourself with a cloud, so that our prayer may not pass through.
You make us offscouring and refuse among the peoples.”
All our enemies open their mouths against us.
Dread and pitfalls have become our lot, desolation and breakdown.
Streams of water flow from my eyes over the breakdown of the daughter of my people.
My eyes weep without ceasing, without pausing,
Until Jehovah looks down and sees from heaven.
My eyes have brought me grief because of all the daughters of my city.
Without cause my enemies have hunted me down like a bird.
They have silenced my life in the pit; they kept hurling stones at me.
Waters flowed over my head, and I said: “I am finished!”
I called out your name, O Jehovah, from the depths of the pit.
Hear my voice; do not shut your ear to my cry for help, for relief.
You drew near in the day that I called you. You said: “Do not be afraid.”
You have defended my cause, O Jehovah, you have redeemed my life.
You have seen, O Jehovah, the wrong done to me; please grant me justice.
You have seen all their vengeance, all their schemes against me.
You have heard their taunts, O Jehovah, all their schemes against me,
The lips of my opposers and their whispering against me all day long.
Look at them; whether they sit or stand, they mock me in their songs!
You will repay them, O Jehovah, according to their deeds.
You will make them hardhearted, as your curse to them.
You will pursue them in your anger and annihilate them from under the heavens of Jehovah.
How Jehovah has covered the daughter of Zion in the cloud of his anger! He has thrown down the beauty of Israel from heaven to earth. He has not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
Jehovah has swallowed up without compassion all the dwellings of Jacob. In his fury he has torn down the fortified places of the daughter of Judah. He has brought down to the ground and profaned the kingdom and her princes.
In the heat of anger he has cut down all the strength of Israel. He withdrew his right hand when the enemy approached,And in Jacob he kept burning like a fire that consumed everything around it.
He has bent his bow like an enemy; his right hand is poised as an adversary;He kept killing all those desirable to the eyes. And he poured out his wrath like a fire into the tent of the daughter of Zion.
Jehovah has become like an enemy;He has swallowed down Israel. He has swallowed down all her towers;He has destroyed all its fortified places. And in the daughter of Judah he makes mourning and lamentation abound.
He treats his booth violently, like a hut in a garden. He has put an end to his festival. Jehovah has caused festival and sabbath to be forgotten in Zion,And in his fierce indignation he shows no regard for king and priest.
Jehovah has rejected his altar;He has spurned his sanctuary. He has surrendered the walls of her fortified towers into the hand of the enemy. They have raised their voice in the house of Jehovah, as on the day of a festival.
Jehovah has resolved to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion. He has stretched out the measuring line. He has not held back his hand from bringing destruction. And he causes rampart and wall to mourn. Together they have been made weak.
Her gates have sunk down into the earth. He has destroyed and broken her bars. Her king and her princes are among the nations. There is no law; even her prophets find no vision from Jehovah.
The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on the ground in silence. They throw dust on their heads and wear sackcloth. The virgins of Jerusalem have bowed their heads down to the ground.
My eyes are worn out from shedding tears. My insides are churning. My liver has been poured out on the ground, because of the downfall of the daughter of my people,Because of the children and infants fainting away in the public squares of the town.
They keep asking their mothers, “Where are grain and wine?” As they faint away like someone wounded in the public squares of the city,As their life ebbs away in their mothers’ arms.
What can I use as a witness,Or to what can I liken you, O daughter of Jerusalem? To what can I compare you, to comfort you, O virgin daughter of Zion? For your breakdown is as vast as the sea. Who can heal you?
The visions your prophets saw for you were false and empty,And they did not expose your error in order to turn away your captivity,But they kept visioning for you false and misleading pronouncements.
At you all those passing by on the road scornfully clap their hands. They whistle in amazement and shake their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying: “Is this the city about which they said, ‘It is perfect in beauty, the joy of all the earth’?”
At you all your enemies have opened their mouth. They whistle and grind their teeth and say: “We have swallowed her down. This is the day we were waiting for! It has arrived, and we have seen it!”
Jehovah has done what he intended; he has carried out his saying,What he commanded long ago. He has torn down without compassion. He has let the enemy rejoice over you; he has exalted the strength of your adversaries.
Their heart cries out to Jehovah, O wall of the daughter of Zion. Let tears stream down like a torrent day and night. Give yourself no respite, give your eye no rest.
Rise up! Cry out during the night, at the start of the watches. Pour out your heart like water before the face of Jehovah. Raise your hands to him for the lives of your children,Who are fainting away at every street corner because of famine.
See, O Jehovah, and look upon the one with whom you have dealt so harshly. Should women keep eating their own offspring, their own fully formed children,Or should priests and prophets be killed in the sanctuary of Jehovah?
Young boy and old man are lying dead on the ground in the streets. My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword. You have killed in the day of your anger; you have slaughtered without compassion.
As if for a festival day, you summon terrors from every direction. In the day of the wrath of Jehovah, no one escaped or survived;Those whom I gave birth to and reared, my enemy exterminated.
Remember, O Jehovah, what has befallen us. Look and see our disgrace.
Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers, our houses to foreigners.
We have become orphans without a father; our mothers are like widows.
We must pay to drink our own water, and our own wood comes at a price.
Those pursuing us are at our neck;We are weary, but we are given no rest.
We hold out our hand to Egypt and to As·syrʹi·a, to get enough bread to eat.
Our forefathers who sinned are no more, but we must bear their errors.
Servants now rule over us; there is no one to snatch us from their hand.
We bring in our bread at the risk of our life, because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin has become as hot as a furnace, because of the pangs of hunger.
The wives in Zion they have humiliated, the virgins in the cities of Judah.
Princes were hanged by their hand, and elders were shown no respect.
Young men carry the hand mill, and boys stumble under loads of wood.
The elders are gone from the city gate; young men do not play their music.
The joy is gone from our heart; our dancing has turned into mourning.
The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us, because we have sinned!
Because of this our heart is sick,And because of these things our eyes have grown dim,
Because of Mount Zion, which is desolate; foxes now roam on it.
As for you, O Jehovah, you sit enthroned forever. Your throne is for generation after generation.
Why do you forget us forever and abandon us for so long a time?
Bring us back to yourself, O Jehovah, and we will readily return to you. Renew our days as in those of old.
However, you have utterly rejected us. You remain intensely angry with us.
How the shining gold has grown dim, the fine gold! How the holy stones lie scattered at every street corner!
As for the precious sons of Zion, who were weighed against refined gold,How they have been regarded as earthenware jars,The work of a potter’s hands!
Even jackals offer the udder to nurse their young,But the daughter of my people has become cruel, like ostriches in the wilderness.
The tongue of the nursing infant sticks to its palate because of thirst. Children beg for bread, but no one gives them any.
Those who used to eat delicacies lie famished in the streets. Those who were brought up wearing scarlet have embraced ash heaps.
The punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment for the sin of Sodʹom,Which was overthrown in a moment, with no hand to help her.
Her Nazʹi·rites were purer than snow, whiter than milk. They were more ruddy than corals; they were like polished sapphires.
Their appearance has become darker than soot;They are not recognized in the streets. Their skin has shriveled over their bones; it has become like dry wood.
Those slain with the sword are better off than those slain by famine,Those who waste away, who are pierced through for lack of food from the field.
The hands of compassionate women have boiled their own children. They have become their food of mourning during the breakdown of the daughter of my people.
Jehovah has expressed his wrath;He has poured out his burning anger. And he starts a fire in Zion that consumes her foundations.
The kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the productive land did not believeThat the adversary and the enemy would enter the gates of Jerusalem.
It was because of the sins of her prophets, the errors of her priests,Who shed the blood of righteous ones in her midst.
They have wandered blindly in the streets. They are polluted with blood,So that none are able to touch their garments.
“Go away! Unclean!” they call out to them. “Go away! Go away! Do not touch us!” For they have gone homeless and wander about. People have said among the nations: “They cannot stay here with us.
The face of Jehovah has scattered them;He will no longer look favorably on them. Men will show no respect for the priests, no favor to the elders.”
Even now our eyes are worn out from looking in vain for help. We looked and looked for help from a nation that could not save us.
They have hunted us down at every step so that we could not walk in our public squares. Our end has drawn near; our days have finished, for our end has come.
Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the sky. They chased us on the mountains; they ambushed us in the wilderness.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed one of Jehovah, has been captured in their large pit,The one of whom we said: “In his shade we will live among the nations.”
Exult and rejoice, O daughter of Eʹdom, living as you do in the land of Uz. But to you also the cup will be passed, and you will become drunk and expose your nakedness.
The punishment for your error, O daughter of Zion, has come to its finish. He will not carry you off into exile again. But he will turn his attention to your error, O daughter of Eʹdom. He will uncover your sins.
Then he led me to the gate that is facing east.
There I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters; and the earth was illuminated by his glory.
What I saw was like the vision I had seen when I came to bring the city to ruin, and it appeared to be like what I had seen near the river Cheʹbar; and I fell with my face to the ground.
Then the glory of Jehovah entered the temple through the gate facing the east.
A spirit then raised me up and brought me into the inner courtyard, and I saw that the temple had become full of the glory of Jehovah.
Then I heard someone speaking to me out of the temple, and the man came and stood beside me.
He said to me: “Son of man, this is the place of my throne and the place for the soles of my feet, where I will dwell among the people of Israel forever. The house of Israel will no longer defile my holy name, they and their kings, by their spiritual prostitution and by the carcasses of their kings at their death.
By putting their threshold next to my threshold and their doorpost beside my doorpost, with only a wall between me and them, they defiled my holy name by the detestable things they did, so I exterminated them in my anger.
Now let them put their spiritual prostitution and the carcasses of their kings far away from me, and I will dwell among them forever.
“As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the house of Israel, so that they will feel ashamed because of their errors, and they should study its plan.
If they feel ashamed of all they have done, you should make known to them the ground plan of the temple, its arrangement, its exits, and its entrances. Show them all its ground plans and its statutes, its ground plans and its laws, and write them down before their eyes, so that they may observe all its ground plan and carry out its statutes.
This is the law of the temple. The entire territory all around the top of the mountain is most holy. Look! This is the law of the temple.
“These are the measurements of the altar in cubits (to each cubit a handbreadth was added). Its base is a cubit, and it is a cubit wide. It has a border all around the edge that is one span in width. This is the base of the altar.
From the base on the floor to the lower surrounding ledge is two cubits, and its width is one cubit. From the small surrounding ledge to the big surrounding ledge is four cubits, and its width is a cubit.
The altar hearth is four cubits high, and projecting up from the altar hearth are the four horns.
The altar hearth is square, 12 cubits long and 12 cubits wide.
The four sides of the surrounding ledge are 14 cubits long and 14 cubits wide; and the surrounding border is half a cubit, and its base is a cubit on all sides. “And its steps are facing east.”
He then said to me, “Son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘These are the directions to follow when the altar is made, so that whole burnt offerings may be offered and blood may be sprinkled on it.’
“‘You are to give a young bull of the herd as a sin offering to the Levitical priests of the offspring of Zaʹdok, who approach me to minister to me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘You should take some of its blood and put it on the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge, and on the border all around, in order to purify it from sin and to make atonement for it.
Then take the young bull, the sin offering, in order to burn it in the appointed place of the temple, outside the sanctuary.
On the second day you will offer a sound male goat as a sin offering; and they will purify the altar from sin just as they purified it from sin with the young bull.’
“‘When you finish purifying it from sin, you will offer a sound young bull of the herd and a sound ram from the flock.
You are to present them to Jehovah, and the priests must throw salt on them and offer them up as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah.
For seven days you will offer a male goat as a daily sin offering, as well as a young bull of the herd and a ram of the flock; you will offer unblemished animals.
For seven days they are to make atonement for the altar, and they must cleanse it and install it.
When the days are completed, on the eighth day and thereafter, the priests will offer your whole burnt offerings and communion sacrifices on the altar; and I will find pleasure in you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
Then he led me to the outer courtyard toward the north. And he brought me to the dining-room block that was next to the open area, north of the adjoining building.
Its length at the north entrance was 100 cubits, and it was 50 cubits wide.
It was located between the inner courtyard, which was 20 cubits wide, and the pavement of the outer courtyard. Its galleries faced each other and were three stories high.
Before the dining rooms was an inner walkway 10 cubits wide and 100 cubits long, and their entrances were to the north.
The upper dining rooms of the building were narrower than those in the lower and middle stories, because the galleries took up more of their space.
For they were three stories high, but they had no pillars like the pillars of the courtyards. That is why more floor space was taken away from them than from the lower and middle stories.
The outer stone wall near the dining rooms toward the outer courtyard that faced the other dining rooms was 50 cubits long.
For the length of the dining rooms that were toward the outer courtyard was 50 cubits, but for those facing the sanctuary, it was 100 cubits.
The dining rooms had an entryway on the east side leading up to them from the outer courtyard.
There were also dining rooms inside the stone wall of the courtyard toward the east, near the open area and the building.
There was a walkway before them like that of the northern dining rooms. They were the same length and width, and they had the same exits and layouts. Their entrances
were like the entrances of the dining rooms that were toward the south. There was an entrance at the beginning of the walkway, before the adjacent stone wall toward the east, where one could enter.
Then he said to me: “The dining rooms of the north and the dining rooms of the south that are next to the open area are the holy dining rooms where the priests who are approaching Jehovah eat the most holy offerings. There they place the most holy offerings, the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, because the place is holy.
When the priests enter, they should not go out of the holy place to the outer courtyard without first removing the garments in which they minister, for these are holy. They will clothe themselves with other garments in order to approach the areas permitted to the people.”
When he finished measuring the inner temple area, he led me out by way of the gate that faces east, and he measured the entire area.
He measured the eastern side with the measuring reed. According to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths from one side to the other.
He measured the northern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths.
He measured the southern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths.
He went around to the western side. He measured 500 reed lengths with the measuring reed.
He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall all around it that was 500 reeds long and 500 reeds wide, to make a division between what is holy and what is for common use.
Then he brought me into the outer sanctuary, and he measured the side pillars; they were six cubits wide on one side and six cubits wide on the other side.
The entrance was ten cubits wide, and the sidewalls of the entrance were five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. He measured its length, which was 40 cubits, and its width, 20 cubits.
He then went inside and measured the side pillar of the entrance, and it was two cubits thick, and the entrance was six cubits wide. The sidewalls of the entrance were seven cubits.
Next he measured the room facing the outer sanctuary, and it was 20 cubits long and 20 cubits wide. And he said to me: “This is the Most Holy.”
Then he measured the wall of the temple, and it was six cubits thick. The side chambers around the temple were four cubits wide.
The side chambers were three stories high, one on top of the other, with 30 chambers on each story. There were ledges around the wall of the temple that served as supports for the side chambers, so that the supports did not go into the wall of the temple itself.
On both sides of the temple was a winding passage that widened as it ascended to the upper chambers. The width increased from story to story as one ascended from the lowest story to the uppermost story by passing through the middle story.
I saw that there was a raised platform all around the temple, and the foundations of the side chambers measured a full reed of six cubits to the corner.
The width of the outside wall of the side chambers was five cubits. There was an open space alongside the structure of the side chambers that was part of the temple.
Between the temple and the dining rooms was an area that was 20 cubits wide on each side.
There was an entrance between the side chambers and the open space on the north side and another entrance on the south side. The width of the open space was five cubits all around.
The building that was on the west facing the open area was 70 cubits wide and 90 cubits long; the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around.
He measured the temple, and it was 100 cubits long. The open area, the building, and its walls were also 100 cubits long.
The width of the front of the temple facing east and the open area was 100 cubits.
He measured the length of the building that faced the open area in the rear, along with its galleries on both sides, and it was 100 cubits. He also measured the outer sanctuary, the inner sanctuary, and the porches of the courtyard,
as well as the thresholds, the windows with narrowing frames, and the galleries that were in those three areas. Near the threshold were wood panels from the floor up to the windows; and the windows were covered.
Measurements were taken above the entrance and in the inner temple and on the outside and on the entire wall all around.
It had carved cherubs and palm-tree figures, with each palm tree between two cherubs, and each cherub had two faces.
The human face was toward the palm tree on one side, and the face of a lion was toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved this way throughout the entire temple.
From the floor to the area above the entrance were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the wall of the sanctuary.
The doorposts of the sanctuary were square. In front of the holy place was something like
a wooden altar that was three cubits high and two cubits long. It had corner posts, and its base and its sides were made of wood. He then said to me: “This is the table that is before Jehovah.”
The outer sanctuary and the holy place each had two doors.
The doors had two swinging leaves, two leaves for each door.
There were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the doors of the sanctuary, like those on the walls. There was also a wooden overhang on the front of the porch on the outside.
There were also windows with narrowing frames and palm-tree figures along both sides of the porch, as well as along the side chambers of the temple and the overhangs.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, tell a riddle and relate a proverb about the house of Israel.
You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The great eagle, with great wings, long pinions, and full, colorful plumage, came to Lebʹa·non and took the top of the cedar.
He plucked off its topmost shoot and brought it to the land of traders and set it down in a city of traders.
He then took some of the seed of the land and put it in a fertile field. He planted it like a willow by abundant waters.
So it sprouted and became a low, sprawling vine with its foliage facing inward and its roots growing under it. Thus it became a vine and produced shoots and sent out branches.
“‘“And there came another great eagle, with great wings and large pinions. This vine then stretched its roots eagerly toward him, away from the garden beds where it was planted, and it sent out its foliage toward him so that he would irrigate it.
It had already been planted in a good field near abundant waters, in order to produce branches, to bear fruit, and to become a majestic vine.”’
“Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Will it prosper? Will someone not tear out its roots and make its fruit rot and cause its sprouts to wither? It will become so dry that neither a strong arm nor many people will be needed to pull it up by the roots.
Although it is transplanted, will it prosper? Will it not dry up completely when the east wind blows on it? It will dry up in the garden bed where it sprouted.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Please tell the rebellious house, ‘Do you not realize what these things mean?’ Say, ‘Look! The king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took its king and its princes and brought them back with him to Babylon.
Furthermore, he took one of the royal offspring and made a covenant with him and put him under an oath. Then he took away the prominent men of the land,
so that the kingdom would be brought low, unable to rise up, so that only by keeping his covenant might it continue to exist.
But the king finally rebelled against him by sending his messengers to Egypt to obtain horses and a large army from them. Will he succeed? Will the one doing these things escape punishment? Can he break the covenant and still escape?’
“‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “he will die in Babylon, in the place where the king who made him king lives, the one whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke.
And the great army and numerous troops of Pharʹaoh will be of no help in the war, when siege ramparts are raised and siege walls are built to destroy many lives.
He has despised an oath and broken a covenant. Even though he gave his promise, he has done all these things, and he will not escape.”’
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, I will bring upon his head the consequences of despising my oath and breaking my covenant.
I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. I will bring him to Babylon and enter into judgment with him there because of the unfaithfulness he committed against me.
All the fugitives of his troops will fall by the sword, and those remaining will be scattered in every direction. Then you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take a shoot from the top of the lofty cedar and plant it, from the top of its twigs I will pluck a tender shoot, and I myself will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
On a high mountain of Israel I will plant it; and its branches will grow, and it will produce fruit and become a majestic cedar. And every kind of bird will live beneath it and reside in the shadow of its foliage.
And all the trees of the field will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree and exalted the low tree; I have dried up the green tree and made the dry tree blossom. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.”’”
In the 11th year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, say to Pharʹaoh king of Egypt and to his hordes,‘Whom are you like in your greatness?
There was an As·syrʹi·an, a cedar in Lebʹa·non,With beautiful branches like a shady thicket, lofty in stature;Its top was among the clouds.
The waters made it grow big, the deep springs of water caused it to grow high. Streams were all around where it was planted;Their channels watered all the trees of the field.
That is why it grew taller than all the other trees of the field. Its boughs multiplied, and its branches grew longBecause of the abundant water in its streams.
All the birds of the sky nested in its boughs,All the wild animals of the field gave birth under its branches,And all the populous nations were dwelling in its shade.
It became majestic in beauty and in the length of its branches,For its roots went down into abundant waters.
No other cedars in the garden of God could compare to it. None of the juniper trees had boughs like it,And none of the plane trees could match its branches. No other tree in the garden of God could rival its beauty.
I made it beautiful, with abundant foliage,And all the other trees of Eʹden, the garden of the true God, envied it.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because it became so tall, lifting its top among the clouds, and its heart became arrogant because of its height,
I will hand it over to the mighty ruler of the nations. He will surely act against it, and I will reject it for its wickedness.
And foreigners, the most ruthless of the nations, will cut it down, and they will abandon it on the mountains, and its foliage will fall in all the valleys, and its branches will lie broken in all the streams of the land. All the peoples of the earth will depart from its shade and abandon it.
All the birds of the sky will live on its fallen trunk, and all the wild animals of the field on its branches.
This is so that no tree near the waters should grow so tall or lift up its top among the clouds and that no well-watered tree may reach up to them in height. For they will all be given over to death, to the land down below, along with the sons of mankind, who are going down into the pit.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘On the day it goes down to the Grave, I will cause a mourning. Therefore, I will cover over the deep waters and hold back its streams so that the abundant waters are restrained. I will darken Lebʹa·non because of it, and the trees of the field will all wither away.
At the sound of its downfall, I will cause nations to shudder when I bring it down to the Grave along with all those going down into the pit, and all the trees of Eʹden, the choicest and the best of Lebʹa·non, all that are well-watered, will be comforted in the land down below.
They have gone down to the Grave with him, to those slain by the sword, together with his supporters who lived in his shadow among the nations.’
“‘Which of the trees of Eʹden was like you in glory and greatness? But you will certainly be brought down with the trees of Eʹden to the land down below. You will lie down among the uncircumcised ones, with those slain by the sword. This will happen to Pharʹaoh and all his hordes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘When you allot the land as an inheritance, you should offer as a contribution to Jehovah a holy portion out of the land. Its length should be 25,000 cubits, and its width, 10,000 cubits. Its entire area will be a holy portion.
Within this will be a square lot for the holy place measuring 500 cubits by 500 cubits, and it will have 50 cubits as pastures on each side.
Out of this measurement you should measure the length of 25,000 and the width of 10,000, and within it will be the sanctuary, something most holy.
It will be a holy portion of the land for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who approach to minister to Jehovah. It will be a place for their houses and a sacred place for the sanctuary.
“‘For the Levites, the ministers of the temple, there will be a portion 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide, and they will have 20 dining rooms as a possession.
“‘You should give the possession of the city an area that is 25,000 cubits long (corresponding to the holy contribution) and 5,000 cubits wide. It will belong to all the house of Israel.
“‘And for the chieftain there will be land on both sides of the holy contribution and of the area allotted to the city. It will be next to the holy contribution and the possession of the city. It will be on the west side and on the east side. Its length from the western boundary to the eastern boundary will correspond to one of the tribal portions.
This land will become his possession in Israel. My chieftains will no longer mistreat my people, and they will give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have gone far enough, chieftains of Israel!’ “‘Put an end to your violence and oppression, and do what is just and righteous. Stop seizing the property of my people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘You should use accurate scales, an accurate eʹphah measure and an accurate bath measure.
There should be a fixed measurement for the eʹphah measure and the bath measure. The bath measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer, and the eʹphah measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer. The hoʹmer will be the standard for measuring.
The shekel is to be 20 geʹrahs. And 20 shekels plus 25 shekels plus 15 shekels will make up one maʹneh for you.’
“‘This is the contribution that you should offer: one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of wheat and one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of barley.
The allowance of the oil is to be based on the bath measure. The bath is a tenth of a cor, and ten baths are a hoʹmer, for ten baths equal a hoʹmer.
And from the flock of the livestock of Israel, one sheep out of every 200 should be given. These will be for the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement for the people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘All the people of the land will make this contribution to the chieftain in Israel.
But the chieftain will be responsible for the whole burnt offerings, the grain offering, and the drink offering during the festivals, the new moons, the Sabbaths, and all the designated festivals of the house of Israel. He will be the one to provide the sin offering, the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement in behalf of the house of Israel.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the first month, on the first day of the month, you should take a sound young bull of the herd, and you are to purify the sanctuary from sin.
The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering and put it on the doorpost of the temple, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge of the altar, and on the doorpost of the gate of the inner courtyard.
That is what you will do on the seventh day of the month because of anyone who sins by mistake or through ignorance; and you are to make atonement for the temple.
“‘In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, you will observe the festival of the Passover. For seven days unleavened bread should be eaten.
On that day the chieftain will provide a young bull as a sin offering in his own behalf and in behalf of all the people of the land.
For the seven days of the festival he will provide as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah seven sound young bulls and seven sound rams each of the seven days, as well as a male goat each day as a sin offering.
He should also provide as a grain offering an eʹphah for each young bull and an eʹphah for each ram, as well as a hin of oil for each eʹphah.
“‘In the seventh month, on the 15th day of the month, for seven days during the festival, he should provide the same sin offering, whole burnt offering, grain offering, and oil.’”
“You must sing a dirge concerning the chieftains of Israel
and say,‘What was your mother? A lioness among lions. She lay down among strong young lions and reared her cubs.
She raised one of her cubs, and he became a strong young lion. He learned how to tear prey apart,He even devoured humans.
Nations heard about him and caught him in their pit,And they brought him to the land of Egypt with hooks.
She waited and eventually saw that there was no hope for his return. So she took another of her cubs and sent him out as a strong young lion.
He also walked about among the lions and became a strong young lion. He learned how to tear prey apart, and he even devoured humans.
He prowled among their fortified towers and devastated their cities,So that the desolate land was filled with the sound of his roaring.
Nations from the surrounding districts came against him to cast their net over him,And he was caught in their pit.
With hooks they put him in a cage and brought him to the king of Babylon. There they confined him, so that his voice would no more be heard on the mountains of Israel.
Your mother was like a vine in your blood, planted by waters. It bore fruit and was full of branches because of the abundant water.
It developed strong branches, fit for the scepters of rulers. It grew and towered over the other trees,And it became visible because of its height and because of the abundance of its foliage.
But in fury she was uprooted and thrown to the earth,And an east wind dried up her fruit. Her strong branches were torn off and became dry, and fire consumed them.
Now she is planted in the wilderness,In a waterless, thirsty land.
The fire spread from her branches and consumed her shoots and her fruit,And there was no strong branch left, no scepter for ruling. “‘That is a dirge, and it will serve as a dirge.’”
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, speak to the sons of your people, and say to them,“‘Suppose that I bring a sword upon a land, and all the people of that land take a man and make him their watchman,
and he sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the horn and warns the people.
If someone hears the sound of the horn but does not heed the warning and a sword comes and takes his life, his blood will be on his own head.
He heard the sound of the horn, but he did not heed the warning. His blood will be upon himself. If he had heeded the warning, his life would have been saved.
“‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and he does not blow the horn and the people receive no warning and a sword comes and takes the life of one of them, that person will die for his own error, but I will ask his blood back from the watchman.’
“As for you, son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth you must warn them from me.
When I say to someone wicked, ‘Wicked one, you will surely die!’ but you do not speak out to warn the wicked one to change his course, he will die as a wicked man because of his own error, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you warn someone wicked to turn back from his way and he refuses to change his course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
“And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel, ‘You have said: “Our revolts and our sins weigh heavily upon us, causing us to waste away; so how will we keep living?”’
Tell them, ‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that someone wicked changes his way and keeps living. Turn back, turn back from your bad ways, for why should you die, O house of Israel?”’
“And you, son of man, tell the sons of your people, ‘The righteousness of the righteous man will not save him when he revolts; nor will the wickedness of the wicked man make him stumble when he turns away from his wickedness; nor will anyone righteous be able to keep living because of his righteousness in the day that he sins.
When I say to the righteous one: “You will surely keep living,” and he trusts in his own righteousness and does what is wrong, none of his righteous acts will be remembered, but he will die for the wrong that he has done.
“‘And when I say to the wicked one: “You will surely die,” and he turns away from his sin and does what is just and righteous,
and the wicked one returns what was taken in pledge and pays back what was taken by robbery, and he walks in the statutes of life by not doing what is wrong, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
None of the sins he committed will be held against him. For doing what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living.’
“But your people have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust,’ when it is actually their way that is unjust.
“When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, he must die for it.
But when someone wicked turns away from his wickedness and does what is just and righteous, he will keep living for doing so.
“But you have said, ‘The way of Jehovah is unjust.’ I will judge each of you according to his ways, O house of Israel.”
At length in the 12th year, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month of our exile, a man who had escaped from Jerusalem came to me and said: “The city has been struck down!”
Now the evening before the escaped man came, the hand of Jehovah had come upon me, and he had opened my mouth before the man came to me in the morning. So my mouth was opened, and I was no longer speechless.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, the inhabitants of these ruins are saying concerning the land of Israel, ‘Abraham was just one man, and yet he took possession of the land. But we are many; surely the land has been given to us as a possession.’
“Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “You are eating food with the blood, and you lift up your eyes to your disgusting idols, and you keep shedding blood. So why should you possess the land?
You have relied on your sword, you engage in detestable practices, and each of you has defiled his neighbor’s wife. So why should you possess the land?”’
“This is what you should say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “As surely as I am alive, those living in the ruins will fall by the sword; those in the open field, I will give as food to the wild beasts; and those in the strongholds and the caves will die by disease.
I will make the land an utterly desolate wasteland, and its arrogant pride will be brought to an end, and the mountains of Israel will be desolated, with no one passing through.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I make the land an utterly desolate wasteland because of all the detestable things that they have done.”’
“As for you, son of man, your people are speaking with one another about you beside the walls and in the doorways of the houses. They are saying to each other, each to his brother, ‘Come, and let us hear the word that comes from Jehovah.’
They will crowd in to sit before you as my people; and they will hear your words, but they will not do them. For with their mouth they flatter you, but their heart is greedy for dishonest gain.
Look! You are to them like a romantic love song, sung with a beautiful voice and skillfully played on a stringed instrument. They will hear your words, but no one will act on them.
And when it comes true—and it will come true—they will have to know that a prophet has been among them.”
And a spirit lifted me up and brought me to the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, the gate that faces east. There at the entrance of the gate I saw 25 men, and among them were Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Azʹzur and Pel·a·tiʹah the son of Be·naiʹah, princes of the people.
Then He said to me: “Son of man, these are the men who are scheming evil and giving wicked advice in this city.
They are saying, ‘Is it not the time for building houses? The city is the cooking pot, and we are the flesh.’
“So prophesy against them. Prophesy, son of man.”
Then the spirit of Jehovah came upon me, and he said to me: “Say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “What you have said is correct, O house of Israel, and I know what you are thinking.
You have caused many to die in this city, and you have filled her streets with the dead.”’”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The dead bodies that you have strewn about the city are the flesh, and the city is the cooking pot. But you yourselves will be taken out of it.’”
“‘A sword you have feared, and a sword I will bring against you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will bring you out of her and give you into the hand of foreigners and execute judgment on you.
You will fall by the sword. I will judge you at the border of Israel, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
The city will not be a cooking pot for you, and you will not be the flesh within it; I will judge you at the border of Israel,
and you will have to know that I am Jehovah. For you did not walk in my regulations and carry out my judgments, but you have acted in harmony with the judgments of the nations around you.’”
As soon as I prophesied, Pel·a·tiʹah the son of Be·naiʹah died, and I fell facedown and cried with a loud voice: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Are you going to exterminate the remaining ones of Israel?”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, your brothers, those of your brothers with the right of repurchase, along with the entire house of Israel, have been told by the inhabitants of Jerusalem, ‘Keep far away from Jehovah. The land is ours; it has been given to us as a possession.’
Therefore say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Although I have removed them far away among the nations and I have scattered them among the lands, for a little while I will become a sanctuary for them in the lands to which they have gone.”’
“Therefore say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will also collect you from the peoples and gather you from the lands to which you have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
And they will return there and remove from it all its disgusting things and detestable practices.
And I will give them a unified heart, and I will put a new spirit in them; and I will remove the heart of stone from their bodies and give them a heart of flesh,
in order that they may walk in my statutes and observe my judgments and obey them. Then they will be my people, and I will be their God.”’
“‘“But as for those whose hearts are set to continue in their disgusting things and their detestable practices, I will bring the consequences of their way upon their head,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
The cherubs now lifted up their wings, and the wheels were close to them, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
Then the glory of Jehovah ascended from the city and stopped over the mountain to the east of the city.
A spirit then lifted me up—through a vision by the spirit of God—and brought me to the exiled people in Chal·deʹa. Then the vision that I had seen left me.
And I began to tell the exiled people all the things that Jehovah had shown me.
The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and by his spirit Jehovah took me and set me down in the middle of the valley plain, and it was full of bones.
He had me pass all around them, and I saw that there were very many bones lying in the valley plain, and they were very dry.
He asked me: “Son of man, can these bones come to life?” To that I said: “Sovereign Lord Jehovah, you are the one who knows.”
So he said to me: “Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, ‘You dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah:
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to these bones: “I will cause breath to enter you, and you will come to life.
I will put sinews and flesh on you, and I will cover you with skin and put breath in you, and you will come to life; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
Then I prophesied just as I had been commanded. As soon as I prophesied, there was a noise, a rattling sound, and the bones began to come together, bone to bone.
Then I saw sinews and flesh come on them, and skin covered over them. But there was still no breath in them.
He then said to me: “Prophesy to the wind. Prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “From the four winds come in, O wind, and blow upon these people who were killed, so that they may come to life.”’”
So I prophesied just as he commanded me, and breath came into them, and they began to live and to stand on their feet, an extremely large army.
Then he said to me: “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Here they are saying, ‘Our bones are dry, and our hope has perished. We are completely cut off.’
So prophesy and say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will open your graves and raise you up from your graves, my people, and bring you to the land of Israel.
And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I open your graves and when I raise you up out of your graves, O my people.”’
‘I will put my spirit in you and you will come to life, and I will settle you on your land; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have spoken and I have done it,’ declares Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“And you, son of man, take a stick and write on it, ‘For Judah and for the people of Israel who are with him.’ Then take another stick and write on it, ‘For Joseph, the stick of Eʹphra·im, and all the house of Israel who are with him.’
Then bring them close to each other so that they become just one stick in your hand.
When your people say to you, ‘Will you not tell us what these things mean?’
tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Eʹphra·im, and the tribes of Israel who are with him, and I will join them to the stick of Judah; and I will make them one stick, and they will become one in my hand.”’
The sticks that you write on should be in your hand for them to see.
“Then tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will take the Israelites from among the nations where they have gone, and I will collect them together from every direction and bring them to their land.
I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over all of them, and they will no longer be two nations; nor will they be divided any longer into two kingdoms.
They will no longer defile themselves with their disgusting idols and their detestable practices and all their transgressions. I will save them from all their unfaithfulness by which they have sinned, and I will cleanse them. They will be my people, and I myself will be their God.
“‘“My servant David will be their king, and they will all have one shepherd. They will walk in my judicial decisions and carefully observe my statutes.
They will dwell on the land that I gave to my servant, to Jacob, where your forefathers lived, and they will dwell on it forever, they and their children and their children’s children; and David my servant will be their chieftain forever.
“‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them; it will be an eternal covenant with them. I will establish them and make them many and place my sanctuary among them forever.
My tent will be with them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.
And the nations will have to know that I, Jehovah, am sanctifying Israel when my sanctuary is in their midst forever.”’”
In the 11th year, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, ‘Aha! The gateway of the peoples has been broken! Everything will come my way, and I will become rich now that she is devastated’;
therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against you, O Tyre, and I will bring up many nations against you, just as the sea brings up its waves.
They will destroy the walls of Tyre and tear down her towers, and I will scrape away soil and make her a shining, bare rock.
She will become a drying yard for dragnets in the midst of the sea.’ “‘For I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and she will become plunder for the nations.
And her settlements in the countryside will be slaughtered by the sword, and people will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon against Tyre from the north; he is a king of kings, with horses, war chariots, cavalrymen, and an army of many soldiers.
He will destroy your settlements in the countryside with the sword, and he will build a siege wall and throw up a siege rampart against you and raise up a great shield against you.
He will pound your walls with his battering ram, and with his axes he will pull down your towers.
His horses will be so many that they will cover you with dust, and the sound of the cavalry, the wheels, and the chariots will cause your walls to shake when he enters your gates, like men storming a city with broken walls.
The hooves of his horses will trample down all your streets; he will kill your people with the sword, and your mighty pillars will crash to the ground.
They will loot your resources, plunder your merchandise, tear down your walls, and pull down your fine houses; then they will throw your stones and your woodwork and your soil into the water.’
“‘I will put an end to the noise of your songs, and the sound of your harps will be heard no more.
And I will make you a shining, bare rock, and you will become a drying yard for dragnets. You will never be rebuilt, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Tyre: ‘At the sound of your downfall, when the dying ones are groaning, when a slaughter takes place in your midst, will the islands not shudder?
All the princes of the sea will come down from their thrones and remove their robes and strip off their embroidered garments, and they will be seized with trembling. They will sit on the ground and tremble constantly and stare at you in amazement.
And they will sing a dirge over you and say to you: “How you have perished, you who were inhabited from the seas, the praised city;You and your inhabitants were mighty on the sea,Spreading terror to all the inhabitants of the earth!
The islands will tremble on the day of your downfall,The islands of the sea will be disturbed when you are gone.”’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘When I devastate you like the cities that are not inhabited, when I overwhelm you with the surging waters and the mighty waters have covered you,
I will bring you and those going down into the pit with you to the people of long ago; I will cause you to dwell in the lowest place, like the places of old that have been devastated, together with those going down into the pit, so that you may not be inhabited. Then I will glorify the land of the living.
“‘I will bring sudden terror upon you, and you will no longer be. They will search for you, but you will never again be found,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
In the 30th year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, while I was among the exiled people by the river Cheʹbar, the heavens were opened and I began to see visions of God.
On the fifth day of the month—that is, in the fifth year of the exile of King Je·hoiʹa·chin—
the word of Jehovah came to Ezekiel son of Buʹzi the priest by the river Cheʹbar in the land of the Chal·deʹans. There the hand of Jehovah came upon him.
As I was looking, I saw a tempestuous wind coming from the north, and there was a huge cloud and flashing fire surrounded by a bright light, and from the midst of the fire was something that looked like electrum.
Within it were what looked like four living creatures, and the appearance of each one was like that of a human.
Each one had four faces and four wings.
Their feet were straight, and the soles of their feet were like those of a calf, and they were shining like the glow of burnished copper.
They had human hands under their wings on all four sides, and the four of them had faces and wings.
Their wings were touching one another. They would not turn when they went; they would each go straight forward.
Their faces had this appearance: Each of the four had a man’s face with a lion’s face on the right, a bull’s face on the left, and each of the four had an eagle’s face.
That is how their faces were. Their wings were spread out above them. Each had two wings that were touching one another and two wings covering their bodies.
They would each go straight forward, going wherever the spirit would incline them to go. They would not turn as they went.
And the living creatures had the appearance of burning coals of fire, and something that looked like torches of bright fire was moving back and forth between the living creatures, and lightning was flashing out from the fire.
And when the living creatures would go forth and return, their movement had the appearance of flashes of lightning.
As I was watching the living creatures, I saw one wheel on the earth beside each of the living creatures with four faces.
The wheels and their structure appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite, and the four of them looked alike. Their appearance and structure looked as though a wheel were within a wheel.
When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning as they went.
Their rims were so high that they inspired awe, and the rims of all four were full of eyes all around.
Whenever the living creatures moved, the wheels would move along with them, and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would also be lifted up.
They would go where the spirit inclined them to go, wherever the spirit went. The wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
When they moved, these would move; and when they stood still, these would stand still; and when they were lifted up from the earth, the wheels would be lifted up together with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was also in the wheels.
Over the heads of the living creatures was the likeness of an expanse that sparkled like awesome ice, stretched out above their heads.
Under the expanse their wings were straight, one to the other. Each one had two wings for covering one side of their bodies and two for covering the other side.
When I heard the sound of their wings, it was like a sound of rushing waters, like the sound of the Almighty. When they moved, it was like the sound of an army. When they stood still, they would let their wings down.
There was a voice above the expanse over their heads. (When they stood still, they would let their wings down.)
Above the expanse that was over their heads was what looked like a sapphire stone, and it resembled a throne. Sitting on the throne up above was someone whose appearance resembled that of a human.
I saw something glowing like electrum that was like a fire radiating from what appeared to be his waist and upward; and from his waist down, I saw something that resembled fire. There was a brilliance all around him
like that of a rainbow in a cloud on a rainy day. That was how the surrounding brilliant light appeared. It was like the appearance of the glory of Jehovah. When I saw it, I fell facedown and began to hear the voice of someone speaking.
“As for you, son of man, prophesy about the mountains of Israel and say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “The enemy has said against you, ‘Aha! Even the ancient high places have become our possession!’”’
“So prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because they have desolated and attacked you from every direction, so that you would become a possession of the survivors from among the nations and people keep talking about you and slandering you,
therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah! This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains and the hills, to the streams and the valleys, to the ruins that were desolated, and to the abandoned cities that have been plundered and ridiculed by the survivors of the nations around them;
to these the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the fire of my zeal I will speak against the survivors of the nations and against all Eʹdom, those who with great rejoicing and utter scorn have claimed my land as their own possession, to take over its pastures and to plunder it.’”’
“So prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Look! I will speak in my zeal and in my rage, because you have borne humiliation by the nations.”’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I myself raise my hand in an oath that the surrounding nations will themselves bear their own shame.
But you, O mountains of Israel, will produce branches and bear your fruitage for my people Israel, for they will soon return.
For I am with you, and I will turn toward you, and you will be cultivated and sown with seed.
I will multiply your people—the whole house of Israel, all of it—and the cities will be inhabited and the ruins will be rebuilt.
Yes, I will multiply your people and your livestock; they will increase and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited as you were formerly, and I will make you prosper more than in the past; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
I will cause people—my people Israel—to walk upon you, and they will take possession of you. You will become their inheritance, and you will never again make them childless.’”
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because they are saying to you, “You are a land that devours people and bereaves your nations of children,”’
‘therefore, you will no longer devour people or make your nations childless,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will not subject you to any more insults of the nations or make you bear the taunts of people, and you will no longer cause your nations to stumble,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, when the house of Israel was dwelling in their land, they made it unclean by their ways and their dealings. Their ways were like the uncleanness of menstruation to me.
So I poured out my rage on them because of the blood that they had shed upon the land and because they made the land unclean with their disgusting idols.
So I scattered them among the nations and dispersed them among the lands. I judged them according to their way and according to their dealings.
But when they came to those nations, people profaned my holy name by saying about them, ‘These are the people of Jehovah, but they had to leave his land.’
So I will show concern for my holy name, which the house of Israel profaned among the nations where they have gone.”
“Therefore say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Not for your sakes am I acting, O house of Israel, but for my holy name, which you profaned among the nations where you have gone.”’
‘I will certainly sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the nations, which you profaned among them; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when I am sanctified among you before their eyes.
I will take you from the nations and gather you back from all the lands and bring you into your land.
I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you will become clean; I will cleanse you from all your uncleanness and from all your disgusting idols.
I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit inside you. I will remove the heart of stone from your body and give you a heart of flesh.
I will put my spirit inside you, and I will cause you to walk in my regulations, and you will observe and carry out my judicial decisions.
Then you will dwell in the land that I gave to your forefathers, and you will be my people and I will be your God.’
“‘I will save you from all your uncleanness and summon the grain and make it abound, and I will not bring famine upon you.
I will make the fruitage of the tree and the produce of the field abound, so that you may never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations.
Then you will remember your evil ways and your deeds that were not good, and you will loathe yourselves because of your guilt and your detestable practices.
But know this: I am not doing this for your sakes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Instead, be ashamed and feel humiliated because of your ways, O house of Israel.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the day that I cleanse you from all your guilt, I will cause the cities to be inhabited and the ruins to be rebuilt.
The desolate land that was lying desolate for everyone passing by to see will be cultivated.
And people will say: “The desolate land has become like the garden of Eʹden, and the cities that were in ruins and desolate and torn down are now fortified and inhabited.”
And the nations that are left remaining around you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have built what was torn down, and I have planted what was desolate. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I have done it.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also let the house of Israel ask me to do this for them: I will multiply their people like a flock.
Like the flock of holy ones, like the flock of Jerusalem during her festivals, the cities that were in ruins will become full of flocks of people; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the land of Israel: ‘An end! The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
The end is now upon you, and I will unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
My eye will not feel sorry for you; nor will I feel compassion, for I will bring upon you the results of your own ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Look! A calamity, a unique calamity, is coming.
An end is coming; the end will come; it will rouse itself against you. Look! It is coming.
Your turn has come, you who inhabit the land. The time is coming, the day is near. There is confusion and not joyful shouting on the mountains.
“‘Very soon I will pour out my rage on you, and I will fully unleash my anger against you, and I will judge you according to your ways and call you to account for all your detestable deeds.
My eye will not feel sorry; nor will I feel compassion. I will bring on you the results of your ways, and you will suffer the consequences of your own detestable deeds. And you will have to know that I, Jehovah, am striking you.
“‘Look, the day! Look, it is coming! Your turn has come; the rod has blossomed and presumptuousness has sprouted.
Violence has grown into a rod of wickedness. Neither they nor their wealth nor their crowds nor their prominence will survive.
The time will come, the day will arrive. Let the buyer not rejoice, and let the seller not mourn, for there is wrath against their whole crowd.
For the seller will not return to what was sold, even if his life is spared, for the vision is against the entire multitude. No one will return, and because of his error, no one will preserve his life.
“‘They have blown the trumpet, and everyone is ready, but no one is going to the battle, because my wrath is against the whole multitude.
The sword is outside, and the pestilence and the famine are inside. Whoever is in the field will die by the sword, and famine and pestilence will consume those in the city.
Their survivors who manage to escape will go to the mountains, and like the doves of the valleys, each one will moan over his error.
All their hands will hang limp, and all their knees will drip with water.
They have put on sackcloth, and shuddering has seized them. Everyone will be put to shame, and every head will be bald.
“‘They will throw their silver into the streets, and their gold will become abhorrent to them. Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the day of Jehovah’s fury. They will not be satisfied, nor will they fill their stomachs, for it has become a stumbling block causing their error.
They took pride in the beauty of their ornaments, and they made with them their detestable images, their disgusting idols. That is why I will make it an abhorrent thing to them.
I will give it into the hand of the foreigners for plunder and to the wicked ones of the earth for spoil, and they will profane it.
“‘I will turn my face away from them, and they will profane my concealed place, and robbers will enter it and profane it.
“‘Make the chain, for the land is full of bloodstained judgment and the city is full of violence.
I will bring in the worst of the nations, and they will take possession of their houses, and I will put an end to the pride of the strong ones, and their sanctuaries will be profaned.
When their anguish comes, they will seek peace, but there will be none.
There will come disaster upon disaster, and one report after another, and people will seek a vision from a prophet, but the law will perish from a priest and advice from the elders.
The king will go into mourning, and the chieftain will be clothed with despair, and the hands of the people of the land will tremble in terror. I will treat them according to their ways, and I will judge them as they have judged. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the Amʹmon·ites, and prophesy against them.
You must say concerning the Amʹmon·ites, ‘Hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because you said ‘Aha!’ against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was laid desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into exile,
therefore I am giving you to the people of the East as a possession. They will set up their encampments within you and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruitage, and they will drink your milk.
I will make Rabʹbah a pasture ground for camels, and the land of the Amʹmon·ites a resting-place for the flock; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you clapped your hands and stamped your feet and you rejoiced over the land of Israel with such utter scorn,
therefore I will stretch out my hand against you to give you to the nations as something to plunder. I will cut you off from the peoples and destroy you from the lands. I will annihilate you, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because Moʹab and Seʹir have said, “Look! The house of Judah is like all the other nations,”
I am exposing Moʹab’s flank at his frontier cities, the beauty of his land, Beth-jeshʹi·moth, Baʹal-meʹon, and clear to Kir·i·a·thaʹim.
I will give it along with the Amʹmon·ites as a possession to the people of the East, so that the Amʹmon·ites will not be remembered among the nations.
And I will execute judgment in Moʹab, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Eʹdom has acted vengefully against the house of Judah and has incurred great guilt in taking revenge on them;
therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will also stretch out my hand against Eʹdom and cut off from it both man and livestock, and I will make it desolate. From Teʹman clear to Deʹdan, they will fall by the sword.
‘I will take vengeance on Eʹdom by the hand of my people Israel. They will bring my anger and my wrath on Eʹdom, so that they experience my own vengeance,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because of their unrelenting hostility, the Phi·lisʹtines have maliciously sought to bring vengeance and destruction.
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am stretching out my hand against the Phi·lisʹtines, and I will cut off the Cherʹe·thites and will destroy the remaining inhabitants of the seacoast.
I will execute on them great acts of vengeance with furious punishments, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring my vengeance on them.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel, and say to those who fabricate their own prophecies, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the stupid prophets, who follow their own spirit, when they have seen nothing!
O Israel, your prophets have become like foxes among the ruins.
You will not go to the broken places in the stone walls to rebuild them for the house of Israel, so that Israel may keep standing in the battle in the day of Jehovah.”
“They have seen false visions and foretold a lie, those who are saying, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when Jehovah himself has not sent them, and they have waited for their word to come true.
Is it not a false vision that you have seen and a lie that you have foretold when you say, ‘The word of Jehovah is,’ when I have not said anything?”’
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘Because you have spoken what is false and your visions are a lie, I am against you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
My hand is against the prophets whose visions are false and who foretell a lie. They will not be among the people with whom I confide; nor will they be written in the registry of the house of Israel; nor will they return to the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
All of this is because they have led my people astray by saying, “There is peace!” when there is no peace. When a flimsy partition wall is built, they are plastering it with whitewash.’
“Tell those plastering with whitewash that it will fall. A torrential downpour will come, hailstones will fall, and powerful windstorms will break it down.
And when the wall falls you will be asked, ‘Where is your coating of plaster?’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will cause powerful windstorms to burst forth in my wrath, and a torrential downpour in my anger, and hailstones in destructive fury.
I will tear down the wall that you plastered with whitewash and bring it down to the earth, and its foundation will be exposed. When the city falls, you will perish within her; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“‘When I fully unleash my wrath upon the wall and upon those who plastered it with whitewash, I will say to you: “The wall is no more, and those plastering it are no more.
The prophets of Israel are gone, those who prophesy to Jerusalem and who see visions of peace for her, when there is no peace,”’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“As for you, son of man, set your face against the daughters of your people who fabricate their own prophecies, and prophesy against them.
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the women who sew together bands for all arms and make veils for heads of every size in order to hunt down people’s lives! Are you hunting for the lives of my people and trying to preserve your own lives?
Will you profane me among my people for handfuls of barley and for scraps of bread, putting to death those who should not die and keeping alive those who should not live, doing so by your lies to my people, who listen to your lies?”’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against your bands, O women, which you use to hunt down people as though they were birds, and I will rip them from your arms and release those whom you are hunting down like birds.
I will rip away your veils and rescue my people out of your hand, and they will no longer be something for you to catch in the hunt; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
For you have disheartened the righteous one with your falsehood when I was not causing him distress, and you have strengthened the hands of the wicked one, so that he does not turn back from his bad way and stay alive.
Therefore, you women will no longer see false visions and practice divination; and I will rescue my people from your hand, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Jerusalem, and make a proclamation against the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel.
Say to the land of Israel, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, and I will bring my sword out of its sheath and cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked.
Because I will cut off from you the righteous and the wicked, my sword will be drawn from its sheath against all flesh, from south to north.
All people will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have drawn my sword from its sheath. It will not go back again.”’
“And you, son of man, sigh while you tremble, yes, sigh bitterly before them.
And if they say to you, ‘Why are you sighing?’ you will say, ‘Because of a report.’ For it will certainly come, and every heart will melt with fear and every hand will hang limp and every spirit will become dejected and every knee will drip with water. ‘Look! It will certainly come—it will take place,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what Jehovah says: “Say, ‘A sword! A sword is sharpened, and it is polished.
It is sharpened to inflict a great slaughter; it is polished to flash like lightning.’”’” “Should we not rejoice?” “‘Will it reject the scepter of my own son, as it does every tree?
“‘It is given to be polished and to be wielded with the hand. This sword is sharpened and polished, to be put into the hand of an executioner.
“‘Cry out and wail, son of man, for it has come against my people; it is against all the chieftains of Israel. These will be victims of the sword along with my people. So strike your thigh in grief.
For an examination has been made, and what will happen if the sword rejects the scepter? It will cease to exist,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“And you, son of man, prophesy and clap your hands and repeat ‘A sword!’ three times. It is the sword of the slain victims, the sword of great slaughter, that surrounds them.
Their hearts will melt with fear and many will fall at their city gates; I will inflict a slaughter by the sword. Yes, it flashes like lightning and is polished for a slaughter!
Cut sharply to the right! Swing to the left! Go wherever your blade is directed!
I will also clap my hands and satisfy my rage. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, mark out two ways for the sword of the king of Babylon to come. Both of them will originate from the same land, and a signpost should be set up where the road branches off to the two cities.
You should mark out one way for the sword to come against Rabʹbah of the Amʹmon·ites, and the other way against fortified Jerusalem in Judah.
For the king of Babylon stops to use divination at the fork in the road, where the two roads branch off. He shakes the arrows. He consults his idols; he examines the liver.
The divination in his right hand is pointed toward Jerusalem, to set up battering rams, to give the word for slaughter, to sound the battle cry, to set battering rams against the gates, to throw up a siege rampart, to build a siege wall.
But it will seem like false divination in the eyes of those who had sworn oaths to them. But he remembers their guilt and will capture them.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have caused your own guilt to be remembered by exposing your transgressions and causing your sins to be seen in all your actions. Now that you have been remembered, you will be taken by force.’
“But your day has come, O fatally wounded, wicked chieftain of Israel, the time of your final punishment.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Remove the turban, and take off the crown. This will not remain the same. Raise up the low one, and bring low the high one.
A ruin, a ruin, a ruin I will make it. And it will not belong to anyone until the one who has the legal right comes, and I will give it to him.’
“And you, son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says about the Amʹmon·ites and about their insults.’ Say, ‘A sword! A sword is drawn for a slaughter; it is polished to devour and to flash like lightning.
Despite the false visions and lying divination about you, you will be piled up on the slain, the wicked men whose day has come, the time of their final punishment.
Return it to its sheath. I will judge you in the place that you were created, in the land of your origin.
I will pour out my indignation on you. I will blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and I will hand you over to brutal men, the craftsmen of destruction.
You will become fuel for the fire; your own blood will be shed in the land, and you will be remembered no more, for I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
Then he said to me: “Son of man, eat what is before you. Eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.”
So I opened my mouth, and he made me eat this scroll.
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, eat this scroll that I am giving you, and fill your stomach with it.” So I began to eat it, and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.
He said to me: “Son of man, go in among the house of Israel and speak my words to them.
For you are not being sent to a people who speak an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, but to the house of Israel.
You are not being sent to many peoples speaking an unintelligible language or an unknown tongue, whose words you cannot understand. If I would send you to them, they would listen to you.
But the house of Israel will refuse to listen to you, for they do not want to listen to me. All those of the house of Israel are hardheaded and hardhearted.
Look! I have made your face exactly as hard as their faces and your forehead exactly as hard as their foreheads.
I have made your forehead like a diamond, harder than flint. Do not be afraid of them or be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.”
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, take to heart and listen to all my words that I speak to you.
Go in among the exiles of your people and speak to them. Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,’ whether they listen or refuse to listen.”
A spirit then carried me along and I heard behind me a great rumbling sound that said: “May the glory of Jehovah be praised from his place.”
There was the sound of the wings of the living creatures as they were brushing against one another, and the sound of the wheels next to them, and the sound of a great rumbling.
And the spirit carried me along and took me, and I went in bitterness and in the rage of my spirit, and the hand of Jehovah rested strongly on me.
So I went to the exiled people at Tel-aʹbib, who were dwelling by the river Cheʹbar, and I stayed there where they were dwelling; and in a dazed condition, I stayed among them for seven days.
At the end of seven days the word of Jehovah came to me:
“Son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them from me.
When I say to someone wicked, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him, and you fail to speak in order to warn the wicked one to turn from his wicked course so that he may stay alive, he will die for his error because he is wicked, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you warn someone wicked and he does not turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.
But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, I will put a stumbling block before him and he will die. If you did not warn him, he will die for his sin and his righteous acts will not be remembered, but I will ask his blood back from you.
But if you have warned the righteous one not to sin, and he does not sin, he will surely keep alive because he was warned, and you will have saved your own life.”
The hand of Jehovah came upon me there, and he said to me: “Get up, go to the valley plain, and I will speak with you there.”
So I got up and went to the valley plain, and look! the glory of Jehovah was there, like the glory that I saw by the river Cheʹbar, and I fell facedown.
Then spirit entered into me and made me stand up on my feet, and he spoke to me and said: “Go, shut yourself inside your house.
As for you, son of man, they will put ropes on you and tie you with them so that you cannot go out among them.
And I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth, and you will become mute, unable to reprove them, because they are a rebellious house.
But when I speak with you I will open your mouth, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’ Let the one listening listen, and let the one refusing to listen refuse, because they are a rebellious house.
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy and say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Wail, ‘Alas, the day is coming!’
For the day is near, yes, a day of Jehovah is near. It will be a day of clouds, an appointed time of nations.
A sword will come against Egypt, and panic will overtake E·thi·oʹpi·a when the slain fall in Egypt;Its wealth is taken and its foundations are torn down.
E·thi·oʹpi·a, Put, Lud, and all the mixed populations,And Chub, along with the sons of the land of the covenant,By the sword they will all fall.”’
This is what Jehovah says: ‘The supporters of Egypt will also fall,And its arrogant power will be brought down.’ “‘From Migʹdol to Sy·eʹne they will fall by the sword in the land,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘They will be made the most desolate of lands, and its own cities will become the most devastated cities.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set a fire in Egypt and all its allies are crushed.
In that day I will send messengers in ships to make self-confident E·thi·oʹpi·a tremble; panic will seize them in the day that is coming upon Egypt, for it will surely come.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will bring an end to Egypt’s hordes by the hand of King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon.
He and his troops, the most ruthless of the nations, will be brought in to destroy the land. They will draw their swords against Egypt and fill the land with the slain.
I will turn the canals of the Nile into dry ground and will sell the land into the hand of wicked men. I will make the land and everything in it desolate by the hand of foreigners. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will also destroy the disgusting idols and bring an end to the worthless gods of Noph. There will no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt, and I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
I will desolate Pathʹros and set a fire in Zoʹan and execute judgment on No.
I will pour out my rage on Sin, the stronghold of Egypt, and destroy the population of No.
I will set a fire in Egypt; and Sin will be seized with terror and No will be broken through and Noph will face attack in broad daylight!
The young men of On and Pi·beʹseth will fall by the sword, and the cities will go into captivity.
In Te·haphʹne·hes the day will grow dark when I break the yoke bars of Egypt there. Her arrogant power will come to an end, clouds will cover her, and her towns will go into captivity.
I will execute judgment on Egypt, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And in the 11th year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharʹaoh king of Egypt; it will not be bound up to be healed or wrapped with a bandage to make it strong enough to take up the sword.”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am against Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and I will break his arms, the strong one and the broken one, and I will make the sword fall from his hand.
Then I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands.
I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon and put my sword into his hand, and I will break the arms of Pharʹaoh, and he will groan loudly like a dying man before him.
I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, but the arms of Pharʹaoh will fall limp; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon and he wields it against the land of Egypt.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
He then called out in my ears with a loud voice, saying: “Summon those who will bring punishment on the city, each one with his weapon for destruction in his hand!”
I saw six men coming from the direction of the upper gate that faces north, each with his weapon for smashing in his hand; and there was one man among them clothed in linen, with a secretary’s inkhorn at his waist, and they came in and stood beside the copper altar.
Then the glory of the God of Israel rose from where it had rested above the cherubs and moved to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and he began calling out to the man who was clothed in linen, at whose waist was the secretary’s inkhorn.
Jehovah said to him: “Go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the foreheads of the men who are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the city.”
And to the others he said in my hearing: “Go through the city after him and strike. Do not let your eye feel sorry, and do not feel any compassion.
Old man, young man, virgin, little child, and women you should kill off completely. But do not go near to any man on whom there is the mark. You should start from my sanctuary.” So they started with the elders who were in front of the house.
Then he said to them: “Defile the house and fill the courtyards with the slain. Go!” So they went out and struck down people in the city.
While they were striking them down, I alone was left, and I fell facedown and cried out: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Are you going to destroy all the remaining ones of Israel while you pour out your rage on Jerusalem?”
So he said to me: “The error of the house of Israel and Judah is very, very great. The land is filled with bloodshed, and the city is full of corruption. For they say, ‘Jehovah has left the land, and Jehovah is not seeing.’
But as for me, my eye will not feel sorry; nor will I show compassion. The consequences of their way I will bring down on their own head.”
Then I saw the man clothed in linen with the inkhorn at his waist bringing back word, saying: “I have done just as you have commanded me.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Maʹgog, the head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal, and prophesy against him.
Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws and bring you out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in splendor, a vast assembly with large shields and bucklers, all of them wielding swords;
Persia, E·thi·oʹpi·a, and Put are with them, all of them with buckler and helmet;
Goʹmer and all its troops, the house of To·garʹmah from the remotest parts of the north, along with all its troops—many peoples are with you.
“‘“Be ready, prepare yourselves, you with all your armies that are assembled with you, and you will be their commander.
“‘“You will be given attention after many days. In the final part of the years you will invade the land whose people have been restored from the ravages of the sword, collected together out of many peoples onto the mountains of Israel, which had long been lying devastated. The inhabitants of this land were restored from the peoples, and all of them dwell in security.
You will come against them like a storm, and you will cover the land like clouds, you and all your troops and many peoples with you.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In that day thoughts will come into your heart, and you will devise an evil plan.
You will say: “I will invade the land of unprotected settlements. I will come against those living in security, without disturbance, all of them living in settlements unprotected by walls, bars, or gates.”
It will be to take much spoil and plunder, to attack the devastated places that are now inhabited and a people regathered from the nations, who are accumulating wealth and property, those who are living in the center of the earth.
“‘Sheʹba and Deʹdan, the merchants of Tarʹshish and all its warriors will say to you: “Are you invading to get much spoil and plunder? Have you assembled your armies to carry off silver and gold, to take wealth and property, to seize a very great spoil?”’
“So prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “On that day when my people Israel are dwelling in security, will you not know it?
You will come from your place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly, a vast army.
Like clouds covering the land, you will come against my people Israel. In the final part of the days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may know me when I sanctify myself through you before their eyes, O Gog.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Are you not the same one I spoke about in the former days through my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for many years that you would be brought against them?’
“‘On that day, the day when Gog invades the land of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘my great rage will flare up.
In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I will speak; and in that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
Because of me the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the wild beasts of the field, all the reptiles that creep on the ground, and all humans on the surface of the earth will tremble, and the mountains will be thrown down, and the cliffs will fall, and every wall will collapse to the ground.’
“‘I will call for a sword against him on all my mountains,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Every man’s sword will be against his own brother.
I will bring my judgment against him with pestilence and bloodshed; and I will rain down a torrential downpour and hailstones and fire and sulfur on him and on his troops and on the many peoples with him.
And I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
The word of Jehovah again came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, saying:
“Son of man, record this date, this very day. The king of Babylon has begun his attack against Jerusalem on this very day.
And relate a proverb concerning the rebellious house, and say concerning them: “‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Put the cooking pot on; put it on the fire and pour water into it.
Put pieces of meat into it, every good piece,The thigh and the shoulder; fill it with the choicest bones.
Take the choicest sheep of the flock, and stack the logs all around under the pot. Boil the pieces, and cook the bones inside it.”’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed, the rusty cooking pot, whose rust has not been removed! Empty it piece by piece; do not cast lots for them.
For its blood is within it; she poured it out on the bare rock. She did not pour it out on the earth, to cover it over with dust.
To stir up rage for executing vengeance,I have put her blood on the shining, bare rockSo that it may not be covered over.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed! I will pile the wood high.
Heap on the logs and kindle the fire,Boil the flesh thoroughly, pour out the broth, and let the bones be charred.
Set the empty pot on the coals to make it hotSo that its copper will become red hot. Its uncleanness will melt away within it, and its rust will be consumed.
It is frustrating and exhausting,For the heavy rust will not come off. Throw it into the fire with its rust!’
“‘Your uncleanness was due to your obscene conduct. I tried to cleanse you, but you would not become clean from your uncleanness. You will not become clean until my rage against you subsides.
I myself, Jehovah, have spoken. It will come to pass. I will act without holding back, without sorrow, without regret. They will judge you according to your ways and your dealings,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, in a single blow I am about to take away your dear one from you. You should not mourn; nor should you weep or shed tears.
Groan in silence, and do not observe mourning rites for the dead. Bind on your turban, and put on your sandals. You should not cover over the mustache, and do not eat the bread brought to you by others.”
And I spoke to the people in the morning, and my wife died in the evening. So I did in the morning just as I had been commanded.
The people were saying to me: “Will you not tell us what these things you are doing have to do with us?”
I replied to them: “The word of Jehovah has come to me, saying,
‘Tell the house of Israel: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘I am about to profane my sanctuary, the source of your great pride, the thing dear to you and the desire of your heart. Your own sons and daughters whom you left behind will fall by the sword.
Then you will have to do just as I have done. You will not cover over your mustache, and you will not eat the bread brought to you by others.
Your turbans will be on your heads and your sandals on your feet. You will not mourn or weep. Instead, you will rot away in your errors, and you will groan to one another.
Ezekiel has become a sign for you. Just as he has done, you will do. When it happens, you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”’”
“And as for you, son of man, on the day that I take away from them their fortress—the beautiful object of their joy, the thing dear to them, their heart’s desire—along with their sons and daughters,
it will be reported to you by one who has escaped.
In that day you will open your mouth and speak to the one who escaped, and you will no longer be mute. You will become a sign to them, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there I saw water flowing eastward from under the threshold of the temple, for the front of the temple was facing east. The water was flowing down from under the right side of the temple, south of the altar.
He then led me out by way of the north gate and took me outside and around to the outer gate that is facing east, and I saw water trickling from the right side.
When the man went out toward the east with a measuring line in his hand, he measured off 1,000 cubits and had me pass through the water; the water was ankle deep.
Then he measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through the water, and it was up to the knees. He measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through, and the water was up to the hips.
When he measured off another 1,000, it was a torrent that I was unable to walk across, for the water was so deep that one had to swim, a torrent of water that could not be crossed on foot.
He asked me: “Have you seen this, son of man?” Then he had me walk and return to the bank of the stream.
When I returned, I saw that on the bank of the stream were very many trees on both sides.
Then he said to me: “This water flows toward the eastern region and continues down through the Arʹa·bah and enters the sea. When it enters the sea, the water there will be healed.
Swarms of living creatures will be able to live wherever the waters flow. There will be an abundance of fish, because this water will flow there. The seawater will be healed, and everything will live wherever the stream goes.
“Fishermen will stand beside it from En-gedʹi clear to En-egʹla·im, where there will be a drying yard for dragnets. There will be an abundance of many kinds of fish, like the fish of the Great Sea.
“It will have swampy places and marshy places, and these will not be healed. They will be abandoned to salt.
“All sorts of trees for food will grow on both banks of the stream. Their leaves will not wither; nor will their fruitage fail. Each month they will bear new fruit, because the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruitage will serve as food and their leaves for healing.”
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This is the territory that you will assign as the land inheritance of the 12 tribes of Israel, and Joseph will have two portions.
You will inherit it and receive equal shares. I swore to give this land to your forefathers, and now it is assigned to you as an inheritance.
“This is the boundary of the land on the northern side: It goes from the Great Sea by the way to Hethʹlon toward Zeʹdad,
Haʹmath, Be·roʹthah, and Sibʹra·im, which is between the territory of Damascus and the territory of Haʹmath, to Haʹzer-hatʹti·con, which is by the boundary of Ha·u·ranʹ.
So the boundary will run from the sea to Haʹzar-eʹnon, along the boundary of Damascus to the north, and the boundary of Haʹmath. This is the northern border.
“The eastern side runs between Ha·u·ranʹ and Damascus and along the Jordan between Gilʹe·ad and the land of Israel. You should measure from the boundary to the eastern sea. This is the eastern border.
“The southern border will be from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, then to the Wadi and to the Great Sea. This is the southern border.
“On the western side is the Great Sea, from the boundary up to a point opposite Leʹbo-haʹmath. This is the western border.”
“You are to apportion this land among yourselves, among the 12 tribes of Israel.
You should distribute it for inheritance among yourselves and to the foreigners residing with you who have had children while living among you; and they will be like native-born Israelites to you. They will receive an inheritance among the tribes of Israel along with you.
You should give the foreign resident an inheritance in the territory of the tribe where he has taken up residence,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, sing a dirge over Tyre,
and say to Tyre,‘You who dwell at the gateways of the sea,The merchant for the peoples of many islands,This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “O Tyre, you yourself have said, ‘I am perfect in beauty.’
Your territories are in the heart of the sea,And your builders have perfected your beauty.
They made all your planks from the juniper trees of Seʹnir,And they took a cedar from Lebʹa·non to make a mast for you.
They made your oars from oaks of Baʹshan,And your prow was of cypress inlaid with ivory from the islands of Kitʹtim.
Colorful linen from Egypt served as cloth for your sail,And your deck awnings were of blue thread and purple wool from the islands of E·liʹshah.
The inhabitants of Siʹdon and of Arʹvad were your rowers. Your own skilled men, O Tyre, were your sailors.
The experienced and skilled men of Geʹbal caulked your seams. All the ships of the sea and their mariners came to you to trade merchandise.
Men of Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army, your men of war. They hung their shields and helmets in you, and they brought you splendor.
The men of Arʹvad in your army were stationed on your walls all around,And brave men manned your towers. They hung circular shields all around your wallsAnd perfected your beauty.
“‘“Tarʹshish did business with you because of your abundant wealth. They exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your goods.
Jaʹvan, Tuʹbal, and Meʹshech traded with you, exchanging slaves and articles of copper for your merchandise.
The house of To·garʹmah exchanged horses and steeds and mules for your goods.
The people of Deʹdan traded with you; you employed merchants on many islands; they gave ivory tusks and ebony as your tribute.
Eʹdom did business with you because of the abundance of your products. They gave turquoise, purple wool, colorful embroidery, fine fabric, corals, and rubies in exchange for your goods.
“‘“Judah and the land of Israel traded with you, giving the wheat of Minʹnith, choice foods, honey, oil, and balsam in exchange for your goods.
“‘“Damascus did business with you because of the abundance of your products and all your wealth, trading the wine of Helʹbon and wool of Zaʹhar.
Veʹdan and Jaʹvan from Uʹzal gave wrought iron, cassia, and cane in exchange for your goods.
Deʹdan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding.
You employed the Arabs and all the chieftains of Keʹdar, who were merchants of lambs and rams and goats.
The merchants of Sheʹba and Raʹa·mah traded with you; they gave all sorts of the finest perfumes, precious stones, and gold in exchange for your goods.
Haʹran, Canʹneh, Eʹden, the merchants of Sheʹba, Asʹshur, and Chilʹmad traded with you.
In your marketplace they traded beautiful garments, cloaks made of blue material and colorful embroidery, and multicolored carpets, all bound and secured with ropes.
The ships of Tarʹshish were the caravans for your merchandise,So that you were filled and loaded down in the heart of the open sea.
Your rowers have brought you into heavy seas;The east wind has wrecked you in the heart of the open sea.
Your wealth, your goods, your merchandise, your mariners, and your sailors,Those caulking your seams, those trading your merchandise, and all the men of war—The entire multitude within you—They will all sink in the heart of the open sea on the day of your downfall.
When your sailors cry out, the coastlands will shudder.
All the oarsmen, the mariners, and the seamenWill come down from their ships and stand on the land.
They will raise their voices and cry out bitterly over youAs they throw dust on their heads and wallow in ashes.
They will make themselves bald and put on sackcloth;They will weep bitterly over you with intense wailing.
In their lamentation they will sing a dirge and chant over you: ‘Who is like Tyre, now silent in the midst of the sea?
When your goods came in from the open sea, you satisfied many peoples. Your abundant wealth and your merchandise enriched earth’s kings.
Now you have been wrecked in the open sea, in the deep waters,And all your merchandise and your people have sunk with you.
All the inhabitants of the islands will stare at you in amazement,And their kings will shudder with horror—their faces will be troubled.
The merchants among the nations will whistle over what happened to you. Your end will be sudden and terrible,And you will cease to exist for all time.’”’”
He then said to me: “Son of man, stand up on your feet that I may speak with you.”
When he spoke to me, spirit came into me and made me stand up on my feet so that I could hear the One speaking to me.
He went on to say to me: “Son of man, I am sending you to the people of Israel, to rebellious nations that have rebelled against me. They and their forefathers have transgressed against me down to this very day.
I am sending you to sons who are defiant and hardhearted, and you must say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says.’
As for them, whether they listen or refuse to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will certainly know that a prophet was among them.
“But you, son of man, do not be afraid of them, and do not be afraid of their words, although you are surrounded by briars and thorns and are dwelling among scorpions. Do not be afraid of their words, and do not be terrified by their faces, for they are a rebellious house.
You must speak my words to them, whether they listen or not, for they are a rebellious people.
“But you, son of man, listen to what I am telling you. Do not become rebellious like this rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what I am giving you.”
When I looked, I saw a hand stretched out to me, and in it I saw a written scroll.
When he spread it out before me, it had writing on both front and back. Dirges and mourning and wailing were written on it.
He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary facing east, and it was shut.
Then Jehovah said to me: “This gate will remain shut. It is not to be opened, and no human will enter by it; for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered through it, so it must remain shut.
However, the chieftain will sit in it to eat bread before Jehovah, for he is a chieftain. He will come in through the porch of the gate, and he will go out through it.”
Then he brought me through the north gate to the front of the temple. When I looked, I saw that the glory of Jehovah had filled the temple of Jehovah. So I fell with my face to the ground.
Then Jehovah said to me: “Son of man, pay attention, watch, and listen carefully to everything I tell you about the statutes and the laws of the temple of Jehovah. Pay close attention to the entryway of the temple and all the exits of the sanctuary.
You must say to the rebellious house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “That is enough of your detestable practices, O house of Israel.
When you bring foreigners who are uncircumcised in heart and flesh into my sanctuary, they profane my temple. You present my bread, fat and blood, while my covenant is being broken because of all your detestable practices.
You have not taken care of my holy things. Instead, you assign others to take care of the duties in my sanctuary.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “No foreigner living in Israel who is uncircumcised in heart and in flesh may enter my sanctuary.”’
“‘But the Levites who strayed far from me when Israel strayed from me to follow their disgusting idols will bear the consequences of their error.
And they will become ministers in my sanctuary to oversee the gates of the temple and to minister at the temple. They will slaughter the whole burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they will stand before the people to minister to them.
Because they ministered to them before their disgusting idols and became a stumbling block causing the house of Israel to sin, that is why I have raised my hand against them in an oath,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and they will bear the consequences of their error.
They will not approach me to serve as my priests or approach any of my holy or most holy things, and they will bear their shame because of the detestable things that they did.
But I will make them caretakers of the responsibilities of the temple, to take care of its service and all the things that should be done in it.’
“‘As for the Levitical priests, the sons of Zaʹdok, who took care of the responsibilities of my sanctuary when the Israelites strayed from me, they will approach me to minister to me, and they will stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘They are the ones who will enter my sanctuary, and they will approach my table to minister to me, and they will take care of their responsibilities to me.
“‘When they come into the gates of the inner courtyard, they should wear linen garments. They should not wear any wool when they minister in the gates of the inner courtyard or inside it.
They should wear linen turbans on their head, and linen shorts should cover their hips. They should not wear anything that makes them perspire.
Before they go out to the outer courtyard—the outer courtyard where the people are—they should remove the garments they were ministering in and place them in the holy dining rooms. Then they will put on other garments, so that they will not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.
They should not shave their head or let the hair of their head grow long. They should trim the hair of their heads.
The priests should not drink wine when they enter the inner courtyard.
They should not take a widow or a divorced woman as a wife; but they may marry either a virgin of the offspring of Israel or the widow of a priest.’
“‘They should instruct my people about the difference between what is holy and what is common; and they will teach them the difference between what is unclean and what is clean.
They should preside as judges in a legal case; they must judge it in harmony with my judicial decisions. They should keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my festivals and sanctify my sabbaths.
They should not approach any dead human, or they will become unclean. However, they may make themselves unclean for their father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or an unmarried sister.
And after the purification of a priest, they should count off seven days for him.
On the day he enters into the holy place, into the inner courtyard, to minister in the holy place, he should present his sin offering,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘And this will be their inheritance: I am their inheritance. You should not give them any possession in Israel, for I am their possession.
They will be the ones to eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel will become theirs.
The choicest of all the first ripe fruits and every sort of contribution from you will belong to the priests. And you should give the firstfruits of your coarse meal to the priest. This will cause a blessing to rest on your households.
The priests should not eat any bird or animal that was found dead or torn to pieces.’
As I was watching, I saw above the expanse that was over the heads of the cherubs something like a sapphire stone appearing above them, and its appearance resembled a throne.
Then he said to the man clothed in linen: “Enter between the wheelwork, under the cherubs, and fill both your hands with burning coals from between the cherubs and toss them over the city.” So he entered as I watched.
The cherubs were standing to the right of the house when the man entered, and the cloud filled the inner courtyard.
And the glory of Jehovah rose up from the cherubs to the threshold of the doorway of the house, and the house gradually became filled with the cloud, and the courtyard was full of the brightness of the glory of Jehovah.
And the sound of the wings of the cherubs could be heard in the outer courtyard, like the sound of God Almighty when he speaks.
Then he commanded the man clothed in linen: “Take fire from between the wheelwork, from between the cherubs,” and he entered and stood beside the wheel.
Then one of the cherubs stretched his hand out toward the fire that was between the cherubs. He took some and put it into both hands of the one clothed in linen, who now took it and went out.
The cherubs had what looked like the form of human hands under their wings.
As I was watching, I saw four wheels beside the cherubs, one wheel beside each cherub, and the wheels appeared to glow like chrysʹo·lite stone.
As for their appearance, the four of them were alike, looking as though a wheel were within a wheel.
When they moved, they could go in any of the four directions without turning, because they would go to the place where the head would face without turning.
Their entire bodies, their backs, their hands, their wings, and the wheels, the wheels of all four of them, were full of eyes all around.
As regards the wheels, I heard a voice that called to them, “Wheelwork!”
Each one had four faces. The first face was the face of the cherub, the second face was the face of a man, the third was the face of a lion, and the fourth was the face of an eagle.
And the cherubs would rise—they were the same living creatures that I had seen at the river Cheʹbar—
and when the cherubs moved, the wheels would move alongside them; and when the cherubs lifted up their wings to be high above the earth, the wheels would not turn or move from their side.
When these stood still, they would stand still; and when these rose, they would rise with them, for the spirit operating on the living creatures was in them.
Then the glory of Jehovah departed from over the threshold of the doorway of the house and stood still over the cherubs.
The cherubs now lifted up their wings and rose from the earth as I watched. The wheels were also alongside them when they departed. They stopped at the entrance of the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
These were the living creatures that I had seen under the God of Israel at the river Cheʹbar, so I came to know that they were cherubs.
All four had four faces, four wings, and what appeared to be human hands under their wings.
And the appearances of their faces were like the faces I had seen by the river Cheʹbar. They would each go straight forward.
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her detestable practices.
You must say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to Jerusalem: “Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Caʹnaan·ite. Your father was an Amʹor·ite, and your mother was a Hitʹtite.
As for your birth, on the day you were born, your umbilical cord was not cut, you were not washed in water to make you clean, you were not rubbed with salt, and you were not wrapped in cloths.
No one pitied you enough to do any of these things. No one had compassion for you. Instead, you were thrown into the open field because you were hated on the day you were born.
“‘“When I was passing by, I saw you kicking about in your own blood, and as you lay there in your blood, I said: ‘Keep living!’ Yes, I said to you lying there in your blood: ‘Keep living!’
I made you a very great multitude, like plants sprouting in the field, and you grew up and developed and wore the finest ornaments. Your breasts became firm, and your hair grew; but you were still naked and exposed.”’
“‘When I was passing by and saw you, I noticed that you were old enough for expressions of love. So I spread my garment over you and covered your nakedness and made an oath and entered into a covenant with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you became mine.
Furthermore, I washed you with water and rinsed away your blood and put oil on you.
I then clothed you with an embroidered garment and gave you fine leather sandals and wrapped you in fine linen, and I clothed you with costly garments.
I adorned you with ornaments and put bracelets on your hands and a necklace around your neck.
I also put a ring in your nose and earrings on your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.
You kept adorning yourself with gold and silver, and your clothing was fine linen, costly material, and an embroidered garment. Fine flour, honey, and oil were what you ate, and you grew to be extremely beautiful, and you became fit to be a queen.’”
“‘Your fame began to spread among the nations because of your beauty, for it was perfect because my own splendor I placed upon you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘But you began to trust in your beauty, and you became a prostitute because of your fame. You lavished your acts of prostitution on everyone passing by, and your beauty became his.
You took some of your garments and made colorful high places where you prostituted yourself—such things should not take place, nor should they ever happen.
You also took your beautiful jewelry made from the gold and silver that I had given to you and you made for yourself male images and prostituted yourself with them.
And you took your embroidered garments and covered them, and you offered them my oil and my incense.
And the bread that I had given to you—made from fine flour, oil, and honey that I gave you to eat—you also offered to them as a pleasing aroma. That is exactly what happened,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘You took your sons and your daughters whom you had borne to me, and you sacrificed these to idols to be devoured—have your acts of prostitution not gone far enough?
You slaughtered my sons, and you offered them as sacrifices by making them pass through the fire.
While engaging in all your detestable practices and acts of prostitution, you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and exposed, kicking about in your own blood.
After all your evil, woe, woe to you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘You built yourself a mound and made a high place for yourself in every public square.
You built your high places at the most prominent place of every street, and you turned your beauty into something detestable by offering yourself to everyone passing by, and you multiplied your acts of prostitution.
You prostituted yourself to the sons of Egypt, your lustful neighbors, and you offended me with your countless acts of prostitution.
Now I will bring my hand against you and diminish your food allowance and give you over to the will of the women who hate you, the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines, who were appalled because of your obscene conduct.
“‘Because you could not be satisfied, you then prostituted yourself to the sons of As·syrʹi·a, but after prostituting yourself to them, you still did not find satisfaction.
So you increased your prostitution toward the land of traders and toward the Chal·deʹans, but even then you did not find satisfaction.
How sick your heart was,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘when you did all these things, behaving like a brazen prostitute!
But when you built your mound at the most prominent place of every street and made your high place in every public square, you were not like a prostitute, because you refused any payment.
You are an adulterous wife who takes strangers instead of her own husband!
People give all prostitutes a gift, but you are the one who has given gifts to all those lusting after you, and you bribe them to come to you from all around to commit prostitution.
You are the opposite of other women who engage in prostitution. No one commits prostitution your way! You pay others, and they do not pay you. Your way is the opposite.’
“Therefore, O prostitute, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because your lust has been poured out and your nakedness has been exposed during your prostitution with your lovers and all your detestable, disgusting idols to which you even sacrificed the blood of your sons,
therefore I am collecting together all the lovers you have given pleasure to, all those you loved together with all those you hated. I will collect them together against you from all around and expose your nakedness to them, and they will see you completely naked.
“‘And I will punish you with the judgments that adulteresses and women shedding blood deserve, and your blood will be shed in rage and jealousy.
I will give you into their hand, and they will tear down your mounds, and your high places will be pulled down; and they will strip you of your garments and take your beautiful jewelry and leave you naked and exposed.
They will bring against you a crowd, and they will stone you and will slaughter you with their swords.
They will burn your houses with fire and execute judgment on you before the eyes of many women; and I will bring an end to your prostitution, and you will stop giving payment.
I will satisfy my rage against you, and my indignation will turn away from you; and I will be calm and no longer feel offended.’
“‘Because you did not remember the days of your youth and you have angered me by doing all these things, I will now bring the consequences of your ways on your own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and you will no longer carry on your obscene conduct and all your detestable practices.
“‘Look! Everyone who uses proverbs will apply this proverb to you: “Like mother, like daughter!”
You are the daughter of your mother, who despised her husband and her children. And you are the sister of your sisters, who despised their husbands and their children. Your mother was a Hitʹtite, and your father was an Amʹor·ite.’”
“‘Your older sister is Sa·marʹi·a, who is dwelling to the north of you with her daughters, and your younger sister, who is dwelling to the south of you, is Sodʹom with her daughters.
Not only did you walk in their ways and follow their detestable practices, but in a short while you were even more corrupt in all your conduct than they were.
As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘Sodʹom your sister and her daughters have not done what you and your daughters have done.
Look! This was the error of Sodʹom your sister: She and her daughters were proud and had an abundance of food and carefree tranquillity; yet they did not support the afflicted and the poor.
They remained haughty and carried on detestable practices in my sight, so I found it necessary to remove them.
“‘Nor did Sa·marʹi·a commit even half as many sins as you did. You kept making your detestable practices abound more than they have, to the point that your sisters appeared righteous because of all your detestable practices.
You must now bear your humiliation because you have justified the behavior of your sisters. On account of your sin of acting more detestably than they have, they are more righteous than you. So now, be ashamed and bear the humiliation of making your sisters appear righteous.’
“‘And I will gather their captives, the captives of Sodʹom and her daughters and the captives of Sa·marʹi·a and her daughters; I will also gather your captives along with them,
so that you may bear your humiliation; and you will feel humiliated because of what you have done by comforting them.
Your own sisters, Sodʹom and her daughters, will return to their former state, and Sa·marʹi·a and her daughters will return to their former state, and you along with your own daughters will return to your former state.
Sodʹom your sister was not worthy of your mention in the day of your pride,
before your own wickedness was exposed. Now the daughters of Syria and her neighbors reproach you, and the daughters of the Phi·lisʹtines, those all around you, treat you with scorn.
You will bear the consequences of your obscene conduct and your detestable practices,’ declares Jehovah.”
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will now do with you just as you have done, for you despised the oath by breaking my covenant.
But I myself will remember the covenant that I made with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish with you a permanent covenant.
You will remember your behavior and feel humiliated when you welcome your sisters, those older than you as well as those younger than you, and I will give them to you as daughters, but not because of your covenant.’
“‘And I myself will establish my covenant with you; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
Then you will remember and be too ashamed to open your mouth because of your humiliation, when I make an atonement for you despite all that you have done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“As for you, son of man, take a sharp sword for yourself to use as a barber’s razor. Shave your head and your beard, and then take scales to weigh and divide the hair into portions.
You will burn a third of it in the fire inside the city when the days of the siege are completed. Then you will take another third and strike it with the sword all around the city, and the last third you will scatter to the wind, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
“You must also take a few strands of them and wrap them up in the folds of your garment.
And take some more of them and throw them into the fire and incinerate them. From this a fire will spread to all the house of Israel.
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the middle of the nations, with lands all around her.
But she has rebelled against my judicial decisions and my statutes, acting more wickedly than the nations and the lands all around her. For they have rejected my judicial decisions, and they did not walk in my statutes.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you were more troublesome than the nations all around you and you did not walk in my statutes or carry out my judicial decisions but, instead, you followed the judicial decisions of the nations all around you,
this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O city, and I myself will execute judgment in your midst before the eyes of the nations.
I will do in you what I have never done before, and the likes of which I will not do again, because of all your detestable practices.
“‘“So fathers among you will eat their sons, and sons will eat their fathers, and I will execute judgment among you and scatter all the rest of you in every direction.”’
“‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘because it was my sanctuary that you defiled with all your disgusting idols and with all your detestable practices, I will also reject you; my eye will not feel sorry, and I will show no compassion.
A third of you will die by the pestilence or perish in your midst by famine. Another third will fall all around you by the sword. And I will scatter the last third in every direction, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
Then my anger will come to an end, and my wrath against them will subside, and I will be satisfied. And they will have to know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my insistence on exclusive devotion, when I have finished unleashing my wrath against them.
“‘I will make you a devastated place and an object of reproach among the surrounding nations and in the eyes of everyone passing by.
You will become an object of reproach and scorn, a warning example and a horror to the nations around you, when I execute judgment on you in anger and in wrath and with furious punishments. I, Jehovah, have spoken.
“‘I will send against them the deadly arrows of famine to destroy them. The arrows that I send will bring you to ruin. I will make the famine worse for you by cutting off your food supply.
I will send against you famine and vicious wild beasts, and they will bereave you of children. Pestilence and bloodshed will overwhelm you, and I will bring a sword against you. I, Jehovah, have spoken.’”
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The gate of the inner courtyard that is facing east should remain shut for the six workdays, but on the Sabbath day and on the day of the new moon it should be opened.
The chieftain will enter from outside by way of the porch of the gate, and he will stand by the doorpost of the gate. The priests will offer his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices, and he will bow down at the threshold of the gate and then go out. But the gate should not be shut until the evening.
The people of the land will also bow down before Jehovah at the entrance of that gate on the Sabbaths and on the new moons.
“‘The whole burnt offering that the chieftain will present to Jehovah on the Sabbath day should consist of six sound male lambs and a sound ram.
The grain offering will be an eʹphah for the ram and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
On the day of the new moon the offering will consist of a sound young bull of the herd, six male lambs, and a ram; they should be sound ones.
He should offer as a grain offering an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he can afford for the male lambs. And he should offer a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
“‘When the chieftain enters, he should enter by way of the porch of the gate, and he should go out the same way.
And when the people of the land come in before Jehovah during the festivals, those who come in to worship through the north gate should go out through the south gate, and those who come in through the south gate should go out through the north gate. No one should go back by way of the gate through which he entered, for they should exit through the gate that is opposite them.
As for the chieftain who is among them, he should come in when they come in, and he should go out when they go out.
During the festivals and the festal seasons the grain offering should be an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin of oil with each eʹphah.
“‘If the chieftain provides a whole burnt offering or communion sacrifices as a voluntary offering to Jehovah, the gate facing east will be opened for him, and he will provide his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices just as he does on the Sabbath day. After he goes out, the gate should be shut behind him.
“‘Each day you should provide a sound male lamb in its first year as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. You should do this morning by morning.
Along with it, each morning you should provide a sixth of an eʹphah as a grain offering, along with a third of a hin of oil for sprinkling on the fine flour as a regular grain offering to Jehovah. This is a lasting statute.
They must provide the male lamb, the grain offering, and the oil each morning as a regular whole burnt offering.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘If the chieftain gives a gift to each one of his sons as an inheritance, it will become the property of his sons. It is their possession by inheritance.
But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it will be his until the year of liberty; and then it will return to the chieftain. Only the inheritance of his sons will be permanently theirs.
The chieftain should not take any of the inheritance of the people by forcing them off their property. He should give his sons an inheritance from his own property, so that no one among my people may be driven from his property.’”
Then he brought me in by the entryway that was beside the gate leading to the holy dining rooms of the priests, which faced north, and there I saw a place at the rear toward the west.
He said to me: “This is the place where the priests will boil the guilt offering and the sin offering and where they will bake the grain offering, so that they will not carry anything out to the outer courtyard and transmit holiness to the people.”
He brought me out to the outer courtyard and led me past the four corners of the courtyard, and I saw a courtyard by each corner of the outer courtyard.
At the four corners of the courtyard were small courtyards, 40 cubits long and 30 cubits wide. All four of them were the same size.
There were ledges all around the four of them, and beneath the ledges were built places to boil the offerings.
Then he said to me: “These are the houses where the ministers of the temple boil the sacrifice of the people.”
And some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, these men are determined to follow their disgusting idols, and they have set up a stumbling block that causes people to sin. Should I let them inquire of me?
Now speak with them and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “If an Israelite is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block causing people to sin and he then comes to inquire of a prophet, I, Jehovah, will answer him appropriately according to his many disgusting idols.
For I will cause terror in the hearts of the house of Israel because they have all withdrawn from me and have gone after their disgusting idols.”’
“So tell the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Come back and turn away from your disgusting idols and turn your faces away from all your detestable practices.
For if any Israelite or foreign resident living in Israel separates himself from me and is determined to follow his disgusting idols and sets up a stumbling block that causes people to sin and then comes to inquire of my prophet, I, Jehovah, I will personally answer him.
I will set my face against that man and make him a warning sign and a proverbial saying, and I will cut him off from my people; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’
“‘But if the prophet is fooled and gives a response, it is I, Jehovah, who have fooled that prophet. I will then stretch out my hand against him and annihilate him from my people Israel.
They will have to bear their guilt; the guilt of the inquirer will be the same as the guilt of the prophet,
so that the house of Israel may stop wandering away from me and stop defiling themselves by all their transgressions. And they will be my people, and I will be their God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, if a land sins against me by acting unfaithfully, I will stretch out my hand against it and destroy its food supply, and I will send famine upon it and cut off man and animal from it.”
“‘Even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—were within it, they would be able to save only themselves because of their righteousness,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“‘Or suppose I make vicious wild animals pass through the land and they depopulate it and make it a wasteland without anyone passing through because of the wild animals.
As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘even if these three men were in it, they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves, and the land would become desolate.’”
“‘Or suppose I bring a sword against that land and say: “Let a sword pass through the land,” and cut off from it both man and animal,
even if these three men were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves.’”
“‘Or suppose I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my rage on it with bloodshed to cut off from it man and animal,
even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘they would save neither their sons nor their daughters; they would save only themselves because of their righteousness.’”
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘So it will be when I send my four punishments—sword, famine, vicious wild animal, and pestilence—against Jerusalem to cut off man and animal from it.
However, some left in it will escape and be brought out, both sons and daughters. They are coming to you, and when you see their ways and their deeds, you will certainly be comforted over the calamity that I brought on Jerusalem, over everything that I did to it.’”
“‘They will comfort you when you see their ways and their deeds, and you will know that it was not without cause that I did what I had to do to it,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, tell the leader of Tyre, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because your heart has become haughty, you keep saying, ‘I am a god. I sit on the throne of a god in the heart of the sea.’ But you are only a man, not a god,Though in your heart you feel that you are a god.
Look! You are wiser than Daniel. No secrets have been hidden from you.
You have made yourself wealthy by your wisdom and your discernment,And you keep storing up gold and silver in your treasuries.
Your skillful trading brought you great wealth,And your heart grew haughty because of your wealth.”’
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Because in your heart you feel that you are a god,
I am bringing foreigners against you, the most ruthless of the nations,And they will draw their swords against the beauty of your wisdomAnd defile your glorious splendor.
They will bring you down to the pit,And you will die a violent death in the heart of the open sea.
Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’ to the one killing you? You will be a mere man, not a god, in the hand of those defiling you.”’
‘By the hand of foreigners, you will die the death of the uncircumcised ones,For I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, sing a dirge concerning the king of Tyre, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “You were the model of perfection,Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
You were in Eʹden, the garden of God. You were adorned with every precious stone—Ruby, topaz, and jasper; chrysʹo·lite, onyx, and jade; sapphire, turquoise, and emerald;And their settings and mountings were made of gold. They were prepared on the day you were created.
I assigned you as the anointed covering cherub. You were on the holy mountain of God, and you walked about among fiery stones.
You were faultless in your ways from the day you were createdUntil unrighteousness was found in you.
Because of your abundant trade,You became filled with violence, and you began to sin. So I will cast you out as profane from the mountain of God and destroy you,O covering cherub, away from the stones of fire.
Your heart became haughty because of your beauty. You corrupted your wisdom because of your own glorious splendor. I will throw you down to the earth. I will make you a spectacle before kings.
Because of your great guilt and your dishonest trading, you have profaned your sanctuaries. I will cause a fire to break out in your midst, and it will consume you. I will reduce you to ashes on the earth before all those looking at you.
All who knew you among the peoples will stare at you in amazement. Your end will be sudden and terrible,And you will cease to exist for all time.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Siʹdon, and prophesy against her.
You should say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Siʹdon, and I will be glorified in your midst;And people will have to know that I am Jehovah when I execute judgment on her and I am sanctified in her.
I will send pestilence into her and blood will flow in her streets. The slain will fall in her midst when the sword comes against her from all sides;And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
“‘“Then the house of Israel will no longer be surrounded by injurious briars and painful thorns, those who treat them with scorn; and people will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “When I regather the house of Israel from among the peoples where they were scattered, I will be sanctified among them in the eyes of the nations. And they will dwell on their land that I gave to my servant Jacob.
They will dwell on it in security and build houses and plant vineyards, and they will dwell in security when I execute judgment on all those around them who treat them with scorn; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“As for you, son of man, are you prepared to pronounce judgment on the bloodguilty city and to make known to her all her detestable things?
You are to say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “O city that sheds blood within herself, whose time is coming, who makes disgusting idols to defile herself,
your bloodshed has made you guilty, and your disgusting idols have made you unclean. You have hastened the end of your days, and the end of your years has come. That is why I will make you an object of reproach to the nations and an object of mockery to all the lands.
The lands nearby and those far away from you will mock you, you whose name is unclean and who are filled with turmoil.
Look! Each of the chieftains of Israel among you uses his authority to shed blood.
Within you they treat their father and mother with contempt. They defraud the foreign resident, and they mistreat the fatherless child and the widow.”’”
“‘My holy places you despise, and my sabbaths you profane.
Within you are slanderers intent on shedding blood. Within you they eat sacrifices on the mountains and carry on obscene conduct in your midst.
Within you they dishonor their father’s bed, and they violate a woman unclean in her menstruation.
Within you one man acts detestably with his neighbor’s wife, another defiles his own daughter-in-law with obscene conduct, and another violates his sister, the daughter of his own father.
Within you they take a bribe to shed blood. You lend on interest or for a profit, and you extort money from your neighbors. Yes, you have entirely forgotten me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Look! I clap my hands in disgust at the dishonest gain you have made and over the acts of bloodshed in your midst.
Will your courage endure and your hands remain strong in the days when I take action against you? I myself, Jehovah, have spoken, and I will take action.
I will scatter you among the nations and disperse you among the lands, and I will put an end to your uncleanness.
And you will be dishonored before the nations, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, the house of Israel has become like worthless dross to me. All of them are copper and tin and iron and lead in a furnace. They have become the dross of silver.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because all of you have become like worthless dross, I am collecting you together inside Jerusalem.
Just as silver and copper and iron and lead and tin are collected inside a furnace in order to blow fire upon them and melt them, so I will collect you together in my anger and in my rage, and I will blow upon you and make you melt.
I will bring you together and blow upon you with the fire of my fury, and you will be melted inside of her.
Just as silver is melted in a furnace, so you will be melted inside her; and you will have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have poured out my rage on you.’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that will not be cleansed or rained on in the day of indignation.
Her prophets have conspired within her, like a roaring lion tearing prey. They are devouring people. They are seizing treasure and precious things. They have made many widows within her.
Her priests have violated my law, and they keep profaning my holy places. They make no distinction between what is holy and what is common, and they fail to make known what is unclean and what is clean, and they refuse to observe my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
Her princes in her midst are like wolves tearing prey; they shed blood and kill people to make dishonest gain.
But her prophets have plastered over their deeds with whitewash. They see false visions and give lying divination, and they say: “This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,” when Jehovah himself has not spoken.
The people of the land have defrauded and committed robbery, they have mistreated the needy and the poor, and they have defrauded the foreign resident and denied him justice.’
“‘I was looking for a man from among them who would repair the stone wall or stand before me in the breach in behalf of the land, so that it would not be destroyed, but I found no one.
So I will pour out my indignation on them and exterminate them with the fire of my fury. I will bring the consequences of their way on their own head,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, how does the wood of the vine compare with that of any other tree or branch from the trees of the forest?
Can a pole from it be used to do work? Or do people make a peg from it to hang utensils on?
Look! It is thrown into the fire for fuel, and the fire consumes both ends and scorches the middle. Is it now fit for any work?
Even when it was whole, it could not be used for anything. How much less useful it will be when the fire has consumed and scorched it!”
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Just like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given as fuel for the fire, so I will deal with the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
I have set my face against them. They have escaped from the fire, but fire will consume them. And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I set my face against them.’”
“‘And I will make the land desolate because they have acted unfaithfully,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And in the 12th year, in the 12th month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, sing a dirge concerning Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and say to him,‘You were like a strong young lion of the nations,But you have been silenced. You were like a sea monster, thrashing about in your rivers,Muddying the waters with your feet and fouling the rivers.’
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘By means of an assembly of many nations I will cast my net over you,And they will haul you up in my dragnet.
I will abandon you on the land;I will cast you onto the open field. I will cause all the birds of the sky to settle on you,And I will satisfy the wild beasts of the whole earth with you.
I will cast your flesh on the mountainsAnd fill the valleys with your remains.
I will drench the land with your gushing blood up to the mountains,And it will fill the streams.’
‘And when you are extinguished I will cover the heavens and darken their stars. I will cover the sun with clouds,And the moon will not give its light.
I will darken all the shining luminaries in the heavens because of you,And I will cover your land with darkness,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will distress the hearts of many peoples when I lead your captives to other nations,To lands that you have not known.
I will cause many peoples to be awestruck,And their kings will shudder in horror over you when I brandish my sword before them. They will tremble continually, each fearing for his life,On the day of your downfall.’
For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The sword of the king of Babylon will come upon you.
I will cause your hordes to fall by the swords of mighty warriors,The most ruthless of the nations, all of them. They will bring down the pride of Egypt, and all her hordes will be annihilated.
I will destroy all her livestock beside her abundant waters,And no foot of a human or hoof of the livestock will muddy them again.’
‘At that time I will clear up their waters,And I will make their rivers flow like oil,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘When I make Egypt a desolate wasteland, a land stripped of all that filled it,When I strike down all the inhabitants in it,They will have to know that I am Jehovah.
This is a dirge, and people will certainly chant it;The daughters of the nations will chant it. They will chant it over Egypt and over all its hordes,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
Then in the 12th year, on the 15th day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, wail over the hordes of Egypt and bring her down to the land below, her and the daughters of mighty nations, with those going down into the pit.
“‘Whom do you surpass in beauty? Go down, and lie with the uncircumcised ones!’
“‘They will fall among those slain by the sword. She has been given to the sword; drag her away along with all her hordes.
“‘From the depths of the Grave the mightiest warriors will speak to him and his helpers. They will certainly go down and will lie just like the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
As·syrʹi·a is there with all her assembly. Their graves are all around him, all of them fallen by the sword.
Her graves are in the depths of the pit, and her assembly is all around her grave, all of them struck down by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
“‘Eʹlam is there with all her hordes around her grave, all of them fallen by the sword. They have gone down uncircumcised to the land below, those who caused terror in the land of the living. Now they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
They have made a bed for her among the slain, along with all her hordes around her graves. All of them are uncircumcised, slain by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living; and they will bear their shame with those going down into the pit. He has been put among the slain.
“‘There is where Meʹshech and Tuʹbal and all their hordes are. Her graves are all around him. All of them are uncircumcised, pierced through by the sword, because they caused terror in the land of the living.
Will they not lie with mighty uncircumcised warriors who have fallen, who went down to the Grave with their weapons of war? And they will put their swords under their heads and their sins on their bones, because these mighty warriors terrorized the land of the living.
But as for you, you will be crushed among the uncircumcised ones, and you will lie with those who were slain by the sword.
“‘Eʹdom is there, her kings and all her chieftains, who despite their mightiness, were laid among those slain by the sword; they too will lie with the uncircumcised ones and with those going down into the pit.
“‘There all the princes of the north are, along with all the Si·doʹni·ans, who have gone down in disgrace with the slain, despite the terror caused by their mightiness. They will lie uncircumcised with those who were slain by the sword and will bear their shame with those going down into the pit.
“‘Pharʹaoh will see all of these, and he will be comforted over all that happened to his hordes; Pharʹaoh and all his army will be slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Because he caused terror in the land of the living, Pharʹaoh and all his hordes will be laid to rest with the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
“And you, son of man, take a brick and put it in front of you. Engrave on it a city—Jerusalem.
Lay siege to it, build a siege wall against it, raise up a siege rampart against it, set up camps against it, and surround it with battering rams.
Take an iron griddle and place it as an iron wall between you and the city. Then set your face against it, and it will be under siege; you are to besiege it. This is a sign to the house of Israel.
“Then you should lie on your left side and lay the guilt of the house of Israel on yourself. You will carry their guilt for the number of days that you lie on your side.
And I will impose on you 390 days, corresponding to the years of their guilt, and you will carry the guilt of the house of Israel.
And you must complete them. “Then for a second time you will lie down, on your right side, and you will carry the guilt of the house of Judah for 40 days. A day for a year, a day for a year, is what I have given you.
And you will turn your face toward the siege of Jerusalem with your arm bared, and you must prophesy against it.
“Look! I will tie you with ropes so that you cannot turn from your one side to your other side until you have completed the days of your siege.
“And you should take wheat, barley, broad beans, lentils, millet, and spelt and put them in one container and make them into bread for yourself. For the number of the days that you are lying on your side, 390 days, you will eat it.
You will weigh out and eat 20 shekels of food per day. You will eat it at set times.
“And you will drink water by measure, a sixth of a hin. You will drink it at set times.
“You will eat it as you would a round barley loaf; you will bake it before their eyes, using dried human excrement as fuel.”
Jehovah went on to say: “This is how the Israelites will eat their bread—unclean—among the nations where I will disperse them.”
I then said: “Not that, Sovereign Lord Jehovah! From my youth until now, I have not been defiled by eating meat from an animal found dead or a torn animal, and no unclean meat has entered my mouth.”
So he said to me: “All right, I will allow you to use cattle manure instead of human excrement, and you will bake your bread over it.”
He then said to me: “Son of man, here I am cutting off your food supply in Jerusalem, and with great anxiety they will eat their bread ration by weight, and in horror they will drink their water ration by measure.
This will happen so that lacking bread and water, they may look in shock at one another and waste away because of their error.
“And you, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am against you, Gog, head chieftain of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal.
I will turn you around and lead you and make you come up from the remotest parts of the north and bring you in upon the mountains of Israel.
I will knock your bow out of your left hand and make your arrows fall from your right hand.
On the mountains of Israel you will fall, you and all your troops and the peoples who will be with you. I will give you as food to all kinds of birds of prey and the wild beasts of the field.”’
“‘You will fall on the open field, for I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘And I will send fire against Maʹgog and against those who are inhabiting the islands in security, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.
I will make my holy name known among my people Israel, and I will not allow my holy name to be profaned any longer; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.’
“‘Yes, this is coming, and it will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘This is the day I have spoken about.
The inhabitants of the cities of Israel will go out and make fires with the weapons—the bucklers and shields, the bows and arrows, the war clubs and lances. And they will use them to light fires for seven years.
They will not need to take wood from the field or gather firewood from the forests because they will use the weapons to light fires.’ “‘They will take spoil from those who despoiled them and plunder from those who had been plundering them,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘On that day I will give Gog a burial place there in Israel, in the valley of those who travel east of the sea, and it will block the path of those passing through. That is where they will bury Gog and all his hordes, and they will call it the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
The house of Israel will spend seven months burying them in order to cleanse the land.
All the people of the land will work at burying them, and this will bring them fame in the day that I glorify myself,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘Men will be assigned to pass through the land constantly and bury the bodies left remaining on the surface of the earth, in order to cleanse it. They will continue the search for seven months.
When those who pass through the land see a human bone, they will set up a marker beside it. Then those assigned to do the burying will bury it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog.
And there will also be a city there named Ha·moʹnah. And they will cleanse the land.’
“As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Say to every sort of bird and to all the wild beasts of the field, “Gather yourselves together and come. Gather all around my sacrifice that I am preparing for you, a great sacrifice on the mountains of Israel. You will eat flesh and drink blood.
You will eat the flesh of mighty ones and drink the blood of the chieftains of the earth—the rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—all the fattened animals of Baʹshan.
You will gorge yourselves on fat and drink blood until you are drunk from the sacrifice that I prepare for you.”’
“‘At my table you will be filled up with horses and charioteers, mighty ones and all sorts of warriors,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘I will display my glory among the nations, and all the nations will see the judgment that I have executed and the power that I have demonstrated among them.
From that day on the house of Israel will have to know that I am Jehovah their God.
And the nations will have to know that the house of Israel went into exile because of their own error, because they were unfaithful to me. So I hid my face from them and handed them over to their enemies, and they all fell by the sword.
I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and I hid my face from them.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will restore the captives of Jacob and have mercy on the whole house of Israel; and I will zealously defend my holy name.
After they have been humiliated for all their unfaithfulness toward me, they will dwell securely on their land, with no one to make them afraid.
When I bring them back from the peoples and collect them together from the lands of their enemies, I will also sanctify myself among them before the eyes of many nations.’
“‘They will have to know that I am Jehovah their God when I send them into exile among the nations and then gather them back to their land, not leaving any of them behind.
I will not hide my face from them any longer, for I will pour out my spirit on the house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
Now in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me to inquire of Jehovah.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, speak with the elders of Israel, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you coming to inquire of me? ‘As surely as I am alive, I will not respond to your inquiry,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“Are you ready to judge them? Are you ready to judge them, son of man? Make them know the detestable things that their forefathers did.
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In the day I chose Israel, I also swore to the offspring of the house of Jacob, and I made myself known to them in the land of Egypt. Yes, I swore to them and said, ‘I am Jehovah your God.’
In that day I swore that I would bring them out of the land of Egypt to a land that I had searched out for them, one flowing with milk and honey. It was the most beautiful of all the lands.
I then said to them, ‘Each of you must throw away the detestable things that are before your eyes; do not defile yourselves with the disgusting idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.’
“‘“But they rebelled against me and were not willing to listen to me. They did not throw away the detestable things that were before them, and they would not abandon the disgusting idols of Egypt. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger fully against them in the land of Egypt.
But I acted for the sake of my name so that it would not be profaned before the nations among whom they were living. For I made myself known to them before these nations when I brought them out of the land of Egypt.
So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them into the wilderness.
“‘“I then gave them my statutes and made my judicial decisions known to them, so that the man who follows them may have life by them.
I also gave my sabbaths to them as a sign between me and them, so that they would know that I, Jehovah, am the one sanctifying them.
“‘“But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes, and they rejected my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. They utterly profaned my sabbaths. So I promised to pour out my fury on them in the wilderness to exterminate them.
I acted for the sake of my own name so that it would not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
I also swore to them in the wilderness that I would not bring them into the land that I had given them—a land flowing with milk and honey, the most beautiful of all the lands—
because they rejected my judicial decisions, they did not walk in my statutes, and they profaned my sabbaths, for their heart was following after their disgusting idols.
“‘“But I felt sorry for them, and I did not destroy them; I did not exterminate them in the wilderness.
I said to their sons in the wilderness, ‘Do not walk in the regulations of your forefathers or keep their judgments or defile yourselves with their disgusting idols.
I am Jehovah your God. Walk in my statutes, and keep my judicial decisions, and carry them out.
And sanctify my sabbaths, and they will serve as a sign between me and you for you to know that I am Jehovah your God.’
“‘“But the sons began to rebel against me. They did not walk in my statutes, and they did not observe and carry out my judicial decisions, which if a man follows them, he will have life by them. My sabbaths they profaned. So I promised to pour out my rage on them and to unleash my anger against them fully in the wilderness.
But I refrained and acted for the sake of my own name, so that it should not be profaned before the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
Also, I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them among the lands,
because they did not carry out my judicial decisions and they rejected my statutes, they profaned my sabbaths, and they followed after the disgusting idols of their forefathers.
I also allowed them to follow regulations that were not good and judicial decisions by which they could not have life.
I let them become defiled by their own sacrifices—when they made every firstborn child pass through the fire—in order to make them desolate, so that they would know that I am Jehovah.”’
“So speak to the house of Israel, O son of man, and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “In this way also, your forefathers blasphemed me by acting unfaithfully against me.
I brought them into the land that I swore to give them. When they saw all the high hills and leafy trees, they began offering their sacrifices and their offensive offerings. They presented the pleasing aromas of their sacrifices and poured out their drink offerings there.
So I asked them, ‘What is the meaning of this high place to which you go? (It is still called High Place to this day.)’”’
“Now say to the house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Are you defiling yourselves the same way your forefathers did by going after their disgusting idols to commit spiritual prostitution with them?
And are you still defiling yourselves to this day by offering sacrifices to all your disgusting idols, making your sons pass through the fire? Should I at the same time respond to your inquiry, O house of Israel?”’ “‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will not respond to your inquiry.
And what you have in mind when you say, “Let us become like the nations, like the families of the other lands, who worship wood and stone,” it will never happen.’”
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will rule as king over you with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
I will bring you out from the peoples and collect you together out of the lands where you have been scattered with a mighty hand, with an outstretched arm, and with an outpouring of rage.
I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples and enter into judgment with you there face-to-face.
“‘Just as I entered into judgment with your forefathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘I will make you pass under the shepherd’s staff and bring you under obligation to the covenant.
But I will remove from you the rebels and those transgressing against me. For I will bring them out of the land of their foreign residence, but they will not enter the land of Israel; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“As for you, O house of Israel, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Each of you go and serve his disgusting idols. But afterward if you do not listen to me, you will no longer be able to profane my holy name by your sacrifices and your disgusting idols.’
“‘For in my holy mountain, on a high mountain of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘is where the whole house of Israel, all of them, will serve me in the land. I will take pleasure in them there, and I will require your contributions and the firstfruits of your offerings, all your holy things.
Because of the pleasing aroma, I will take pleasure in you when I bring you out from the peoples and collect you together from the lands to which you have been scattered; and I will be sanctified among you before the eyes of the nations.’
“‘And you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I bring you to the land of Israel, into the land that I swore to give to your forefathers.
And there you will remember your conduct and all your deeds by which you defiled yourselves, and you will loathe yourselves because of all the bad things that you did.
Then you will have to know that I am Jehovah when I deal with you for the sake of my name, not according to your wicked conduct or according to your corrupted dealings, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face in the direction of the southern quarter and proclaim to the south, and prophesy to the forest of the field of the south.
Say to the forest of the south, ‘Hear the word of Jehovah. This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am setting a fire ablaze against you, and it will consume every green tree and every dry tree in you. The burning flame will not be extinguished, and every face will be scorched by it, from south to north.
And all flesh will see that I myself, Jehovah, have set it afire, so that it will not be extinguished.”’”
And I said: “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! They are saying about me, ‘Is he not just speaking in riddles?’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, you are living in a rebellious house. They have eyes to see, but they do not see, and ears to hear, but they do not hear, for they are a rebellious house.
As for you, son of man, prepare for yourself luggage for going into exile. Then, during the day while they are watching, you must go into exile. Go into exile from your home to another place while they are watching. Perhaps they will take notice, even though they are a rebellious house.
Bring out your luggage packed for going into exile during the day while they are watching, and then in the evening while they are watching, you should leave like someone being taken into exile.
“While they are watching, bore a hole in the wall, and carry your belongings out through it.
While they are watching, put your belongings on your shoulder and carry them out in the darkness. Cover your face so that you cannot see the ground, for I am making you a sign to the house of Israel.”
I did just as I was commanded. During the day I brought out my luggage as luggage for going into exile, and in the evening I bored a hole through the wall by hand. And when it was dark, I took out my belongings, carrying them on my shoulder right before their eyes.
In the morning the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, did not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, ask you, ‘What are you doing?’
Tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This pronouncement concerns the chieftain in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel within the city.”’
“Say, ‘I am a sign for you. Just as I have done, that is what will be done to them. They will go into exile, into captivity.
The chieftain who is among them will carry his belongings on his shoulder and leave in the darkness. He will bore a hole in the wall and carry his belongings out through it. He will cover his face so that he cannot see the ground.’
I will cast my net over him, and he will be caught in my hunting net. Then I will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the Chal·deʹans, but he will not see it; and there he will die.
And all those around him, his helpers and his troops, I will scatter in every direction; and I will draw out a sword to chase after them.
And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I disperse them among the nations and I scatter them among the lands.
But I will spare a few of them from the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, so that they may tell about all their detestable practices among the nations where they will go; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, you should eat your bread with trembling and drink your water with agitation and anxiety.
Say to the people of the land, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: “They will eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water with horror, for their land will become completely desolate because of the violence of all those dwelling in it.
The inhabited cities will be devastated, and the land will become a wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, what is this proverb that you have in Israel that says, ‘The days go by, and every vision comes to nothing’?
Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I will cause this saying to cease, and they will no more use it as a proverb in Israel.”’ But tell them, ‘The days are near, and every vision will take place.’
For there will no longer be any false vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel.
‘“For I, Jehovah, will speak. Whatever word I speak will be done without any more delay. In your days, O rebellious house, I will say the word and carry it out,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, this is what the people of Israel are saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for a long time from now, and he is prophesying about the distant future.’
Therefore say to them, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “‘None of my words will be delayed; whatever I say will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’”
“These are the names of the tribes, starting from the northern extremity: Dan’s portion runs along the way of Hethʹlon to Leʹbo-haʹmath to Haʹzar-eʹnan, along the boundary of Damascus northward, beside Haʹmath; and it extends from the eastern to the western border.
Ashʹer’s portion is on the boundary of Dan, from the eastern border to the western border.
Naphʹta·li’s portion is on the boundary of Ashʹer, from the eastern border to the western border.
Ma·nasʹseh’s portion is on the boundary of Naphʹta·li, from the eastern border to the western border.
Eʹphra·im’s portion is on the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh, from the eastern border to the western border.
Reuʹben’s portion is on the boundary of Eʹphra·im, from the eastern border to the western border.
Judah’s portion is on the boundary of Reuʹben, from the eastern border to the western border.
On the boundary of Judah, from the eastern border to the western border, the contribution that you are to set apart should be 25,000 cubits wide and correspond to the length of the other tribal portions from the eastern border to the western border. The sanctuary will be in the middle of it.
“The contribution that you are to set apart to Jehovah will be 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 wide.
This will be the holy contribution for the priests. It will be 25,000 cubits on the north side, 10,000 on the west, 10,000 on the east, and 25,000 on the south. The sanctuary of Jehovah will be in the middle of it.
It will be for the sanctified priests from the sons of Zaʹdok, those who took care of their responsibilities toward me and did not go astray when the Israelites and the Levites went astray.
They will have a portion of the contribution of the land set apart as something most holy, on the boundary of the Levites.
“Right next to the territory of the priests, the Levites will have a portion 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 wide. (The whole length will be 25,000 long and 10,000 wide.)
They should not sell, exchange, or transfer any of this choicest portion of the land, for it is something holy to Jehovah.
“The remaining area that is 5,000 cubits wide alongside the 25,000 cubit border will be for common use of the city, for housing and pasture ground. The city will be in the middle of it.
These are the city’s measurements: The northern border is 4,500 cubits, the southern border is 4,500, the eastern border is 4,500, and the western border is 4,500.
The pasture ground of the city will be 250 cubits to the north, 250 to the south, 250 to the east, and 250 to the west.
“The length of the remaining portion will correspond to the holy contribution, 10,000 cubits to the east and 10,000 to the west. It will correspond to the holy contribution, and its produce will provide food for those serving the city.
Those who are serving the city from all the tribes of Israel will cultivate it.
“The whole contribution is 25,000 cubits square. You should set it aside as the holy contribution along with the possession of the city.
“What remains on both sides of the holy contribution and of the possession of the city will belong to the chieftain. It will be alongside the 25,000 cubit borders that are east and west of the contribution. It will correspond to those adjoining portions, and it will be for the chieftain. The holy contribution and the sanctuary of the temple will be in the middle of it.
“The possession of the Levites and the possession of the city will be between what belongs to the chieftain. The chieftain’s territory will be between the boundary of Judah and the boundary of Benjamin.
“As for the remaining tribes, Benjamin’s portion is from the eastern border to the western border.
Simʹe·on’s portion is by the boundary of Benjamin, from the eastern border to the western border.
Isʹsa·char’s portion is by the boundary of Simʹe·on, from the eastern border to the western border.
Zebʹu·lun’s portion is by the boundary of Isʹsa·char, from the eastern border to the western border.
Gad’s portion is by the boundary of Zebʹu·lun, from the eastern border to the western border.
The southern border by the boundary of Gad will run from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, to the Wadi and on to the Great Sea.
“This is the land that you should distribute as an inheritance to the tribes of Israel, and these will be their portions,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“These will be the exits of the city: The northern side will measure 4,500 cubits.
“The gates of the city will be named according to the tribes of Israel. Of the three gates on the north, there is one gate for Reuʹben, one gate for Judah, and one gate for Leʹvi.
“The eastern side will be 4,500 cubits long, and there are three gates: one gate for Joseph, one gate for Benjamin, and one gate for Dan.
“The southern side will measure 4,500 cubits, with three gates: one gate for Simʹe·on, one gate for Isʹsa·char, and one gate for Zebʹu·lun.
“The western side will be 4,500 cubits long, with three gates: one gate for Gad, one gate for Ashʹer, and one gate for Naphʹta·li.
“The perimeter will be 18,000 cubits. And the name of the city from that day on will be Jehovah Is There.”
And the word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“What does this proverb that you quote in the land of Israel mean, ‘Fathers have eaten sour grapes, but the teeth of the sons are set on edge’?
“‘As surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘you will not continue to quote this saying in Israel.
Look! All the souls—to me they belong. As the soul of the father so also the soul of the son—to me they belong. The soul who sins is the one who will die.
“‘Suppose that a man is righteous and does what is just and right.
He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife or have relations with a woman who is menstruating;
he does not mistreat anyone, but he returns what a debtor has given him in pledge; he does not rob anyone, but he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
he does not charge interest or engage in usury, but he refrains from acting with injustice; he executes true justice between one man and another;
and he keeps walking in my statutes and observing my judicial decisions in order to act in faithfulness. Such a man is righteous and will surely keep living,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“‘But suppose that he has become father to a son who is a robber or a murderer or who does any of these other things
(though the father has not done any of these things)—he eats idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains, defiles his neighbor’s wife,
mistreats the needy and the poor, takes things by robbery, does not return a pledge, looks up to the disgusting idols, engages in detestable practices,
engages in usury and charges interest—then the son will not keep living. Because of all these detestable things that he has done, he will surely be put to death. His own blood will be upon him.
“‘But suppose that a father has a son who sees all the sins his father has committed, and though he sees them, he does not do such things.
He does not eat idolatrous sacrifices on the mountains; he does not look up to the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; he does not defile his neighbor’s wife;
he does not mistreat anyone; he does not seize what was pledged; he does not take anything in robbery; he gives his own food to the hungry one and covers the naked one with a garment;
he refrains from oppressing the poor; he does not engage in usury or charge interest; and he carries out my judicial decisions and walks in my statutes. Such a man will not die because of the error of his father. He will surely keep living.
But because his father practiced fraud, robbed his brother, and did what was wrong among his people, he will die for his error.
“‘But you will say: “Why does the son not bear guilt because of his father’s error?” Since the son has done what is just and righteous, has kept all my statutes and has observed them, he will surely keep living.
The soul who sins is the one who will die. A son will bear no guilt because of the error of his father, and a father will bear no guilt because of the error of his son. The righteousness of the righteous one will be accounted to him alone, and the wickedness of the wicked one will be accounted to him alone.
“‘Now if someone wicked turns away from all the sins he has committed and keeps my statutes and does what is just and righteous, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
None of the transgressions that he has committed will be held against him. He will keep living for doing what is righteous.’
“‘Do I take any pleasure at all in the death of a wicked person?’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Do I not prefer that he turn away from his ways and keep living?’
“‘But when someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong, doing all the detestable things the wicked do, will he live? None of the righteous acts that he did will be remembered. For his unfaithfulness and the sin he has committed, he will die.
“‘But you will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Please listen, O house of Israel! Is it my way that is unjust? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
“‘When someone righteous abandons his righteousness and does what is wrong and dies because of it, he will die for his own wrongdoing.
“‘And when someone wicked turns away from the wickedness that he has committed and begins to do what is just and righteous, he will preserve his own life.
When he realizes and turns away from all the transgressions that he has committed, he will surely keep living. He will not die.
“‘But the house of Israel will say: “The way of Jehovah is unjust.” Is it really my ways that are unjust, O house of Israel? Is it not your ways that are unjust?’
“‘Therefore, I will judge each one of you according to his ways, O house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Turn away, yes, turn completely away from all your transgressions, so that they will not be a stumbling block bringing guilt upon you.
Rid yourselves of all the transgressions you have committed and acquire a new heart and a new spirit, for why should you die, O house of Israel?’
“‘I do not take any pleasure in the death of anyone,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘So turn back and live.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, there were two women who were the daughters of the same mother.
They became prostitutes in Egypt; from their youth they engaged in prostitution. Their breasts were squeezed there, and their virgin bosoms were fondled.
Their names were O·hoʹlah, the older one, and her sister O·holʹi·bah. They became mine and gave birth to sons and daughters. As for their names, O·hoʹlah is Sa·marʹi·a, and O·holʹi·bah is Jerusalem.
“O·hoʹlah began to prostitute herself while she belonged to me. She lusted after her passionate lovers, her neighbors the As·syrʹi·ans.
They were governors clothed in blue and deputy rulers—all desirable young men mounted on their horses.
She continued to prostitute herself with all the choicest sons of As·syrʹi·a, and she defiled herself with the disgusting idols of those she lusted after.
She did not abandon the prostitution she practiced in Egypt, for in her youth they had lain down with her, and they fondled her virgin bosom and poured out their lust on her.
So I gave her into the hand of her passionate lovers, the sons of As·syrʹi·a, after whom she had lusted.
They exposed her nakedness and seized her sons and daughters, and they killed her with a sword. She became notorious among women, and they executed judgment against her.
“When her sister O·holʹi·bah saw it, her lust became even more depraved, and her prostitution was worse than that of her sister.
She lusted after her neighbors the sons of As·syrʹi·a, the governors and deputy rulers who were clothed in splendor and mounted on horses—all desirable young men.
When she defiled herself, I saw that both of them had followed the same course.
But she kept adding to her acts of prostitution. She saw men carved on the wall, images of Chal·deʹans carved in vermilion,
wearing belts around their waist, with flowing turbans on their heads, having the appearance of warriors, all of them depicting Babylonians, born in the land of the Chal·deʹans.
She began to lust after them as soon as she saw them, and she sent messengers to them in Chal·deʹa.
So the sons of Babylon kept coming to her bed of lovemaking, and they defiled her with their lust. After she was defiled by them, she turned away from them in disgust.
“When she went on brazenly engaging in prostitution and exposing her nakedness, I turned away from her in disgust, just as I had turned away from her sister in disgust.
And she kept increasing her acts of prostitution, calling to mind the days of her youth when she prostituted herself in the land of Egypt.
She lusted after them like the concubines of men whose male members are like those of a donkey and whose genitals are like those of a horse.
You yearned for the obscene conduct of your youth in Egypt when they fondled your bosom, the breasts of your youth.
“Therefore, O·holʹi·bah, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am stirring up your lovers whom you turned away from in disgust, and I will bring them against you from every direction,
the sons of Babylon and all the Chal·deʹans, the men of Peʹkod and Shoʹa and Koʹa, along with all the sons of As·syrʹi·a. All of them are desirable young men, governors and deputy rulers, warriors and handpicked, all mounted on horses.
They will attack you with rumbling war chariots and wheels and with a great assembly of troops, with large shield and buckler and helmet. They will take up positions all around you, and I will authorize them to pass judgment, and they will judge you as they see fit.
I will express my indignation against you, and they will deal with you in their rage. They will cut off your nose and your ears, and those of you who remain will fall by the sword. They will take away your sons and your daughters, and those of you who remain will be consumed by fire.
They will strip off your garments and seize your beautiful jewelry.
I will put an end to your obscene conduct and your prostitution, which started in the land of Egypt. You will stop looking at them, and you will remember Egypt no more.’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Here I am about to hand you over to those you hate, those you turned away from in disgust.
They will deal with you in hatred and take away all you have toiled for and leave you naked and exposed. The shameful nakedness of your immorality and your obscene conduct and your prostitution will be exposed.
These things will be done to you because you chased after the nations like a prostitute, because you defiled yourself with their disgusting idols.
You have followed the same course as your sister, and I will put her cup into your hand.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You will drink the deep and wide cup of your sister,And you will become an object of laughter and ridicule, of which the cup contains much.
You will be overcome by drunkenness and grief,A cup of horror and desolation,The cup of your sister, Sa·marʹi·a.
You will have to drink it and drain it dry and gnaw on its earthenware fragmentsAnd then tear out your breasts. “For I myself have spoken,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Because you have forgotten me and have completely disregarded me, you will bear the consequences of your obscene conduct and your acts of prostitution.’”
Jehovah then said to me: “Son of man, will you pronounce judgment on O·hoʹlah and O·holʹi·bah and confront them with their disgusting practices?
They have committed adultery, and there is blood on their hands. Not only have they committed adultery with their disgusting idols, but they have also made their sons whom they bore to me pass through the fire as food for their idols.
Moreover, this is what they have done to me: They defiled my sanctuary on that day, and they profaned my sabbaths.
After they slaughtered their sons as sacrifices to their disgusting idols, they came into my sanctuary to profane it on that very day. That is what they did inside my own house.
They even sent a messenger for men to come from far away. When they were coming, you washed yourself and painted your eyes and adorned yourself with ornaments.
And you sat down on a magnificent couch with a table set in front of it, on which you put my incense and my oil.
The sound of a carefree crowd of men was heard there, among whom were drunkards brought in from the wilderness. They put bracelets on the hands of the women and beautiful crowns on their heads.
“Then I said regarding her who was worn out with adultery: ‘Now she will keep committing her prostitution.’
So they kept going in to her, just as one goes to a prostitute. That is how they went in to O·hoʹlah and to O·holʹi·bah, the women of obscene conduct.
But righteous men will render to her the appropriate judgment for adultery and bloodshed; for adulteresses is what they are, and they have blood on their hands.
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘An army will be brought against them to make them an object of horror and something to plunder.
The army will hurl stones at them and cut them down with their swords. They will kill their sons and daughters and burn their houses with fire.
I will put an end to the obscene conduct in the land, and all the women will learn a lesson and not copy your obscene conduct.
They will bring on you the consequences of your obscene conduct and of your sins with your disgusting idols; and you will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the mountainous region of Seʹir, and prophesy against it.
Say to it, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O mountainous region of Seʹir, and I will stretch out my hand against you and make you a desolate wasteland.
I will turn your cities into ruins, and you will become a desolate wasteland; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
For you showed unrelenting hostility, and you gave the Israelites over to the sword at the time of their disaster, at the time of their final punishment.”’
“‘Therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will prepare you for bloodshed, and bloodshed will pursue you. Since it was blood that you hated, bloodshed will pursue you.
I will make the mountainous region of Seʹir a desolate wasteland, and I will cut off from it anyone passing through and anyone returning.
I will fill its mountains with the slain; and those slain by the sword will fall on your hills, in your valleys, and in all your streams.
I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited; and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.’
“Because you said, ‘These two nations and these two lands will become mine, and we will take possession of both,’ even though Jehovah himself was there,
‘therefore as surely as I am alive,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘I will deal with you according to the same anger and jealousy that you displayed in your hatred toward them; and I will make myself known among them when I judge you.
You will then have to know that I myself, Jehovah, have heard all the insolent things you spoke against the mountains of Israel when you said, “They have been laid desolate and have been given to us to devour.”
And you spoke arrogantly against me, and you multiplied your words against me. I heard it all.’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The whole earth will rejoice when I will make you a desolate wasteland.
Just as you rejoiced when the inheritance of the house of Israel was laid desolate, that is how I will deal with you. You will become a desolate ruin, O mountainous region of Seʹir, yes, all of Eʹdom; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy, and say to the shepherds, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Woe to the shepherds of Israel, who have been feeding themselves! Is it not the flock that the shepherds should feed?
You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, and you slaughter the fattest animal, but you do not feed the flock.
You have not strengthened the weak or healed the sick or bandaged the injured or brought back the strays or looked for the lost; rather, you have ruled them with harshness and tyranny.
So they were scattered because there was no shepherd; they were scattered and became food for every wild beast of the field.
My sheep were straying on all the mountains and on every high hill; my sheep were scattered over all the surface of the earth, with no one searching for them or seeking to find them.
“‘“Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah:
‘“As surely as I am alive,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, “because my sheep have become prey, food for every wild beast of the field, for there was no shepherd, and my shepherds did not search for my sheep; rather, they kept feeding themselves and did not feed my sheep,”’
therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I am against the shepherds, and I will demand an accounting of them for my sheep, and I will dismiss them from feeding my sheep, and the shepherds will no longer feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their mouth, and they will no longer be food for them.’”
“‘For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am, and I myself will search for my sheep, and I will care for them.
I will care for my sheep like a shepherd who has found his scattered sheep and is feeding them. I will rescue them from all the places where they were scattered in the day of clouds and thick gloom.
I will bring them out from the peoples and collect them together from the lands and bring them into their land and feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the streams and by all the dwelling places of the land.
In a good pasture I will feed them, and the land where they graze will be on Israel’s high mountains. They will lie down there in a good grazing land, and they will feed on choice pastures on the mountains of Israel.”
“‘“I myself will feed my sheep, and I myself will make them lie down,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“The lost one I will search for, the stray I will bring back, the injured I will bandage, and the weak I will strengthen; but the fat one and the strong one I will annihilate. I will feed that one with judgment.”
“‘As for you, my sheep, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am about to judge between one sheep and another sheep, between the rams and the male goats.
Is it not enough for you to feed on the very best pastures? Must you also trample the rest of your pastures with your feet? And after drinking the clearest water, must you foul the water by stamping with your feet?
Should my sheep now feed on the pasture trampled by your feet and drink the water befouled by the stamping of your feet?”
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to them: “Here I am, and I myself will judge between a fat sheep and a lean sheep,
for with your flank and shoulder you kept pushing, and with your horns you kept shoving all the sick ones until you had scattered them abroad.
And I will save my sheep, and they will no longer become something to prey upon; and I will judge between a sheep and a sheep.
I will raise up one shepherd over them, my servant David, and he will feed them. He himself will feed them and become their shepherd.
And I, Jehovah, will become their God, and my servant David a chieftain among them. I myself, Jehovah, have spoken.
“‘“And I will make a covenant of peace with them, and I will rid the land of vicious wild beasts, so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forests.
I will make them and the area around my hill a blessing, and I will cause the rain to fall at the proper time. Blessings will pour down like the rains.
The trees of the field will yield their fruit, and the soil will give its produce, and they will dwell securely on the land. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah when I break their yoke bars and rescue them from those who enslaved them.
They will no longer become something for the nations to prey upon, and the wild beasts of the earth will not devour them, and they will dwell in security, with no one to make them afraid.
“‘“I will establish for them a plantation of fame, and they will no longer die from famine in the land, and they will no longer be humiliated by the nations.
‘Then they will have to know that I, Jehovah their God, am with them and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’
“‘As for you, my sheep, the sheep that I care for, you are but men, and I am your God,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them.
You must say, ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah: This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says to the mountains, to the hills, to the streams, and to the valleys: “Look! I will bring a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places.
Your altars will be demolished, your incense stands will be broken, and I will throw your slain ones down before your disgusting idols.
I will throw the carcasses of the people of Israel before their disgusting idols, and I will scatter your bones all around your altars.
In all the places where you dwell, the cities will be devastated and the high places will be demolished and will lie devastated. Your altars will be demolished and shattered, your disgusting idols will perish, your incense stands will be cut down, and your works will be wiped out.
And those slain will fall in your midst, and you will have to know that I am Jehovah.
“‘“But I will leave a remnant, for some of you will escape the sword among the nations when you are scattered throughout the lands.
And those who escape will remember me among the nations where they are taken captive. They will realize that I was brokenhearted over their unfaithful heart that turned away from me and at their eyes that are lusting after their disgusting idols. They will be ashamed of and loathe all the evil and detestable things they have done.
They will have to know that I am Jehovah and that my threats to bring this calamity on them were not empty.”’
“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Clap your hands and stamp your foot and bemoan all the evil and detestable things done by the house of Israel, for they will fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.
The one far away will die by pestilence, the one nearby will fall by the sword, and whoever escapes these and is left remaining will die by famine; and I will fully unleash my wrath against them.
And you will have to know that I am Jehovah, when their slain lie among their disgusting idols, all around their altars, on every high hill, on all the mountaintops, under every luxuriant tree, and under the branches of big trees where they have made fragrant offerings to appease all their disgusting idols.
I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land desolate, and all their dwelling places will become more desolate than the wilderness near Dibʹlah. And they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’”
In the 25th year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the 14th year after the city had fallen, on that very day the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he took me to the city.
By means of visions from God, he brought me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain, on which there was a structure like a city to the south.
When he brought me there, I saw a man whose appearance was like that of copper. He had a flax cord and a measuring reed in his hand, and he was standing in the gateway.
The man said to me: “Son of man, look closely, listen carefully, and pay attention to everything I show you, for that is why you were brought here. Tell the house of Israel everything that you see.”
I saw a wall surrounding the outside of the temple. In the man’s hand was a measuring reed six cubits long (to each cubit, a handbreadth was added). He began to measure the wall, and its thickness was one reed and its height was one reed.
Then he came to the gate that faced east and climbed its steps. When he measured the threshold of the gate, its width was one reed, and the width of the other threshold was also one reed.
Each guard chamber was one reed long and one reed wide, and there were five cubits between the guard chambers. The threshold of the gate beside the porch of the gate facing the interior measured one reed.
He measured the porch of the gate toward the interior, and it was one reed.
He then measured the porch of the gate, which was eight cubits; and he measured its side pillars, which were two cubits; and the porch of the gate was on the side facing the interior.
There were three guard chambers on each side of the east gate. The three were the same size, and the side pillars on either side were the same size.
Then he measured the width of the entrance of the gate, which was 10 cubits; and the length of the gate was 13 cubits.
The partitioned area in front of the guard chambers on either side was one cubit. The guard chambers on both sides were six cubits each.
He then measured the gate from the roof of the one guard chamber to the roof of the other, and it was 25 cubits wide; one entrance was across from the other entrance.
Then he measured the side pillars, which were 60 cubits tall, as well as the side pillars in the gates all around the courtyard.
From the front of the entrance of the gate to the front of the porch on the inner side of the gate was 50 cubits.
There were windows with narrowing frames for the guard chambers and for their side pillars inside the gate on each side. The interior of the porches also had windows on each side, and there were palm-tree figures on the side pillars.
He then brought me into the outer courtyard, and I saw dining rooms and a pavement around the courtyard. There were 30 dining rooms on the pavement.
The pavement at the side of the gates corresponded to the length of the gates—this was the lower pavement.
Then he measured the distance from the front of the lower gate to the perimeter of the inner courtyard. It was 100 cubits on the east and on the north.
The outer courtyard had a gate facing north, and he measured its length and its width.
There were three guard chambers on each side. Its side pillars and porch had the same measurements as the first gate. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide.
Its windows, its porch, and its palm-tree figures were the same size as those of the east gate. People could reach it by climbing seven steps, and its porch was in front of them.
There was a gate in the inner courtyard opposite the north gate and one opposite the east gate. He measured the distance from gate to gate, and it was 100 cubits.
Next he brought me toward the south, and I saw a gate on the south side. He measured its side pillars and its porch, and they were the same size as the others.
There were windows on each side of it and its porch, like the other windows. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide.
There were seven steps leading up to it, and its porch was in front of them. And it had palm-tree figures on its side pillars, one on each side.
The inner courtyard had a gate facing south; he measured southward from gate to gate, and the distance was 100 cubits.
Next he brought me into the inner courtyard through the south gate; when he measured the south gate, it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others. There were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide.
There were porches all around; they were 25 cubits long and 5 cubits wide.
Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
When he brought me into the inner courtyard from the east, he measured the gate, and it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others, and there were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide.
Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
He then brought me into the north gate and measured it; it was the same size as the others.
Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same as the others. It had windows on each side. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide.
Its side pillars faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it.
A dining room with its entrance was near the side pillars of the gates, where the whole burnt offerings were washed.
There were two tables on each side of the porch of the gate on which to slaughter the whole burnt offerings, the sin offerings, and the guilt offerings.
On the way up to the north gate, there were two tables outside the entrance. There were also two tables on the other side of the porch of the gate.
There were four tables on each side of the gate—eight tables in all—on which the sacrifices were slaughtered.
The four tables for the whole burnt offering were of hewn stone. They were one and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide, and one cubit high. On them were kept the implements used to slaughter the burnt offerings and the sacrifices.
Shelves, one handbreadth wide, were attached all around the interior walls; and the flesh of the gift offerings would be placed on the tables.
Outside the inner gate were the dining rooms for the singers; they were in the inner courtyard near the north gate, facing south. Another dining room was near the east gate, facing north.
He said to me: “This dining room that faces south is for the priests who are responsible for the services in the temple.
The dining room that faces north is for the priests who are responsible for the service of the altar. They are the sons of Zaʹdok, those from the Levites who are assigned to approach Jehovah to minister to him.”
Then he measured the inner courtyard. It was 100 cubits long and 100 cubits wide, foursquare. The altar was in front of the temple.
Then he brought me into the porch of the temple, and he measured the side pillar of the porch, and it was five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. The width of the gate was three cubits on one side and three cubits on the other side.
The porch was 20 cubits long and 11 cubits wide. People would reach it by climbing the steps. There were pillars by the side posts, one on each side.
In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the 12th day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, turn your face toward Pharʹaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.
Speak these words: ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, Pharʹaoh king of Egypt,The great sea monster lying among the streams of his Nile,Who has said, ‘My Nile River belongs to me. I made it for myself.’
But I will put hooks in your jaws and cause the fish of your Nile to cling to your scales. I will bring you up out of your Nile along with all the fish of the Nile that cling to your scales.
I will abandon you in the desert, you and all the fish of your Nile. You will fall on the open field, and you will not be gathered up nor be collected together. I will give you as food to the wild beasts of the earth and the birds of the sky.
Then all the inhabitants of Egypt will have to know that I am Jehovah,For they were no more support to the house of Israel than a piece of straw.
When they grasped your hand, you were crushed,And you caused them to tear their shoulder. When they supported themselves on you, you were broken,And you caused their legs to wobble.”
“‘Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am bringing a sword upon you, and I will cut off from you both man and beast.
The land of Egypt will become a desolate and devastated place; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah, for you have said, ‘The Nile River belongs to me; I am the one who made it.’
So I am against you and against your Nile, and I will make the land of Egypt devastated and dry, a desolate wasteland, from Migʹdol to Sy·eʹne to the boundary of E·thi·oʹpi·a.
Neither man nor livestock will pass through it on foot, and it will not be inhabited for 40 years.
I will make the land of Egypt the most desolate of lands, and its cities will be the most desolate of cities for 40 years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them among the lands.”
“‘For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “After 40 years I will gather back the Egyptians from the peoples where they were scattered;
I will bring the Egyptian captives back to the land of Pathʹros, to the land of their origin, and there they will become an insignificant kingdom.
Egypt will become lower than the other kingdoms and will no longer dominate the other nations, and I will make them so small that they will not be able to subdue other nations.
It will never again be a source of confidence for the house of Israel, but it will only remind them of their error in turning to the Egyptians for help. And they will have to know that I am the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”’”
Now in the 27th year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying:
“Son of man, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon made his army labor greatly against Tyre. Every head became bald, and every shoulder was rubbed bare. But he and his army received no wages for the labor he expended on Tyre.
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says, ‘Here I am giving the land of Egypt to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon, and he will carry off its wealth and take much spoil and plunder from it; and it will become wages for his army.’
“‘As compensation for his labor against her, I will give him the land of Egypt because they acted for me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
“In that day I will cause a horn to sprout for the house of Israel, and I will give you an opportunity to speak among them; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.”
And in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, when I was sitting in my house and the elders of Judah were sitting before me, the hand of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah took hold of me there.
As I watched, I saw a form similar to the appearance of fire; there was fire below what appeared to be his waist, and from his waist upward his appearance was bright, like the glow of electrum.
Then he stretched out what appeared to be a hand and took me by a tuft of hair of my head, and a spirit carried me between the earth and the heavens and brought me to Jerusalem by means of the visions from God, to the entrance of the inner gate that faces north, where the idolatrous symbol of jealousy that incites jealousy stood.
And look! the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the appearance that I had seen in the valley plain.
He then said to me: “Son of man, please raise your eyes toward the north.” So I raised my eyes toward the north, and there, north of the gate of the altar, was this symbol of jealousy in the entryway.
And he said to me: “Son of man, do you see what terrible, detestable things the house of Israel is doing here, things that make me go far away from my sanctuary? But you will see detestable things that are even more terrible.”
Then he brought me to the entrance of the courtyard, and when I looked, I saw a hole in the wall.
He said to me: “Son of man, please bore through the wall.” So I bored through the wall, and I saw an entryway.
He said to me: “Go in and see the evil, detestable things that they are doing here.”
So I went in and looked, and I saw all sorts of images of creeping things and loathsome beasts and all the disgusting idols of the house of Israel; they were carved on the wall all around.
And 70 of the elders of the house of Israel were standing before them, with Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Shaʹphan standing among them. Each one had his censer in his hand, and the perfumed cloud of incense was ascending.
He said to me: “Son of man, do you see what the elders of the house of Israel are doing in the darkness, each one in the inner rooms where his idols are displayed? For they are saying, ‘Jehovah is not seeing us. Jehovah has left the land.’”
And he went on to say to me: “You will see detestable things that are even more terrible that they are doing.”
So he brought me to the entrance of the north gate of the house of Jehovah, and there I saw women sitting and weeping over the god Tamʹmuz.
And he further said to me: “Do you see this, O son of man? You will see detestable things that are even more terrible than these.”
So he brought me to the inner courtyard of the house of Jehovah. There at the entrance of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, were about 25 men with their backs to the temple of Jehovah and their faces to the east; they were bowing down to the sun in the east.
He said to me: “Son of man, do you see this? Is it a trivial thing for the house of Judah to do these detestable things, to fill the land with violence and keep offending me? Here they are thrusting out the branch to my nose.
So I will act in rage. My eye will not feel sorry; nor will I feel compassion. Even though they cry out loudly in my ears, I will not hear them.”
“As for me, in the first year of Da·riʹus the Mede, I stood up to strengthen and fortify him.
What I will tell you now is the truth: “Look! Three more kings will stand up for Persia, and the fourth one will amass greater riches than all others. And when he becomes strong by means of his riches, he will rouse up everything against the kingdom of Greece.
“And a mighty king will stand up and rule with extensive dominion and do as he pleases.
But when he has stood up, his kingdom will be broken and be divided toward the four winds of the heavens, but not to his descendants and not like the dominion with which he ruled; for his kingdom will be uprooted and go to others besides these.
“And the king of the south will become strong, that is, one of his princes; but one will prevail against him and will rule with extensive dominion, greater than that one’s ruling power.
“After some years they will make an alliance, and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north in order to make an equitable arrangement. But she will not retain the power of her arm; and he will not stand, nor his arm; and she will be given up, she and those bringing her in, and the one who caused her birth, and the one making her strong in those times.
And one from the sprout of her roots will stand up in his position, and he will come to the army and come against the fortress of the king of the north and will take action against them and prevail.
Also with their gods, with their metal images, with their desirable articles of silver and of gold, and with captives, he will come to Egypt. For some years he will stand off from the king of the north,
who will come against the kingdom of the king of the south, but will go back to his own land.
“As for his sons, they will prepare for war and assemble a vast, great army. He will certainly advance and sweep through like a flood. But he will go back, and he will wage war all the way to his fortress.
“And the king of the south will become bitter and will go out and fight with him, that is, with the king of the north; and he will muster a large crowd, but the crowd will be given into that one’s hand.
And the crowd will be carried away. His heart will become exalted, and he will cause tens of thousands to fall; but he will not make use of his strong position.
“And the king of the north will return and muster a crowd larger than the first; and at the end of the times, after some years, he will surely come with a large army and with many resources.
In those times many will stand up against the king of the south. “And the violent ones among your people will be carried along to try making a vision come true; but they will stumble.
“And the king of the north will come and throw up a siege rampart and capture a fortified city. And the arms of the south will not stand, nor will his select men; and they will have no power to stand.
The one coming against him will do as he pleases, and no one will stand before him. He will stand in the land of the Decoration, and ability to exterminate will be in his hand.
He will set his face to come with the full force of his kingdom, and there will be equitable terms with him; and he will act effectively. As regards the daughter of women, it will be granted to him to bring her to ruin. And she will not stand, and she will not continue to be his.
He will turn his face back to the coastlands and will capture many. And a commander will make the reproach from him cease for himself, so that his reproach will not be. He will make it turn back on that one.
Then he will turn his face back to the fortresses of his own land, and he will stumble and fall, and he will not be found.
“And there will stand up in his position one who causes an exactor to pass through the splendid kingdom, but in a few days he will be broken, though not in anger nor in warfare.
“And there will stand up in his position a despised one, and they will not give him the majesty of the kingdom; and he will come in during a time of security and take hold of the kingdom by means of smoothness.
And the arms of the flood will be swept away on account of him, and they will be broken; as will be the Leader of the covenant.
And because of their alliance with him, he will carry on deception and rise up and become mighty by means of a little nation.
During a time of security he will come into the richest parts of the province and do what his fathers and their fathers have not done. Plunder and spoil and goods he will distribute among them; and against fortified places he will plot his schemes, but only for a time.
“And he will muster his power and his heart against the king of the south with a large army, and the king of the south will prepare himself for the war with an exceedingly large and mighty army. And he will not stand, because they will plot schemes against him.
And those eating his delicacies will bring his downfall. “As for his army, it will be swept away, and many will fall down slain.
“As regards these two kings, their heart will be inclined to do what is bad, and they will sit at one table speaking lies to each other. But nothing will succeed, because the end is yet for the time appointed.
“And he will go back to his land with a great amount of goods, and his heart will be against the holy covenant. He will act effectively and go back to his land.
“At the time appointed he will return and come against the south. But this time will not be as it was before,
for the ships of Kitʹtim will come against him, and he will be humbled. “He will go back and hurl denunciations against the holy covenant and act effectively; and he will go back and will give attention to those leaving the holy covenant.
And arms will stand up, proceeding from him; and they will profane the sanctuary, the fortress, and remove the constant feature. “And they will put in place the disgusting thing that causes desolation.
“And those who act wickedly against the covenant, he will lead into apostasy by means of smooth words. But the people who know their God will prevail and act effectively.
And those having insight among the people will impart understanding to the many. And they will be made to stumble by sword and by flame, by captivity and by plundering, for some days.
But when they are made to stumble, they will be given a little help; and many will join with them by means of smooth speech.
And some of those having insight will be made to stumble, in order to do a refining work because of them and to do a cleansing and a whitening until the time of the end; because it is yet for the time appointed.
“The king will do as he pleases, and he will exalt himself and magnify himself above every god; and against the God of gods he will speak astonishing things. And he will prove successful until the denunciation comes to a finish; because what is determined must take place.
He will show no regard for the God of his fathers; nor will he show regard for the desire of women or for any other god, but he will magnify himself over everyone.
But instead he will give glory to the god of fortresses; to a god that his fathers did not know he will give glory by means of gold and silver and precious stones and desirable things.
He will act effectively against the most fortified strongholds, along with a foreign god. He will give great glory to those who give him recognition, and he will make them rule among many; and the ground he will apportion out for a price.
“In the time of the end the king of the south will engage with him in a pushing, and against him the king of the north will storm with chariots and horsemen and many ships; and he will enter into the lands and sweep through like a flood.
He will also enter into the land of the Decoration, and many lands will be made to stumble. But these are the ones that will escape out of his hand: Eʹdom and Moʹab and the main part of the Amʹmon·ites.
And he will keep thrusting out his hand against the lands; and as regards the land of Egypt, she will not escape.
And he will rule over the hidden treasures of gold and silver and over all the desirable things of Egypt. And the Libʹy·ans and the E·thi·oʹpi·ans will be at his steps.
“But reports out of the east and out of the north will disturb him, and he will go out in a great rage to annihilate and to devote many to destruction.
And he will plant his royal tents between the grand sea and the holy mountain of Decoration; and he will come all the way to his end, and there will be no helper for him.
In the third year of the kingship of King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
In time Jehovah gave King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah into his hand, along with some of the utensils of the house of the true God, and he brought them to the land of Shiʹnar to the house of his god. He placed the utensils in the treasury of his god.
Then the king ordered Ashʹpe·naz his chief court official to bring some of the Israelites, including those of royal and noble descent.
They were to be youths without any defect, of good appearance, endowed with wisdom, knowledge, and discernment, and capable of serving in the king’s palace. He was to teach them the writing and the language of the Chal·deʹans.
Furthermore, the king assigned to them a daily ration from the king’s delicacies and from the wine he drank. They were to be trained for three years, and at the end of that time they were to enter the king’s service.
Now among them were some from the tribe of Judah: Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah.
And the principal court official assigned names to them; he gave to Daniel the name Bel·te·shazʹzar, to Han·a·niʹah the name Shaʹdrach, to Mishʹa·el the name Meʹshach, and to Az·a·riʹah the name A·bedʹne·go.
But Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king’s delicacies or with the wine he drank. So he asked the principal court official for permission not to defile himself in this way.
And the true God caused the principal court official to show Daniel favor and mercy.
But the principal court official said to Daniel: “I am afraid of my lord the king, who has assigned your food and drink. What if he should see you looking worse in appearance than the other youths of your age? You would make me guilty before the king.”
But Daniel said to the guardian whom the principal court official had appointed over Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah:
“Please, test your servants for ten days, and let us be given some vegetables to eat and water to drink;
then compare our appearance with the appearance of the youths who are eating the king’s delicacies, and deal with your servants according to what you see.”
So he agreed to their proposal and tested them for ten days.
At the end of ten days their appearance was better and healthier than all the youths who were eating the king’s delicacies.
So the guardian would take away their delicacies and their wine and give them vegetables.
And the true God gave these four youths knowledge and insight into every kind of writing and wisdom; and Daniel was given understanding in all sorts of visions and dreams.
At the end of the time that the king had specified to bring them in, the principal court official brought them in before Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
When the king spoke with them, no one in the entire group was found to be like Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah; and they continued to serve before the king.
In every matter requiring wisdom and understanding that the king would ask them about, he found them ten times better than all the magic-practicing priests and the conjurers in his entire realm.
And Daniel remained there until the first year of King Cyrus.
In the first year of King Bel·shazʹzar of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream and visions of his head as he lay on his bed. Then he wrote down the dream; he recorded a complete account of the matters.
Daniel declared: “I was watching in my visions during the night, and look! the four winds of the heavens were stirring up the vast sea.
And four huge beasts came out of the sea, each different from the others.
“The first one was like a lion, and it had the wings of an eagle. I watched until its wings were plucked out, and it was lifted up from the earth and was made to stand up on two feet like a man, and it was given the heart of a man.
“And look! another beast, a second one, like a bear. It was raised up on one side, and three ribs were in its mouth between its teeth; and it was told, ‘Get up, eat much flesh.’
“After this I kept watching, and look! another beast, like a leopard, but on its back it had four wings like those of a bird. And the beast had four heads, and it was given authority to rule.
“After this I kept watching in the visions of the night, and I saw a fourth beast, fearsome and terrifying and unusually strong, and it had large iron teeth. It was devouring and crushing, and what was left it trampled down with its feet. It was different from all the other beasts that were prior to it, and it had ten horns.
While I considered the horns, look! another horn, a small one, came up among them, and three of the first horns were plucked up from before it. And look! there were eyes like human eyes in this horn, and there was a mouth speaking arrogantly.
“I kept watching until thrones were set in place and the Ancient of Days sat down. His clothing was white like snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool. His throne was flames of fire; its wheels were a burning fire.
A stream of fire was flowing and going out from before him. A thousand thousands kept ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The Court took its seat, and books were opened.
“I kept watching at that time because of the sound of the arrogant words that the horn was speaking; I watched until the beast was killed and its body was destroyed and it was given over to be burned in the fire.
But as for the rest of the beasts, their rulerships were taken away, and their lives were prolonged for a time and a season.
“I kept watching in the visions of the night, and look! with the clouds of the heavens, someone like a son of man was coming; and he gained access to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him up close before that One.
And to him there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him. His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.
“As for me, Daniel, my spirit was distressed within me because the visions of my head frightened me.
I went near to one of those who were standing there to ask him about the true meaning of this. So he replied and made known to me the interpretation of these things.
“‘These huge beasts, four in number, are four kings who will stand up from the earth.
But the holy ones of the Supreme One will receive the kingdom, and they will possess the kingdom forever, yes, forever and ever.’
“Then I wanted to know more about the fourth beast, which was different from all the others; it was extraordinarily fearsome, with iron teeth and copper claws, and it was devouring and crushing, and trampling down what was left with its feet;
and about the ten horns on its head, and the other horn that came up and before which three fell, the horn that had eyes and a mouth speaking arrogantly and whose appearance was bigger than that of the others.
“I kept watching as that horn made war on the holy ones, and it was prevailing against them,
until the Ancient of Days came and judgment was rendered in favor of the holy ones of the Supreme One, and the appointed time arrived for the holy ones to take possession of the kingdom.
“This is what he said: ‘As for the fourth beast, there is a fourth kingdom that will come to be on the earth. It will be different from all the other kingdoms, and it will devour all the earth and will trample it down and crush it.
As for the ten horns, ten kings will rise up out of that kingdom; and still another one will rise up after them, and he will be different from the first ones, and he will humiliate three kings.
He will speak words against the Most High, and he will continually harass the holy ones of the Supreme One. He will intend to change times and law, and they will be given into his hand for a time, times, and half a time.
But the Court sat, and they took away his rulership, in order to annihilate him and to destroy him completely.
“‘And the kingdom and the rulership and the grandeur of the kingdoms under all the heavens were given to the people who are the holy ones of the Supreme One. Their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all rulerships will serve and obey them.’
“This is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts alarmed me greatly, so that I turned pale; but I kept the matter in my own heart.”
Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king made an image of gold that was 60 cubits high and 6 cubits wide. He set it up on the plain of Duʹra in the province of Babylon.
Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar sent word to assemble the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces to come to the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces assembled for the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. And they stood in front of the image that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
The herald loudly proclaimed: “You are commanded, O peoples, nations, and language groups,
that when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments, you must fall down and worship the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar has set up.
Whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.”
So when all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, and all the other musical instruments, all the peoples, nations, and language groups fell down and worshipped the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up.
Now at that time some of the Chal·deʹans came forward and accused the Jews.
They said to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar: “O king, may you live on forever.
You, O king, gave the command that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments should fall down and worship the image of gold;
and that whoever would not fall down and worship should be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.
But there are certain Jews whom you appointed to administer the province of Babylon: Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go. These men have paid no regard to you, O king. They are not serving your gods, and they refuse to worship the image of gold that you have set up.”
Then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, in a furious rage, ordered Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go to be brought in. So these men were brought in before the king.
Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar said to them: “Is it really true, Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, that you are not serving my gods and that you refuse to worship the image of gold that I have set up?
Now when you hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the zither, the triangular harp, the stringed instrument, the bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments, if you are ready to fall down and worship the image that I have made, fine. But if you refuse to worship, you will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery furnace. And who is the god who can rescue you out of my hands?”
Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go answered the king: “O Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter.
If it must be, our God whom we serve is able to rescue us from the burning fiery furnace, O king, and to rescue us from your hand.
But even if he does not, let it be known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of gold that you have set up.”
Then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar became so furious with Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go that the expression of his face changed toward them, and he gave orders to heat the furnace seven times hotter than usual.
He ordered some of the mighty men from his army to bind Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go and to throw them into the burning fiery furnace.
So these men were tied up while still wearing their cloaks, garments, caps, and all their other clothing, and they were thrown into the burning fiery furnace.
Because the king’s command was so harsh and the furnace was exceptionally hot, the men who took up Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go were the ones killed by the flames of the fire.
But these three men, Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, fell bound into the burning fiery furnace.
King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar then became frightened and quickly rose up and said to his high officials: “Did we not tie up three men and throw them into the fire?” They answered the king: “Yes, O king.”
He said: “Look! I see four men walking about free in the midst of the fire, and they are unharmed, and the fourth one looks like a son of the gods.”
Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar approached the door of the burning fiery furnace and said: “Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, you servants of the Most High God, step out and come here!” Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go stepped out from the midst of the fire.
And the satraps, prefects, governors, and the high officials of the king who were assembled there saw that the fire had had no effect on the bodies of these men; not a hair of their heads had been singed, their cloaks looked no different, and there was not even the smell of fire on them.
Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar then declared: “Praised be the God of Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, who sent his angel and rescued his servants. They trusted in him and went against the command of the king and were willing to die rather than serve or worship any god except their own God.
I am therefore issuing an order that any people, nation, or language group that says anything against the God of Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go should be dismembered, and their houses should be turned into public latrines; for there is no other god who is able to rescue like this one.”
The king then promoted Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go in the province of Babylon.
In the first year of Da·riʹus the son of A·has·u·eʹrus—a descendant of the Medes who had been made king over the kingdom of the Chal·deʹans—
in the first year of his reign I, Daniel, discerned by the books the number of years mentioned in the word of Jehovah to Jeremiah the prophet to fulfill the desolation of Jerusalem, namely, 70 years.
So I turned my face to Jehovah the true God, entreating him in prayer, along with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
I prayed to Jehovah my God and made confession and said: “O Jehovah the true God, the great and awe-inspiring One, who keeps his covenant and shows loyal love to those who love him and keep his commandments,
we have sinned and done wrong and acted wickedly and rebelled; and we have deviated from your commandments and your judgments.
We have not listened to your servants the prophets, who spoke in your name to our kings, our princes, our forefathers, and all the people of the land.
To you, O Jehovah, belongs righteousness, but to us belongs shame as is the case today, to the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and all Israel, those nearby and far away, in all the lands to which you dispersed them because they acted unfaithfully toward you.
“O Jehovah, to us belongs shame, to our kings, our princes, and our forefathers, because we have sinned against you.
To Jehovah our God belong mercy and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him.
We have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God by following his laws that he set before us through his servants the prophets.
All Israel has overstepped your Law and turned away by not obeying your voice, so that you poured out on us the curse and the sworn oath written about in the Law of Moses the servant of the true God, for we have sinned against Him.
He has carried out his words that he spoke against us and against our rulers who ruled over us, by bringing great calamity on us; nothing has ever been done under the whole heavens such as what was done in Jerusalem.
Just as it is written in the Law of Moses, all this calamity has come upon us, yet we have not begged for the favor of Jehovah our God by turning away from our error and by showing insight into your truth.
“So Jehovah kept watchful and brought calamity on us, for Jehovah our God is righteous in all the works that he has done; yet we have not obeyed his voice.
“Now, O Jehovah our God, the One who brought your people out of the land of Egypt by a mighty hand and made a name for yourself down to this day, we have sinned and acted wickedly.
O Jehovah, according to all your righteous acts, please, may your anger and wrath turn away from your city Jerusalem, your holy mountain; for because of our sins and the errors of our forefathers, Jerusalem and your people are an object of reproach to all those around us.
And now listen, O our God, to the prayer of your servant and to his entreaties, and cause your face to shine upon your sanctuary that is desolate, for your own sake, O Jehovah.
Incline your ear, O my God, and hear! Do open your eyes and see our desolate condition and the city that has been called by your name; for we are not entreating you because of our righteous acts but because of your great mercy.
O Jehovah, do hear. O Jehovah, do forgive. O Jehovah, do pay attention and act! Do not delay, for your own sake, O my God, for your own name has been called upon your city and upon your people.”
While I was still speaking and praying and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel and making my request for favor before Jehovah my God concerning the holy mountain of my God,
yes, while I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gaʹbri·el, whom I had previously seen in the vision, came to me when I was extremely weary at about the time of the evening gift offering.
And he gave me understanding, saying: “O Daniel, now I have come to give you insight and understanding.
When you began your entreaty the word went out, and I have come to report it to you, because you are someone very precious. So consider the matter and understand the vision.
“There are 70 weeks that have been determined for your people and your holy city, in order to terminate the transgression, to finish off sin, to make atonement for error, to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up the vision and the prophecy, and to anoint the Holy of Holies.
You should know and understand that from the issuing of the word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem until Mes·siʹah the Leader, there will be 7 weeks, also 62 weeks. She will be restored and rebuilt, with a public square and moat, but in times of distress.
“And after the 62 weeks, Mes·siʹah will be cut off, with nothing for himself. “And the people of a leader who is coming will destroy the city and the holy place. And its end will be by the flood. And until the end there will be war; what is decided upon is desolations.
“And he will keep the covenant in force for the many for one week; and at the half of the week, he will cause sacrifice and gift offering to cease. “And on the wing of disgusting things there will be the one causing desolation; and until an extermination, what was decided on will be poured out also on the one lying desolate.”
In the second year of his kingship, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had a number of dreams, and he was so agitated that he could not sleep.
So the king gave the order to summon the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the sorcerers, and the Chal·deʹans to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
Then the king said to them: “I have had a dream, and I am agitated because I want to know what I dreamed.”
The Chal·deʹans replied to the king in the Ar·a·maʹic language: “O king, may you live on forever. Relate the dream to your servants, and we will tell the interpretation.”
The king answered the Chal·deʹans: “This is my final word: If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered, and your houses will be turned into public latrines.
But if you do tell the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and a reward and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.”
They answered a second time: “Let the king relate the dream to his servants, and we will tell its interpretation.”
The king replied: “I am well-aware that you are trying to gain time, for you realize what my final word is.
If you do not make the dream known to me, there is only one penalty for all of you. But you have agreed to tell me something false and deceitful until the situation changes. So tell me the dream, and I will know that you can explain its interpretation.”
The Chal·deʹans answered the king: “There is not a man on earth who is able to do what the king demands, for no great king or governor has asked such a thing of any magic-practicing priest or conjurer or Chal·deʹan.
What the king is asking is difficult, and no one exists who could tell the king this except the gods, who do not dwell among mortals.”
At this the king flew into a violent rage and gave the order to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
When the order was issued and the wise men were about to be killed, they also looked for Daniel and his companions to put them to death.
At that time Daniel discreetly and cautiously spoke to Arʹi·och the chief of the king’s bodyguard, who had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon.
He asked Arʹi·och the officer of the king: “Why is there such a harsh order from the king?” Then Arʹi·och informed Daniel about the matter.
So Daniel went in and asked the king to grant him time to tell the interpretation to the king.
Daniel then went to his house and informed his companions Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah of the matter.
He asked them to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this secret, so that Daniel and his companions would not be destroyed along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Then the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision at night. So Daniel praised the God of heaven.
Daniel declared: “Let the name of God be praised for all eternity,For wisdom and mightiness are his alone.
He changes times and seasons,Removes kings and sets up kings,Gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those with discernment.
He reveals the deep things and the hidden things,He knows what is in the darkness,And with him the light dwells.
To you, O God of my forefathers, I offer thanks and praise,Because you have given me wisdom and power. And now you have made known to me what we requested of you;You have made known to us the concern of the king.”
Daniel then went in to Arʹi·och, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and he said to him: “Do not destroy any wise men of Babylon. Take me in before the king, and I will tell the interpretation to the king.”
Arʹi·och quickly took Daniel in before the king and said to him: “I have found a man of the exiles of Judah who can make known the interpretation to the king.”
The king said to Daniel, whose name was Bel·te·shazʹzar: “Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw, and its interpretation?”
Daniel replied to the king: “None of the wise men, conjurers, magic-practicing priests, or astrologers are able to tell the king the secret that he is asking.
But there is a God in the heavens who is a Revealer of secrets, and he has made known to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar what is to happen in the final part of the days. This is your dream, and these are the visions of your head as you lay on your bed:
“As for you, O king, on your bed your thoughts turned to what is to take place in the future, and the Revealer of secrets has made known to you what is to happen.
As for me, this secret was not revealed to me because I have greater wisdom than anyone living; rather, it was to make the interpretation known to the king so that you may know the thoughts in your heart.
“You, O king, were watching, and you saw an immense image. That image, which was huge and extremely bright, was standing in front of you, and its appearance was terrifying.
The head of that image was of fine gold, its chest and its arms were of silver, its abdomen and its thighs were of copper,
its legs were of iron, and its feet were partly of iron and partly of clay.
You looked on until a stone was cut out, not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of clay and crushed them.
At that time the iron, the clay, the copper, the silver, and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a large mountain, and it filled the whole earth.
“This is the dream, and we will now tell the king its interpretation.
You, O king—the king of kings to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the might, the strength, and the glory,
and into whose hand he has given men wherever they may dwell, as well as the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, and whom he has made ruler over all of them—you yourself are the head of gold.
“But after you another kingdom will rise, inferior to you; then another kingdom, a third one, of copper, that will rule over the whole earth.
“As for the fourth kingdom, it will be strong like iron. For just as iron crushes and pulverizes everything else, yes, like iron that shatters, it will crush and shatter all of these.
“And just as you saw the feet and the toes to be partly of clay of a potter and partly of iron, the kingdom will be divided, but some of the hardness of iron will be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with soft clay.
And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile.
Just as you saw iron mixed with soft clay, they will be mixed with the people; but they will not stick together, one to the other, just as iron does not mix with clay.
“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,
just as you saw that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The Grand God has made known to the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.”
Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar fell down with his face to the ground before Daniel and paid homage to him. And he gave the order to offer a present and incense to him.
The king said to Daniel: “Truly your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings and a Revealer of secrets, because you were able to reveal this secret.”
The king then elevated Daniel and gave him many fine gifts, and he made him the ruler over all the province of Babylon and the chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon.
And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go over the administration of the province of Babylon, but Daniel served in the king’s court.
In the third year of King Cyrus of Persia, a revelation was given to Daniel, who was called by the name Bel·te·shazʹzar; and the message was true, and it was about a great conflict. And he understood the message and was given understanding about what he had seen.
In those days I, Daniel, had been mourning for three full weeks.
I ate no rich food, and no meat or wine entered my mouth, and I did not put any oil on myself for three full weeks.
On the 24th day of the first month, while I was on the bank of the great river, the Tiʹgris,
I looked up and saw a man clothed in linen, and around his waist was a belt of gold from Uʹphaz.
His body was like chrysʹo·lite, his face had the appearance of lightning, his eyes were like fiery torches, his arms and his feet looked like burnished copper, and the sound of his words was like the sound of a multitude.
Only I, Daniel, saw the vision; the men with me did not see the vision. However, a great trembling seized them, and they ran away and hid.
Then I was left by myself, and when I saw this great vision, there was no power left in me and my dignified appearance left me and I lost all strength.
Then I heard the sound of him speaking; but when I heard him speaking, I fell fast asleep with my face to the ground.
But then a hand touched me, and it stirred me to get up on my hands and knees.
Then he said to me: “O Daniel, you very precious man, give attention to the words that I am about to speak to you. Now stand up in your place, for I have been sent to you.” When he said this to me, I stood up, trembling.
He then said to me: “Do not be afraid, O Daniel. Your words have been heard from the first day that you gave your heart to understanding and to humbling yourself before your God, and I have come because of your words.
But the prince of the royal realm of Persia stood in opposition to me for 21 days. But then Miʹcha·el, one of the foremost princes, came to help me; and I remained there beside the kings of Persia.
I have come to make you understand what will befall your people in the final part of the days, because it is a vision yet for the days to come.”
Now when he spoke these words to me, I turned my face to the ground and became speechless.
Then one who looked like a man touched my lips, and I opened my mouth and said to the one who stood in front of me: “My lord, I am shuddering because of the vision, and I have no strength.
So how can my lord’s servant speak with my lord? For now I have no strength, and there is no breath left in me.”
The one who looked like a man touched me again and strengthened me.
Then he said: “Do not be afraid, O very precious man. May you have peace. Be strong, yes, be strong.” As he spoke with me I was strengthened and I said: “Let my lord speak, for you have strengthened me.”
Then he said: “Do you know why I have come to you? Now I will go back to fight with the prince of Persia. When I leave, the prince of Greece will come.
However, I will tell you the things recorded in the writings of truth. There is no one strongly supporting me in these things but Miʹcha·el, your prince.
As regards King Bel·shazʹzar, he held a great feast for a thousand of his nobles, and he was drinking wine in front of them.
While under the influence of the wine, Bel·shazʹzar gave an order to bring in the vessels of gold and silver that his father Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem, so that the king and his nobles, his concubines and his secondary wives could drink from them.
Then they brought in the gold vessels that had been taken from the temple of the house of God in Jerusalem, and the king and his nobles, his concubines and his secondary wives drank from them.
They drank wine, and they praised the gods of gold and silver, of copper, iron, wood, and stone.
At that very moment the fingers of a man’s hand appeared and began writing on the plaster of the wall of the king’s palace opposite the lampstand, and the king could see the back of the hand as it was writing.
Then the king turned pale and his thoughts terrified him, and his hips shook and his knees began to knock together.
The king called out loudly to summon the conjurers, the Chal·deʹans, and the astrologers. The king said to the wise men of Babylon: “Any man who reads this writing and tells me its interpretation will be clothed with purple, a gold necklace will be placed around his neck, and he will rule as the third one in the kingdom.”
Then all the wise men of the king came in, but they were not able to read the writing or to make known the interpretation to the king.
So King Bel·shazʹzar was very frightened and his face turned pale; and his nobles were perplexed.
Because of the words of the king and his nobles, the queen entered the banqueting hall. The queen said: “O king, may you live on forever. Do not let your thoughts terrify you, nor let your face turn pale.
There is a man in your kingdom who has the spirit of holy gods. In the days of your father, enlightenment and insight and wisdom like the wisdom of gods were found in him. King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar your father appointed him as chief of the magic-practicing priests, conjurers, Chal·deʹans, and astrologers; your father did this, O king.
For Daniel, whom the king named Bel·te·shazʹzar, had an extraordinary spirit and knowledge and insight to interpret dreams, to explain riddles, and to solve knotty problems. Now let Daniel be summoned, and he will tell you the interpretation.”
So Daniel was brought in before the king. The king asked Daniel: “Are you Daniel of the exiles of Judah, whom my father the king brought out of Judah?
I have heard concerning you that the spirit of gods is in you and that enlightenment and insight and extraordinary wisdom have been found in you.
Now the wise men and the conjurers were brought in before me to read this writing and to make its interpretation known to me, but they are not able to tell the interpretation of the message.
But I have heard concerning you that you are able to provide interpretations and to solve knotty problems. Now if you are able to read the writing and to make its interpretation known to me, you will be clothed with purple, a gold necklace will be placed around your neck, and you will rule as the third one in the kingdom.”
Daniel then replied to the king: “You may keep your gifts and give your presents to others. However, I will read the writing to the king and make known its interpretation to him.
As for you, O king, the Most High God granted to Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar your father the kingdom and greatness and honor and majesty.
Because of the greatness He gave him, all peoples, nations, and language groups trembled with fear before him. Whomever he wanted, he killed or let live, and whomever he wanted, he exalted or humiliated.
But when his heart became haughty and his spirit became hardened, so that he acted presumptuously, he was brought down from the throne of his kingdom, and his dignity was taken away from him.
He was driven away from mankind, and his heart was made like that of a beast, and his dwelling was with the wild donkeys. He was given vegetation to eat just like bulls, and his body became wet with the dew of the heavens, until he came to know that the Most High God is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he sets up over it whomever he wants.
“But you, his son Bel·shazʹzar, have not humbled your heart, although you knew all of this.
Instead, you exalted yourself against the Lord of the heavens, and you had them bring you the vessels of his house. Then you and your nobles, your concubines and your secondary wives drank wine from them and praised gods of silver and gold, of copper, iron, wood, and stone, gods that see nothing and hear nothing and know nothing. But you have not glorified the God in whose hand is your breath and all your ways.
So the hand was sent from him, and this writing was inscribed.
And this is the writing that was inscribed: MEʹNE, MEʹNE, TEʹKEL, and PARʹSIN.
“This is the interpretation of the words: MEʹNE, God has numbered the days of your kingdom and brought it to an end.
“TEʹKEL, you have been weighed in the balances and found lacking.
“PEʹRES, your kingdom has been divided and given to the Medes and the Persians.”
Then Bel·shazʹzar gave the command, and they clothed Daniel with purple and placed a gold necklace around his neck; and they heralded concerning him that he was to become the third ruler in the kingdom.
That very night Bel·shazʹzar the Chal·deʹan king was killed.
And Da·riʹus the Mede received the kingdom; he was about 62 years old.
“From King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar to all the peoples, nations, and language groups dwelling in all the earth: May your peace abound!
I am pleased to declare the signs and wonders that the Most High God has performed toward me.
How great are his signs, and how mighty his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his rulership is for generation after generation.
“I, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, was at ease in my house and prospering in my palace.
I saw a dream that made me afraid. As I lay on my bed, the images and visions of my head frightened me.
So I issued an order to bring in before me all the wise men of Babylon so that they could make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
“At that time the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the Chal·deʹans, and the astrologers came in. When I told them what the dream was, they could not make its interpretation known to me.
At last there came in before me Daniel, whose name is Bel·te·shazʹzar after the name of my god and in whom there is the spirit of the holy gods, and I told him the dream:
“‘O Bel·te·shazʹzar the chief of the magic-practicing priests, I well know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and no secret is too difficult for you. So explain to me the visions I saw in my dream and its interpretation.
“‘In the visions of my head while on my bed, I saw a tree in the midst of the earth, and its height was enormous.
The tree grew and became strong, and its top reached the heavens, and it was visible to the ends of the whole earth.
Its foliage was beautiful, and its fruit was abundant, and there was food on it for all. Beneath it the beasts of the field would seek shade, and on its branches the birds of the heavens would dwell, and all creatures would feed from it.
“‘As I viewed the visions of my head while on my bed, I saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from the heavens.
He called out loudly: “Chop down the tree, cut off its branches, shake off its leaves, and scatter its fruit! Let the beasts flee from beneath it, and the birds from its branches.
But leave the stump with its roots in the ground, with a banding of iron and of copper, among the grass of the field. Let it be wet with the dew of the heavens, and let its portion be with the beasts among the vegetation of the earth.
Let its heart be changed from that of a human, and let it be given the heart of a beast, and let seven times pass over it.
This is by the decree of watchers, and the request is by the word of the holy ones, so that people living may know that the Most High is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he gives it to whomever he wants, and he sets up over it even the lowliest of men.”
“‘This was the dream that I, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, saw; now you, O Bel·te·shazʹzar, tell its interpretation, for all the other wise men of my kingdom are unable to make the interpretation known to me. But you are able to do so, because the spirit of holy gods is in you.’
“At that time Daniel, whose name is Bel·te·shazʹzar, was alarmed for a moment, and his thoughts began to frighten him. “The king said, ‘O Bel·te·shazʹzar, do not let the dream and the interpretation frighten you.’ “Bel·te·shazʹzar answered, ‘O my lord, may the dream apply to those hating you, and its interpretation to your enemies.
“‘The tree that you saw that grew great and became strong, whose top reached the heavens and was visible to all the earth,
which had beautiful foliage, abundant fruit, and food for all, beneath which the beasts of the field would dwell and on whose branches the birds of the heavens would reside,
it is you, O king, because you have grown great and become strong, and your grandeur has grown and reached to the heavens, and your rulership to the ends of the earth.
“‘And the king saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from the heavens, who was saying: “Chop down the tree and destroy it, but leave the stump with its roots in the ground, with a banding of iron and of copper, among the grass of the field. And let the dew of the heavens make it wet, and let its portion be with the beasts of the field until seven times pass over it.”
This is the interpretation, O king; it is the decree of the Most High that must befall my lord the king.
You will be driven away from among men, and your dwelling will be with the beasts of the field, and you will be given vegetation to eat just like bulls; and you will become wet with the dew of the heavens, and seven times will pass over you, until you know that the Most High is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he grants it to whomever he wants.
“‘But because they said to leave the stump of the tree with its roots, your kingdom will be yours again after you come to know that the heavens are ruling.
Therefore, O king, may my counsel be acceptable to you. Turn away from your sins by doing what is right, and from your iniquity by showing mercy to the poor. It may be that your prosperity will be extended.’”
All of this befell King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar.
Twelve months later he was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon.
The king was saying: “Is this not Babylon the Great that I myself have built for the royal house by my own strength and might and for the glory of my majesty?”
While the word was yet in the king’s mouth, a voice came down from the heavens: “To you it is being said, O King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, ‘The kingdom has gone away from you,
and from mankind you are being driven away. With the beasts of the field your dwelling will be, and you will be given vegetation to eat just like bulls, and seven times will pass over you, until you know that the Most High is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he grants it to whomever he wants.’”
At that moment the word was fulfilled on Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar. He was driven away from mankind, and he began to eat vegetation just like bulls, and his body became wet with the dew of the heavens, until his hair grew long just like eagles’ feathers and his nails were like birds’ claws.
“At the end of that time I, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, looked up to the heavens, and my understanding returned to me; and I praised the Most High, and to the One living forever I gave praise and glory, because his rulership is an everlasting rulership and his kingdom is for generation after generation.
All the inhabitants of the earth are regarded as nothing, and he does according to his own will among the army of the heavens and the inhabitants of the earth. And there is no one who can hinder him or say to him, ‘What have you done?’
“At that time my understanding returned to me, and the glory of my kingdom, my majesty, and my splendor returned to me. My high officials and nobles eagerly sought me out, and I was restored to my kingdom, and even more greatness was added to me.
“Now I, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, am praising and exalting and glorifying the King of the heavens, because all his works are truth and his ways are just, and because he is able to humiliate those who are walking in pride.”
“During that time Miʹcha·el will stand up, the great prince who is standing in behalf of your people. And there will occur a time of distress such as has not occurred since there came to be a nation until that time. And during that time your people will escape, everyone who is found written down in the book.
And many of those asleep in the dust of the earth will wake up, some to everlasting life and others to reproach and to everlasting contempt.
“And those having insight will shine as brightly as the expanse of heaven, and those bringing the many to righteousness like the stars, forever and ever.
“As for you, Daniel, keep the words secret, and seal up the book until the time of the end. Many will rove about, and the true knowledge will become abundant.”
Then I, Daniel, looked and saw two others standing there, one on this bank of the stream and one on the other bank of the stream.
Then one said to the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream: “How long will it be to the end of these marvelous things?”
Then I heard the man clothed in linen, who was up above the waters of the stream, as he raised his right hand and his left hand to the heavens and swore by the One who is alive forever: “It will be for an appointed time, appointed times, and half a time. As soon as the dashing to pieces of the power of the holy people comes to an end, all these things will come to their finish.”
Now as for me, I heard, but I could not understand; so I said: “O my lord, what will be the outcome of these things?”
Then he said: “Go, Daniel, because the words are to be kept secret and sealed up until the time of the end.
Many will cleanse themselves and whiten themselves and will be refined. And the wicked ones will act wickedly, and none of the wicked will understand; but those having insight will understand.
“And from the time that the constant feature has been removed and the disgusting thing that causes desolation has been put in place, there will be 1,290 days.
“Happy is the one who keeps in expectation and who arrives at the 1,335 days!
“But as for you, go on to the end. You will rest, but you will stand up for your lot at the end of the days.”
It seemed good to Da·riʹus to appoint 120 satraps over the whole kingdom.
Over them were three high officials, one of whom was Daniel; and the satraps would report to them, so that the king would not suffer loss.
Now Daniel was distinguishing himself over the other high officials and the satraps, for there was an extraordinary spirit in him, and the king intended to elevate him over the entire kingdom.
At that time the high officials and the satraps were seeking to find some grounds for accusation against Daniel respecting matters of state, but they could find no grounds for accusation or anything corrupt, for he was trustworthy and no negligence or corruption could be found in him.
These men then said: “We will find in this Daniel no grounds for accusation at all, unless we find it against him in the law of his God.”
So these high officials and satraps went in as a group to the king, and they said to him: “O King Da·riʹus, may you live on forever.
All the royal officials, prefects, satraps, high royal officers, and governors have consulted together to establish a royal decree and to enforce a ban, that for 30 days whoever makes a petition to any god or man except to you, O king, should be thrown into the lions’ pit.
Now, O king, may you establish the decree and sign it, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be annulled.”
So King Da·riʹus signed the decree and the ban.
But as soon as Daniel knew that the decree had been signed, he went to his house, which had the windows of his roof chamber open toward Jerusalem. And three times a day he got down on his knees and prayed and offered praise before his God, as he had regularly done prior to this.
At that time those men burst in and found Daniel petitioning and pleading for favor before his God.
So they approached the king and reminded him about the royal ban: “Did you not sign a ban stating that for 30 days any man who makes a petition to any god or man except to you, O king, should be thrown into the lions’ pit?” The king replied: “The matter is well-established according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be annulled.”
They immediately said to the king: “Daniel, who is of the exiles of Judah, has paid no regard to you, O king, nor to the ban that you signed, but three times a day he is praying.”
As soon as the king heard this, he was greatly distressed, and he tried to think of a way to rescue Daniel; and until the sun set he made every effort to save him.
Finally those men went in as a group to the king, and they said to the king: “Take note, O king, that the law of the Medes and the Persians is that any ban or decree that the king establishes cannot be changed.”
So the king gave the order, and they brought Daniel and threw him into the pit of lions. The king said to Daniel: “Your God whom you are continually serving will rescue you.”
Then a stone was brought and placed over the entrance of the pit, and the king sealed it with his signet ring and with the signet ring of his nobles, so that nothing could be changed with regard to Daniel.
The king then went to his palace. He passed the night fasting and refused any entertainment, and he could not sleep.
Finally at the first light of dawn, the king got up and hurried to the lions’ pit.
As he got near the pit, he called out to Daniel with a sad voice. The king asked Daniel: “O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God whom you are continually serving been able to rescue you from the lions?”
Daniel immediately said to the king: “O king, may you live on forever.
My God sent his angel and shut the mouth of the lions, and they have not harmed me, for I was found innocent before him; nor have I done any wrong to you, O king.”
The king was overjoyed, and he commanded that Daniel be lifted up out of the pit. When Daniel was lifted up out of the pit, he was completely unharmed, because he had trusted in his God.
The king then gave an order, and the men who had accused Daniel were brought, and they were thrown into the lions’ pit, along with their sons and their wives. They had not reached the bottom of the pit before the lions overpowered them and crushed all their bones.
Then King Da·riʹus wrote to all the peoples, nations, and language groups dwelling throughout the earth: “May you have abundant peace!
I am issuing an order that in every domain of my kingdom, people are to tremble in fear before the God of Daniel. For he is the living God and he endures forever. His kingdom will never be destroyed, and his rulership is eternal.
He rescues, saves, and performs signs and wonders in the heavens and on the earth, for he rescued Daniel from the paw of the lions.”
So this Daniel prospered in the kingdom of Da·riʹus and in the kingdom of Cyrus the Persian.
In the third year of the kingship of King Bel·shazʹzar, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, after the one that appeared to me previously.
I saw the vision, and as I watched I was in Shuʹshan the citadel, which is in the province of Eʹlam; I viewed the vision, and I was next to the watercourse of Uʹlai.
As I raised my eyes, look! there was a ram standing before the watercourse, and it had two horns. The two horns were tall, but one was higher than the other, and the higher one came up later.
I saw the ram making thrusts to the west and to the north and to the south, and no wild beasts could stand before it, and there was no one who could provide rescue from its power. It did as it pleased and exalted itself.
As I kept watching, look! there was a male goat coming from the west crossing the surface of the whole earth without touching the ground. And the goat had a conspicuous horn between its eyes.
It was coming toward the ram with the two horns, which I had seen standing before the watercourse; it was running toward it in a powerful rage.
I saw it closing in on the ram, and it was filled with bitterness toward it. It struck down the ram and broke its two horns, and the ram was powerless to stand up to it. It threw the ram to the ground and trampled it down, and there was no one to rescue it from its power.
Then the male goat exalted itself exceedingly, but as soon as it became mighty, the great horn was broken; then four conspicuous horns came up instead of the one, toward the four winds of the heavens.
Out of one of them came another horn, a small one, and it grew very great toward the south and toward the east and toward the Decoration.
It grew so great that it reached all the way to the army of the heavens, and it caused some of the army and some of the stars to fall to the earth, and it trampled them down.
It exalted itself even against the Prince of the army, and from him the constant feature was taken away, and the established place of his sanctuary was thrown down.
And an army was given over, together with the constant feature, because of transgression; and it kept throwing truth to the earth, and it acted and had success.
And I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one said to the one speaking: “How long will the vision of the constant feature and of the transgression causing desolation continue, to make both the holy place and the army things to trample on?”
So he said to me: “Until 2,300 evenings and mornings; and the holy place will certainly be restored to its right condition.”
While I, Daniel, was watching the vision and seeking to understand it, suddenly I saw standing in front of me someone who appeared to be a man.
Then I heard the voice of a man in the midst of the Uʹlai, and he called out: “Gaʹbri·el, make that one understand what he saw.”
So he came near to where I was standing, but when he came I was so terrified that I fell facedown. He said to me: “Understand, O son of man, that the vision is for the time of the end.”
But while he was speaking with me, I fell fast asleep with my face to the ground. So he touched me and made me stand up where I had been standing.
Then he said: “Here I am causing you to know what will happen in the final part of the denunciation, because it is for the appointed time of the end.
“The two-horned ram that you saw stands for the kings of Meʹdi·a and Persia.
The hairy male goat stands for the king of Greece; and the great horn that was between its eyes stands for the first king.
As for the horn that was broken, so that four stood up instead of it, there are four kingdoms from his nation that will stand up, but not with his power.
“And in the final part of their kingdom, as the transgressors act to a completion, a fierce-looking king who understands ambiguous sayings will stand up.
His power will become great, but not through his own power. He will bring ruin in an extraordinary way, and he will be successful and act effectively. He will bring mighty ones to ruin, also the people made up of the holy ones.
And by his cunning he will use deception to succeed; and in his heart he will exalt himself; and during a time of security he will bring many to ruin. He will even stand up against the Prince of princes, but he will be broken without human hand.
“What was said in the vision about the evenings and the mornings is true, but you must keep the vision secret, for it refers to a time many days from now.”
As for me, Daniel, I felt exhausted and I was sick for some days. Then I got up and carried out the king’s work; but I was numbed by what I had seen, and no one could understand it.
“When Israel was a boy, I loved him,And out of Egypt I called my son.
The more they called them,The more they went away from them. They kept sacrificing to the Baʹal imagesAnd offering sacrifices to the graven images.
But it was I who taught Eʹphra·im to walk, taking them in my arms;And they did not acknowledge that I had healed them.
With the ropes of men I kept drawing them, with the cords of love;And I was to them like one lifting a yoke from their jaws,And I gently brought food to each one.
They will not return to the land of Egypt, but As·syrʹi·a will be their king,Because they refused to return to me.
And a sword will whirl against his citiesAnd destroy his bars and devour them because of their schemes.
My people are bent on unfaithfulness to me. Though they called them upward, no one rises up.
How can I give you up, O Eʹphra·im? How can I hand you over, O Israel? How can I treat you like Adʹmah? How can I make you like Ze·boiʹim? I have had a change of heart;At the same time my compassions are stirred.
I will not vent my burning anger. I will not destroy Eʹphra·im again,For I am God and not man,The Holy One in your midst;And I will not come against you in fury.
They will walk after Jehovah, and he will roar like a lion;When he roars, his sons will come trembling from the west.
They will tremble like a bird when they come out of Egypt,Like a dove out of the land of As·syrʹi·a;And I will settle them in their houses,” declares Jehovah.
“Eʹphra·im has surrounded me with lies,And the house of Israel with deceit. But Judah still roams with God,And he is faithful to the Most Holy One.”
The word of Jehovah that came to Ho·seʹa the son of Be·eʹri in the days of Uz·ziʹah, Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel.
When Jehovah started to speak his word through Ho·seʹa, Jehovah said to Ho·seʹa: “Go, marry a woman of prostitution and have children of prostitution, because by prostitution the land has turned completely away from following Jehovah.”
So he went and married Goʹmer the daughter of Dib·laʹim, and she conceived and bore him a son.
Then Jehovah said to him: “Name him Jezʹre·el, for in a little while I will hold an accounting against the house of Jeʹhu for the acts of bloodshed of Jezʹre·el, and I will put an end to the royal rule of the house of Israel.
In that day I will break the bow of Israel in the Valley of Jezʹre·el.”
She conceived again and gave birth to a daughter. And He told him: “Name her Lo-ru·haʹmah, for I will no longer show mercy to the house of Israel, because I will certainly drive them away.
But I will show mercy to the house of Judah, and I will save them by Jehovah their God; I will not save them by bow or by sword or by war or by horses or by horsemen.”
After weaning Lo-ru·haʹmah, she conceived and gave birth to a son.
Then He said: “Name him Lo-amʹmi, because you are not my people and I will not be yours.
“And the number of the people of Israel will be like the grains of sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or numbered. And in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ it will be said to them, ‘The sons of the living God.’
And the people of Judah and of Israel will be gathered together into unity and will choose for themselves one head and go up out of the land, for great will be the day of Jezʹre·el.
“At the time when I would heal Israel,The error of Eʹphra·im is also exposed,And the wickedness of Sa·marʹi·a. For they practice deception;Thieves break in and marauder bands raid outside.
But they do not say in their heart that I will remember all their wickedness. Now their dealings are all around them;They are right in front of my face.
They make the king rejoice by their wickedness,And princes by their deceit.
All of them are adulterers,Burning like an oven fired by a baker,Who stops stirring the fire after kneading the dough until it is leavened.
On the day of our king, princes have become sick—They are enraged because of wine. He has reached out his hand to ridiculers.
For they approach with hearts burning like an oven. All night long the baker sleeps;In the morning the oven blazes like a flaming fire.
All of them are hot like an oven,And they devour their rulers. All their kings have fallen;No one among them calls out to me.
Eʹphra·im mixes with the nations. Eʹphra·im is like a round cake left unturned.
Strangers have consumed his strength, but he does not know it. And his gray hairs have turned white, but he does not notice it.
The pride of Israel has testified against him,But they have not returned to Jehovah their God,Nor have they looked for him despite all of this.
Eʹphra·im is like a simpleminded dove, lacking good sense. They have called out to Egypt; they have gone to As·syrʹi·a.
Wherever they go, I will spread my net over them. I will bring them down like the birds of the heavens. I will discipline them according to the warning given to their assembly.
Woe to them, for they have fled from me! Devastation to them, for they have transgressed against me! I was ready to redeem them, but they have spoken lies against me.
From their heart they did not call to me for help,Although they kept wailing on their beds. For their grain and new wine they would slash themselves;They turn against me.
Although I disciplined them and strengthened their arms,They are against me, scheming what is bad.
They changed course, but not to anything loftier;They were as unreliable as a loose bow. Their princes will fall by the sword because of their defiant tongues. For this they will be an object of ridicule in the land of Egypt.”
“When Eʹphra·im spoke, there was trembling;He was prominent in Israel. But he became guilty with regard to Baʹal and died.
Now they add to their sinAnd make metal statues from their silver;They skillfully make idols, all the work of craftsmen. To them they say, ‘Let the men who sacrifice kiss the calves.’
So they will become like the morning clouds,Like the dew that vanishes early,Like chaff blown from the threshing floor by a storm,And like smoke out of the hole in the roof.
But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt;You knew no God except me,And besides me there is no savior.
I knew you in the wilderness, in the land of drought.
They were satisfied with their pastures,They were satisfied and their heart became proud. And so they forgot me.
I will become like a young lion to them,Like a leopard lurking along the path.
I will come upon them like a bear that has lost its cubs,And I will rip open their chest. I will devour them there like a lion;A wild beast of the field will tear them to pieces.
It will destroy you, O Israel,Because you turned against me, against your helper.
Where, then, is your king, that he may save you in all your cities,And your rulers, of whom you said,‘Give me a king and princes’?
I gave you a king in my anger,And I will take him away in my fury.
The error of Eʹphra·im is wrapped up;His sin is stored up.
The pangs of childbirth will come for him. But he is an unwise child;He does not present himself when it is time to be born.
From the power of the Grave I will redeem them;From death I will recover them. Where are your stings, O Death? Where is your destructiveness, O Grave? Compassion will be concealed from my eyes.
Even if he should flourish among the reeds,An east wind will come, the wind of Jehovah,From the desert it comes, to dry up his well and drain his spring. That one will pillage the treasury of all his precious things.
Sa·marʹi·a will be held guilty, for she has rebelled against her God. By the sword they will fall,Their children will be dashed to pieces,And their pregnant women will be ripped open.”
Then Jehovah said to me: “Go once again, love the woman who is loved by another man and is committing adultery, just as Jehovah loves the people of Israel while they turn to other gods and love raisin cakes.”
So I purchased her for myself for 15 silver pieces and a hoʹmer measure and a half of barley.
Then I said to her: “You will remain mine for many days. You must not commit prostitution, and you must not have relations with another man, and I will behave the same way toward you.”
It is because for a long time the people of Israel will dwell without a king, without a prince, without a sacrifice, without a pillar, and without an ephʹod and teraphim statues.
Afterward the people of Israel will come back and look for Jehovah their God and for David their king, and they will come trembling to Jehovah and to his goodness in the final part of the days.
“Do not rejoice, O Israel,Do not act joyfully like the peoples. For by prostitution you have strayed from your God. You have loved the wages of a prostitute on every threshing floor of grain.
But the threshing floor and winepress will not feed them,And new wine will fail her.
They will not continue dwelling in the land of Jehovah;Instead, Eʹphra·im will return to Egypt,And in As·syrʹi·a they will eat what is unclean.
They will no longer pour out wine offerings to Jehovah;Their sacrifices will not please him. They are like the bread of mourning;All those eating it will defile themselves. For their bread is for themselves alone;It will not come into the house of Jehovah.
What will you do in the day of meeting,In the day of Jehovah’s festival?
For look! they will have to flee because of destruction. Egypt will gather them together, and Memʹphis will bury them. Nettles will take possession of their precious things of silver,And thornbushes will be in their tents.
The days of reckoning will come,The days of retribution will come,And Israel will know it. Their prophet will be a fool, and the man of inspiration will go mad;Because your error is abundant, the animosity against you is abundant.”
The watchman of Eʹphra·im was with my God. But now all the ways of his prophets are as the traps of a birdcatcher;There is animosity in the house of his God.
They have sunk deep into ruin, as in the days of Gibʹe·ah. He will remember their error and punish their sins.
“Like grapes in the wilderness I found Israel. Like the first of the early figs on a fig tree I saw your forefathers. But they went to Baʹal of Peʹor;They dedicated themselves to the shameful thing,And they became disgusting like the object of their love.
Eʹphra·im’s glory flies away like a bird;There is no giving birth, no pregnancy, and no conception.
Even if they raise children,I will bereave them until no man is left;Yes, woe to them when I turn away from them!
Eʹphra·im, planted in a pasture, was to me like Tyre;Now Eʹphra·im must bring his sons out to the slaughter.”
Give them, O Jehovah, what you should give them;A womb that miscarries and dry breasts.
“All their wickedness was in Gilʹgal, for there I came to hate them. I will drive them away from my house because of their evil deeds. I will no longer love them;All their princes are stubborn.
Eʹphra·im will be struck down. Their root will dry up, and they will produce no fruit. Even if they give birth, I will put to death their cherished offspring.”
My God will reject them,For they have not listened to him,And they will become fugitives among the nations.
“Say to your brothers, ‘My people!’ And to your sisters, ‘O woman shown mercy!’
Accuse your mother; accuse her,For she is not my wife and I am not her husband. She should remove her prostitution from herselfAnd her adultery from between her breasts,
Or I will strip her naked and make her as in the day she was born,Making her like a wilderness,Reducing her to a waterless land,And causing her to die of thirst.
And to her sons I will not show mercy,For they are the sons of prostitution.
For their mother has committed prostitution. She who was pregnant with them has acted shamefully, for she said,‘I will go after my passionate lovers,Those who give me my bread and my water,My wool and my linen, my oil and my drink.’
So I will block your way with a hedge of thorns;And I will raise up a stone wall against her,So that she cannot find her paths.
She will chase after her passionate lovers, but she will not overtake them;She will look for them, but she will not find them. Then she will say, ‘I will go back to my first husband,For I was better off at that time than I am now.’
She did not recognize that it was I who had given her the grain, the new wine, and the oil,And I who had given her silver in abundanceAnd gold, which they used for Baʹal.
‘Therefore, I will return and take away my grain in its timeAnd my new wine in its season,And I will snatch away my wool and my linen that were to cover her nakedness.
Now I will expose her private parts in full view of her passionate lovers,And no man will rescue her out of my hand.
I will put an end to all her joy,Her festivals, her new moons, her sabbaths, and all her festive seasons.
And I will ruin her vines and her fig trees, of which she has said: “These are my wages, which my passionate lovers gave to me”;I will turn them into a forest,And the wild animals of the field will devour them.
I will hold an accounting against her for the days when she offered sacrifices to the Baʹal images,When she would adorn herself with her rings and ornaments and would chase after her passionate lovers,And I was the one she forgot,’ declares Jehovah.
‘So I will persuade her,I will lead her into the wilderness,And I will speak to win her heart.
I will give her vineyards back to her from that time onward,And the Valley of Aʹchor as a gateway to hope;She will answer there as in the days of her youth,As in the day when she came out of the land of Egypt.
And in that day,’ declares Jehovah,‘You will call me My husband, and you will no longer call me My master.’
‘I will remove the names of the Baʹal images from her mouth,And they will no longer be remembered by their name.
In that day I will make a covenant for them with the wild animals of the field,And with the birds of the heavens and the creeping things of the ground;I will rid the land of the bow and the sword and war,And I will make them lie down in security.
I will engage myself to you forever;And I will engage myself to you in righteousness and in justice,In loyal love and in mercy.
I will engage myself to you in faithfulness,And you will certainly know Jehovah.’
‘In that day I will answer,’ declares Jehovah,‘I will answer the heavens,And they will answer the earth;
And the earth will answer the grain and the new wine and the oil;And they will answer Jezʹre·el.
I will sow her like seed for myself in the earth,And I will show mercy to her who was not shown mercy;I will say to those not my people: “You are my people,” And they will say: “You are my God.”’”
“Israel is a degenerate vine yielding its fruit. The more his fruit increases, the more he multiplies his altars;The better his land produces, the more splendid his sacred pillars.
Their heart is hypocritical;Now they will be found guilty. There is one who will break their altars and destroy their pillars.
Now they will say, ‘We have no king, for we have not feared Jehovah. And what could a king do for us?’
They speak empty words, make false oaths, and make covenants;So the judgment that springs up is like poisonous weeds in the furrows of the field.
The residents of Sa·marʹi·a will fear for the calf idol of Beth-aʹven. Its people will mourn over it,As will its foreign-god priests who rejoiced over it and its glory,For it will go away from them into exile.
It will be brought to As·syrʹi·a as a gift to a great king. Eʹphra·im will be put to shame,And Israel will be ashamed because of the advice it followed.
Sa·marʹi·a and her king will certainly be done away with,Like a snapped-off twig on the surface of waters.
The high places of Beth-aʹven, the sin of Israel, will be annihilated. Thorns and thistles will grow on their altars. People will say to the mountains, ‘Cover us!’ And to the hills, ‘Fall over us!’
From the days of Gibʹe·ah you have sinned, O Israel. There they have persisted. War did not overtake the sons of unrighteousness in Gibʹe·ah.
I will also discipline them when I please. And peoples will be gathered against them,When their two errors are harnessed on them.
Eʹphra·im was a trained heifer that loved to thresh,So I spared her fair neck. Now I will make someone ride Eʹphra·im. Judah will plow; Jacob will harrow for him.
Sow seed for yourselves in righteousness and reap loyal love. Plow for yourselves arable landWhile there is time to search for Jehovah,Until he comes and instructs you in righteousness.
But you have plowed wickedness,You have reaped unrighteousness,And you have eaten the fruitage of deception;For you have trusted in your own way,In the multitude of your warriors.
An uproar will rise against your people,And your fortified cities will all be devastated,Like the devastation by Shalʹman of the house of Arʹbel,In the day of battle when mothers were dashed to pieces alongside their children.
This is what will be done to you, O Bethʹel, because of your utter wickedness. At dawn the king of Israel will surely be done away with.”
“Hear this, you priests,Pay attention, O house of Israel,Listen, O house of the king,For the judgment involves you;Because you are a trap to MizʹpahAnd a net spread over Taʹbor.
And those falling away have sunk deep in slaughter,And I am warning all of them.
I know Eʹphra·im,And Israel is not hidden from me. For now, O Eʹphra·im, you have acted promiscuously;Israel has defiled itself.
Their dealings do not permit them to return to their God,Because there is a spirit of prostitution among them;And Jehovah they do not acknowledge.
The pride of Israel has testified against him;Both Israel and Eʹphra·im have stumbled in their error,And Judah has stumbled with them.
With their flock and their herd they went to look for Jehovah,But they could not find him. He had drawn away from them.
They have betrayed Jehovah,For they have fathered foreign sons. Now a month will devour them and their portions.
Blow a horn in Gibʹe·ah, a trumpet in Raʹmah! Shout a war cry at Beth-aʹven—after you, O Benjamin!
O Eʹphra·im, you will become an object of horror in the day of punishment. I have made known what will surely happen among the tribes of Israel.
The princes of Judah are like those moving a boundary. I will pour out my fury on them like water.
Eʹphra·im is oppressed, crushed by judgment,For he was determined to follow after his adversary.
So I was like a moth to Eʹphra·imAnd like rottenness to the house of Judah.
When Eʹphra·im saw his sickness, and Judah his ulcer,Eʹphra·im went to As·syrʹi·a and sent to a great king. But he was unable to heal you,And he could not cure your ulcer.
For I will be like a young lion to Eʹphra·im,And like a strong lion to the house of Judah. I myself will tear to pieces and go away;I will carry them off, and no one will rescue them.
I will go away and return to my place until they bear the consequences of their guilt,And then they will seek my favor. When they are in distress, they will seek me.”
“Come back, O Israel, to Jehovah your God,For you have stumbled because of your error.
Come back to Jehovah with these words,Say to him, ‘May you pardon our error and accept what is good,And we will offer the praise of our lips as we would young bulls.
As·syrʹi·a will not save us. We will not ride on horses,And we will no longer say, “O our God!” to the work of our hands,For it is by you that the fatherless child is shown mercy.’
I will heal their unfaithfulness. I will love them of my own free will,Because my anger has turned away from him.
I will become like the dew to Israel;He will blossom like the lilyAnd will send down his roots like the trees of Lebʹa·non.
His twigs will spread,His splendor will be like that of the olive tree,And his fragrance like that of Lebʹa·non.
They will again dwell in his shadow. They will grow grain and will bud like the vine. His fame will be like the wine of Lebʹa·non.
Eʹphra·im will say, ‘What more do I have to do with idols?’ I will answer and watch over him. I will be like a thriving juniper tree. From me your fruit will be found.”
Who is wise? Let him understand these things. Who is discreet? Let him know them. For the ways of Jehovah are upright,And the righteous will walk in them;But the transgressors will stumble in them.
Hear the word of Jehovah, O people of Israel,For Jehovah has a legal case against the inhabitants of the land,Because there is no truth nor loyal love nor knowledge of God in the land.
False oaths and lying and murderAnd stealing and adultery are widespread,And one act of bloodshed follows another act of bloodshed.
That is why the land will mournAnd every inhabitant in it will waste away;The wild animals of the field and the birds of the heavens,Even the fish of the sea, will perish.
“However, let no man contend or reprove,For your people are like those who contend against a priest.
So you will stumble in broad daylight,And the prophet will stumble with you, as if it were night. And I will silence your mother.
My people will be silenced, because there is no knowledge. Because you have rejected knowledge,I will also reject you from serving as my priest;And because you have forgotten the law of your God,I myself will forget your sons.
The more they increased, the more they sinned against me. I will change their glory into disgrace.
They feed on the sin of my people,And they are greedy for their error.
It will be the same for the people as for the priest;I will call them to account for their ways,And I will bring on them the consequences of their actions.
They will eat but not be satisfied. They will be promiscuous, but they will not increase,Because they have shown no regard for Jehovah.
Prostitution and wine and new wineTake away the motivation to do what is right.
My people consult their wooden idols,Doing what their staff tells them;Because the spirit of prostitution causes them to go astray,And by their prostitution they refuse to submit to their God.
On the tops of the mountains they sacrifice,And on the hills they make sacrifices smoke,Under oak trees and storax trees and every big tree,Because their shade is good. That is why your daughters commit prostitutionAnd your daughters-in-law commit adultery.
I will not hold an accounting against your daughters because of their prostitution,And against your daughters-in-law because of their adultery. For the men go off with the harlotsAnd sacrifice with the temple prostitutes;Such a people without understanding will come to ruin.
Although you are committing prostitution, O Israel,Let not Judah become guilty. Do not come to Gilʹgal or to Beth-aʹven,And do not swear, ‘As surely as Jehovah is alive!’
For like a stubborn cow, Israel has become stubborn. Will Jehovah now shepherd them like a young ram in an open pasture?
Eʹphra·im is joined to idols. Let him alone!
When their beer is finished,They become promiscuous. And her rulers dearly love dishonor.
The wind will wrap her in its wings,And they will be ashamed of their sacrifices.”
“Eʹphra·im is feeding on wind. He chases after the east wind all day long. He multiplies lies and violence. They make a covenant with As·syrʹi·a and take oil to Egypt.
Jehovah has a legal case against Judah;He will call for an accounting against Jacob according to his ways,And he will repay him according to his deeds.
In the womb he seized his brother by the heel,And with his vigor he contended with God.
He kept contending with an angel and prevailed. He wept and begged for his favor.” He found him at Bethʹel, and there He spoke with us,
Jehovah the God of armies,Jehovah is his memorial name.
“So return to your God,Maintain loyal love and justice,And always hope in your God.
But in the hand of the tradesman are deceptive scales;He loves to defraud.
Eʹphra·im keeps saying, ‘Indeed, I have become rich;I have found wealth. And in all my toil, they will not find anything wrong or sinful.’
But I am Jehovah your God from the land of Egypt. I will again make you dwell in tentsAs in the days of an appointed time.
I spoke to the prophets,I multiplied their visions,And I spoke parables through the prophets.
With Gilʹe·ad there has been deception and untruth. In Gilʹgal they have sacrificed bulls,And their altars are like piles of stones in the furrows of the field.
Jacob ran away to the territory of Aʹram;Israel served there for a wife,And for a wife he guarded sheep.
By a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up from Egypt,And by a prophet he was guarded.
Eʹphra·im has caused bitter offense;His bloodguilt remains on him;His Lord will repay him for his reproach.”
“Come, and let us return to Jehovah,For he has torn us to pieces, but he will heal us. He struck us, but he will bind our wounds.
He will revive us after two days. On the third day he will raise us up,And we will live before him.
We will know, we will earnestly seek to know Jehovah. His going out is as certain as the dawn;He will come to us like a pouring rain,Like a spring rain that saturates the earth.”
“What should I do with you, Eʹphra·im? What should I do with you, Judah? For your loyal love is like the morning clouds,Like the dew that quickly vanishes.
That is why I will cut them down by means of the prophets;I will kill them with the words of my mouth. And the judgments on you will shine as the light.
For in loyal love I delight, not in sacrifice,And in the knowledge of God, rather than in whole burnt offerings.
But they, like mere men, have violated the covenant. There they have betrayed me.
Gilʹe·ad is a town of evildoers,Covered with footprints of blood.
The company of priests are like marauder bands lying in ambush for a man. They murder on the road at Sheʹchem,For their conduct is shameful.
I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel. There Eʹphra·im practices prostitution;Israel has defiled itself.
Furthermore, O Judah, a harvest is set for you,When I gather back the captives of my people.”
“Put a horn to your mouth! One comes like an eagle against the house of Jehovah,For they have violated my covenant and transgressed against my law.
To me they cry out, ‘My God, we, Israel, know you!’
Israel has rejected what is good. Let an enemy pursue him.
They have appointed kings, but not through me. They have appointed princes, but I did not recognize them. With their silver and their gold they have made idols,To their own destruction.
Your calf has been rejected, O Sa·marʹi·a. My anger flares up against them. How long will they be incapable of innocence?
For this is from Israel. A craftsman made it, and it is not God;The calf of Sa·marʹi·a will be reduced to splinters.
For it is wind that they are sowing,And they will reap a storm wind. No stalk produces ripe grain;Whatever sprouts produces no flour. If any is produced, foreigners will swallow it down.
Israel will be swallowed down. Now they will be among the nations,Like an unwanted vessel.
For they have gone up to As·syrʹi·a, like a lone wild donkey. Eʹphra·im has hired lovers.
Although they hire them from among the nations,I will now round them up;They will begin to suffer because of the burden imposed by king and princes.
For Eʹphra·im has multiplied altars to sin. They became his altars for sinning.
I wrote for him the many things of my law,But they were regarded as something strange.
They offer sacrificial gifts to me, and they eat the meat,But Jehovah takes no pleasure in them. Now he will remember their error and punish them for their sins. They have turned back to Egypt.
Israel has forgotten his Maker and has built temples,And Judah has multiplied fortified cities. But I will send fire into his cities,And it will consume the towers of each one.”
The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the son of Pe·thuʹel:
“Hear this, you elders,And pay attention, all you inhabitants of the land. Has anything like this happened in your daysOr in the days of your forefathers?
Tell about it to your sons,And let your sons tell about it to their sons,And their sons to the next generation.
What was left by the devouring locust, the swarming locust has eaten;And what was left by the swarming locust, the unwinged locust has eaten;And what the unwinged locust has left, the voracious locust has eaten.
Wake up, you drunkards, and weep! Wail, all you wine drinkers,Because the sweet wine has been taken from your mouths.
For a nation has come up into my land, mighty and without number. Its teeth are the teeth of a lion, and its jaws are those of a lion.
It has devastated my vine and turned my fig tree into a stump,Stripping them completely bare and tossing them aside,Leaving their twigs white.
Wail as a virgin wearing sackcloth doesFor the bridegroom of her youth.
Grain offering and drink offering have ceased from the house of Jehovah;The priests, the ministers of Jehovah, are in mourning.
The field has been devastated, the ground mourns;For the grain has been devastated, the new wine has dried up, the oil has failed.
Farmers are dismayed, vinedressers wail,Because of the wheat and the barley;For the harvest of the field has perished.
The vine has dried up,The fig tree has withered. The pomegranate, the palm, and the apple,All the trees of the field have dried up;For joy has turned to shame among the people.
Put on sackcloth and mourn, you priests;Wail, you ministers of the altar. Come in and spend the night in sackcloth, you ministers of my God;For grain offering and drink offering have been withheld from the house of your God.
Proclaim a fast; call for a solemn assembly. Gather the elders together, with all the inhabitants of the land,To the house of Jehovah your God, and cry to Jehovah for help.
Woe because of the day! For the day of Jehovah is near,And it will come like a destruction from the Almighty!
Has not food been taken from before our very eyes,And rejoicing and joy from the house of our God?
The seeds have shriveled under their shovels. Storehouses are desolate. Granaries have been torn down, for the grain has dried up.
Even the livestock groan! The herds of cattle wander in confusion, for they have no pasture! And the flocks of sheep bear the punishment.
To you, O Jehovah, I will call;For fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness,And a flame has consumed all the trees of the field.
Even the wild beasts long for you,Because the streams of water have dried upAnd fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.”
“For look! in those days and in that time,When I bring back the captives of Judah and Jerusalem,
I will also gather together all the nationsAnd bring them down to the Valley of Je·hoshʹa·phat. I will enter into judgment with them thereIn behalf of my people and my inheritance Israel,For they scattered them among the nations,And they divided up my land among themselves.
For my people they cast lots;They would trade a boy to hire a prostituteAnd sell a girl for wine to drink.
Also, what do you have against me,O Tyre and Siʹdon and all the regions of Phi·lisʹti·a? Are you repaying me for something? If you are repaying me,I will swiftly, speedily bring your repayment on your heads.
Because you have taken my silver and gold,And you have brought my finest treasures into your temples;
And the people of Judah and Jerusalem you have sold to the Greeks,In order to remove them far from their territory;
Here I am rousing them to come from the place where you sold them,And I will bring your repayment on your heads.
I will sell your sons and daughters into the hand of the people of Judah,And they will sell them to the men of Sheʹba, to a nation far away;For Jehovah himself has spoken it.
Proclaim this among the nations: ‘Prepare for war! Stir up the mighty men! Let all the soldiers draw near, let them advance!
Beat your plowshares into swords and your pruning shears into spears. Let the weak one say: “I am powerful.”
Come and help, all you surrounding nations, assemble together!’” To that place, O Jehovah, bring down your powerful ones.
“Let the nations be roused and come up to the Valley of Je·hoshʹa·phat;For there I will sit in order to judge all the surrounding nations.
Thrust in a sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Come down and tread, for the winepress is full. The vats overflow, for their badness is abundant.
Crowds, crowds are in the valley of the decision,For the day of Jehovah is near in the valley of the decision.
Sun and moon will become dark,And the stars will lose their brightness.
And Jehovah will roar out of Zion,Out of Jerusalem he will raise his voice. And heaven and earth will rock;But Jehovah will be a refuge for his people,A fortress for the people of Israel.
And you will have to know that I am Jehovah your God, residing in Zion, my holy mountain. Jerusalem will become a holy place,And strangers will pass through her no more.
In that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine,The hills will flow with milk,And the streams of Judah will all flow with water. Out of the house of Jehovah a spring will flow,And it will irrigate the Valley of the Acacia Trees.
But Egypt will become desolate,And Eʹdom will be a desolate wilderness,Because of the violence done to the people of Judah,In whose land they shed innocent blood.
But Judah will always be inhabited,And Jerusalem to generation after generation.
I will consider innocent their blood that I had not considered innocent;And Jehovah will reside in Zion.”
“Blow a horn in Zion! Shout a war cry in my holy mountain. Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble,For the day of Jehovah is coming! It is near!
It is a day of darkness and gloom,A day of clouds and thick gloom,Like light of dawn spreading out on the mountains. There is a people numerous and mighty;Never before has there been one like it,And never again will there be anotherThrough the years of all generations.
Ahead of it a fire devours,And behind it a flame consumes. The land ahead of it is like the garden of Eʹden,But behind it is a desolate wilderness,And nothing can escape.
Its appearance is like the appearance of horses,And they run like warhorses.
The sound is like that of chariots as they leap on the mountaintops,Like the crackling of a blazing fire that consumes stubble. It is like a mighty people drawn up in battle formation.
Because of them, peoples will be in anguish. Every face will grow flushed.
They charge like warriors,They scale a wall like soldiers,Each keeps to his own course,And they do not swerve from their paths.
They do not shove one another;Each man advances in his course. If the weapons cause some to fall,The others do not break ranks.
Into the city they rush, on the wall they run. Onto the houses they climb, through the windows they enter like a thief.
Before them the land trembles and the heavens rock. Sun and moon have become dark,And the stars have lost their brightness.
Jehovah will raise his voice before his army, for his camp is very numerous. For the one carrying out His word is mighty;For the day of Jehovah is great and very awe-inspiring. Who can endure it?”
“Yet even now,” declares Jehovah, “return to me with all your hearts,With fasting and weeping and wailing.
Rip apart your hearts, and not your garments,And return to Jehovah your God,For he is compassionate and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love,And he will reconsider the calamity.
Who knows whether he will turn back and reconsiderAnd leave behind a blessing,A grain offering and a drink offering for Jehovah your God?
Blow a horn in Zion! Proclaim a fast; call for a solemn assembly.
Gather the people; sanctify the congregation. Collect the old men; gather the children and nursing infants. Let the bridegroom go out from his inner chamber, and the bride from her bridal chamber.
Between the porch and the altarLet the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep and say: ‘Do feel pity, O Jehovah, for your people;Do not make your inheritance an object of scorn,Letting the nations rule over them. Why should the peoples say, “Where is their God?”’
Then Jehovah will be zealous for his landAnd show compassion on his people.
Jehovah will answer his people: ‘Here I am sending to you grain and new wine and oil,And you will be fully satisfied;I will no longer make you a reproach among the nations.
I will drive the northerner far away from you;I will disperse him to a dry and desolate wasteland,With his vanguard toward the eastern seaAnd his rear guard toward the western sea. The foul smell from him will ascend,The stench from him will keep ascending;For He will do great things.’
Do not be afraid, O land. Be joyful and rejoice, for Jehovah will do great things.
Do not be afraid, you beasts of the field,For the pastures of the wilderness will become green,And the trees will bear fruit;The fig tree and the vine must give their full yield.
You sons of Zion, be joyful and rejoice in Jehovah your God;For he will give you the autumn rain in the right amount,And he will send upon you a downpour,The autumn rain and the spring rain, as before.
The threshing floors will be full of pure grain,And the presses will overflow with new wine and oil.
And I will make compensation to you for the yearsThat the swarming locust, the unwinged locust, the voracious locust, and the devouring locust have eaten,My great army that I sent among you.
You will surely eat to satisfaction,And you will praise the name of Jehovah your God,Who has done wonders in your behalf;My people will never again be put to shame.
And you will have to know that I am in the midst of IsraelAnd that I am Jehovah your God—there is no other! My people will never again be put to shame.
After that I will pour out my spirit on every sort of flesh,And your sons and your daughters will prophesy,Your old men will dream dreams,And your young men will see visions.
And even on my male slaves and female slavesI will pour out my spirit in those days.
And I will give wonders in the heavens and on the earth,Blood and fire and columns of smoke.
The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into bloodBefore the coming of the great and awe-inspiring day of Jehovah.
And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved;For on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be those who escape, just as Jehovah has said,The survivors whom Jehovah calls.”
The words of Aʹmos, who was among the sheep raisers from Te·koʹa, which he received in vision concerning Israel in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah and in the days of Jer·o·boʹam son of Joʹash, the king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
He said: “Jehovah will roar out of Zion,And he will raise his voice out of Jerusalem. The pastures of the shepherds will mourn,And the summit of Carʹmel will dry up.”
“This is what Jehovah says,‘“For three revolts of Damascus, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they threshed Gilʹe·ad with iron threshing sledges.
So I will send a fire upon the house of Hazʹa·el,And it will consume the fortified towers of Ben-haʹdad.
I will break the bars of Damascus;I will destroy the inhabitants from Bikʹath-aʹvenAnd the one ruling from Beth-eʹden;And the people of Syria will go as exiles to Kir,” says Jehovah.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘“For three revolts of Gazʹa, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they took a whole group of exiles to hand them over to Eʹdom.
So I will send a fire onto the wall of Gazʹa,And it will consume her fortified towers.
I will destroy the inhabitants from Ashʹdod,And the one ruling from Ashʹke·lon;I will turn my hand against Ekʹron,And the remaining Phi·lisʹtines will perish,” says the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘For three revolts of Tyre, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they handed over a whole group of exiles to Eʹdom,And because they did not remember the covenant of brothers.
So I will send a fire onto the wall of Tyre,And it will consume her fortified towers.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘For three revolts of Eʹdom, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because he pursued his own brother with the sword,And because he refused to show mercy;In his anger he keeps tearing them apart relentlessly,And he remains furious with them continually.
So I will send a fire into Teʹman,And it will consume the fortified towers of Bozʹrah.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘“For three revolts of the Amʹmon·ites, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they ripped open the pregnant women of Gilʹe·ad to widen out their own territory.
So I will set fire to the wall of Rabʹbah,And it will consume her fortified towers,With a war cry in the day of battle,With a tempest in the day of storm wind.
And their king will go into exile together with his princes,” says Jehovah.’
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! He formed a locust swarm when the late crop was beginning to come up. This was the later crop after the king’s hay had been cut.
When the swarm finished eating up the vegetation of the land, I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please forgive! How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
So Jehovah reconsidered this. “It will not happen,” Jehovah said.
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! The Sovereign Lord Jehovah called for a punishment by fire. It consumed the vast deep waters, and it consumed a portion of the land.
Then I said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, please hold this back. How can Jacob survive? For he is weak!”
So Jehovah reconsidered this. “That too will not happen,” the Sovereign Lord Jehovah said.
This is what he showed me: Look! Jehovah was standing on a wall made with a plumb line, and there was a plumb line in his hand.
Then Jehovah said to me: “What do you see, Aʹmos?” So I said: “A plumb line.” Jehovah then said: “Here I am putting a plumb line among my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
The high places of Isaac will be desolated, and the sanctuaries of Israel will be devastated; and I will come against the house of Jer·o·boʹam with a sword.”
Am·a·ziʹah the priest of Bethʹel sent this message to King Jer·o·boʹam of Israel: “Aʹmos is conspiring against you right in the midst of the house of Israel. The land cannot put up with all his words.
For this is what Aʹmos says, ‘Jer·o·boʹam will die by the sword, and Israel will surely go into exile from its land.’”
Am·a·ziʹah then said to Aʹmos: “O visionary, go, run away to the land of Judah, earn your bread there, and there you may prophesy.
But you must no longer prophesy at Bethʹel, for it is the sanctuary of a king and the house of a kingdom.”
Then Aʹmos answered Am·a·ziʹah: “I was not a prophet nor the son of a prophet; but I was a herdsman, and I took care of sycamore fig trees.
But Jehovah took me away from following the flock, and Jehovah said to me, ‘Go, prophesy to my people Israel.’
So now hear the word of Jehovah: ‘You are saying, “Do not prophesy against Israel, and do not preach against the house of Isaac.”
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: “Your wife will become a prostitute in the city, and your sons and your daughters will fall by the sword. Your land will be apportioned out with a measuring line, and you yourself will die in an unclean land; and Israel will surely go into exile from its land.”’”
“Hear this word that Jehovah has spoken concerning you, O people of Israel, concerning the whole family that I brought up out of the land of Egypt:
‘You alone I have known out of all the families of the earth. That is why I will call you to account for all your errors.
Will two walk together unless they have agreed to meet?
Will a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey? Will a young lion growl from its lair when it has caught nothing?
Will a bird fall into a trap on the ground when there is no snare for it? Does a trap spring up from the ground when it has caught nothing?
If a horn is blown in a city, do the people not tremble? If a calamity occurs in the city, is it not Jehovah who has acted?
For the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will not do a thingUnless he has revealed his confidential matter to his servants the prophets.
The lion has roared! Who will not be afraid? The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has spoken! Who will not prophesy?’
‘Proclaim it on the fortified towers of AshʹdodAnd on the fortified towers in the land of Egypt. Say: “Gather together against the mountains of Sa·marʹi·a;See the turmoil in her midstAnd the defrauding within her.
For they do not know how to do what is right,” declares Jehovah,“Those who are storing up violence and destruction in their fortified towers.”’
Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says,‘An adversary will surround the land,He will strip you of your strength,And your fortified towers will be plundered.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘Just as the shepherd snatches away two legs or a piece of an ear from the mouth of the lion,That is how the people of Israel will be snatched away,Those now sitting in Sa·marʹi·a on splendid beds and on fine couches.’
‘Hear and warn the house of Jacob,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, the God of armies.
‘For in the day I call Israel to account for all his revolts,I will also call for an accounting against the altars of Bethʹel;The horns of the altar will be cut off and fall to the earth.
I will strike down the winter house along with the summer house.’ ‘The houses of ivory will perish,And the great houses will come to their end,’ declares Jehovah.”
I saw Jehovah stationed above the altar, and he said: “Strike the head of the pillar, and the thresholds will shake. Cut them off at the head, and I will kill the last of them with the sword. No one who flees will get away, and no one trying to escape will succeed.
If they dig down into the Grave,From there my hand will take them;And if they go up to the heavens,From there I will bring them down.
And if they hide themselves on the top of Carʹmel,From there I will search them out and take them. If they conceal themselves from my eyes on the bottom of the sea,There I will command the serpent to bite them.
If they go into captivity before their enemies,From there I will command the sword, and it will kill them;I will fix my eyes on them for bad, and not for good.
For the Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of the armies, is the One who touches the land,So that it melts, and all its inhabitants will mourn;And all of it will rise like the Nile,And sink down like the Nile of Egypt.
‘The one who builds his stairs in the heavensAnd establishes his structure over the earth;The one who summons the waters of the sea,To pour them out on the surface of the earth—Jehovah is his name.’
‘Are you not like the sons of the Cushʹites to me, O people of Israel?’ declares Jehovah. ‘Did I not bring Israel up out of the land of Egypt,The Phi·lisʹtines out of Crete, and Syria out of Kir?’
‘Look! The eyes of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah are on the sinful kingdom,And he will annihilate it from the surface of the land. But I will not completely annihilate the house of Jacob,’ declares Jehovah.
‘For look! I am giving the command,And I will shake the house of Israel among all the nations,Just as one shakes a sieve,And not a pebble falls to the ground.
They will die by the sword, all the sinners of my people,Those who are saying, “The calamity will not come near us or reach us.”’
‘In that day I will raise up the booth of David that is fallen,I will repair the breaches,And I will restore its ruins;I will rebuild it as in the days of long ago,
So that they may take possession of what is remaining of Eʹdom,And all the nations on whom my name has been called,’ declares Jehovah, who is doing this.
‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares Jehovah,‘When the plowman will overtake the harvester,And the treader of grapes, the one carrying seed;And the mountains will drip with sweet wine,And all the hills will flow with it.
I will gather back the captives of my people Israel,And they will rebuild the desolated cities and inhabit them;They will plant vineyards and drink their wine,And make gardens and eat their fruit.’
‘I will plant them on their land,And they will never again be uprootedFrom their land that I have given them,’ says Jehovah your God.”
“This is what Jehovah says,‘“For three revolts of Moʹab, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because he burned the bones of the king of Eʹdom for lime.
So I will send a fire into Moʹab,And it will consume the fortified towers of Keʹri·oth;Moʹab will die amid an uproar,With a war cry, with the sound of a horn.
I will remove the ruler from her midstAnd kill all her princes along with him,” says Jehovah.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘For three revolts of Judah, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they rejected the law of Jehovah,And because they did not keep his regulations;But the same lies their forefathers followed have led them astray.
So I will send a fire into Judah,And it will consume the fortified towers of Jerusalem.’
This is what Jehovah says,‘For three revolts of Israel, and for four, I will not reverse it,Because they sell the righteous for silver,And the poor for a pair of sandals.
They trample the heads of the lowly into the dust of the earth,And they block the path of the meek. A man and his father have relations with the same girl,Profaning my holy name.
They stretch out next to every altar on garments they seized as security for a loan;And the wine they drink at the house of their gods was obtained from those they fined.’
‘But it was I who annihilated the Amʹor·ite before them,Who was as tall as the cedars and as strong as the oaks;I destroyed his fruit above and his roots below.
I brought you up out of the land of Egypt,And I made you walk through the wilderness 40 years,To take possession of the land of the Amʹor·ite.
I raised up some of your sons as prophetsAnd some of your young men as Nazʹi·rites. Is this not so, O people of Israel?’ declares Jehovah.
‘But you kept giving the Nazʹi·rites wine to drink,And you commanded the prophets: “You must not prophesy.”
So I will crush you in your place,Just as a wagon loaded with cut grain crushes what is under it.
The swift one will have no place to flee,The strong one will not retain his power,And no warrior will escape with his life.
The bowman will not stand his ground,The swift of foot will not escape,And the horseman will not escape with his life.
Even the most courageous among the warriorsWill flee naked in that day,’ declares Jehovah.”
“Hear this word that I am taking up against you as a dirge, O house of Israel:
‘The virgin, Israel, has fallen;She cannot get up again. She has been abandoned on her own ground;There is no one to raise her up.’
“For this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The city that marches out with a thousand will have a hundred left;And the one that goes out with a hundred will have ten left, for the house of Israel.’
“For this is what Jehovah says to the house of Israel: ‘Search for me and keep living.
Do not search for Bethʹel,Do not go to Gilʹgal or pass over to Beʹer-sheʹba,For Gilʹgal will certainly go into exile,And Bethʹel will come to nothing.
Search for Jehovah, and keep living,So that he does not burst out like a fire on the house of Joseph,Consuming Bethʹel, with no one to extinguish it.
You turn justice into wormwood,And you cast righteousness to the earth.
The One who made the Kiʹmah constellation and the Keʹsil constellation,The One who turns deep shadow into morning,The One who makes day as dark as night,The One who summons the waters of the seaTo pour them out on the surface of the earth—Jehovah is his name.
He will cause destruction to burst out against the strong,Bringing destruction on fortified places.
They hate those who give reproof in the city gate,And they detest those who speak truthfully.
Because you demand farm rent from the poorAnd you take his grain as tribute,You will not keep dwelling in the houses of hewn stone that you have builtNor drink the wine from the choice vineyards that you have planted.
For I know how many your revolts areAnd how great your sins are—You harass the righteous,You take bribes,And you deny the rights of the poor in the city gate.
Therefore, those with insight will keep silent at that time,For it will be a time of calamity.
Search for what is good, and not what is bad,So that you may keep living. Then Jehovah the God of armies may be with you,Just as you say he is.
Hate what is bad, and love what is good,Let justice prevail in the city gate. It may be that Jehovah the God of armiesWill show favor to the remaining ones of Joseph.’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah the God of armies, Jehovah, says: ‘In all the public squares there will be wailing,And in all the streets they will say, “Alas, alas!” They will call on the farmers to mournAnd the professional mourners to wail.’
‘In every vineyard there will be wailing;For I will pass through your midst,’ says Jehovah.
‘Woe to those who yearn for the day of Jehovah! What, then, will the day of Jehovah mean for you? It will be darkness, and not light.
It will be like a man who flees from a lion and is confronted by a bear,And when he enters his house and leans his hand against the wall, a snake bites him.
Will not the day of Jehovah be darkness, and not light;Will it not have gloom, and not brightness?
I hate, I despise your festivals,And I take no pleasure in the aroma of your solemn assemblies.
Even if you offer me whole burnt offerings and gift offerings,I will find no pleasure in them;And I will not look with favor on your communion sacrifices of fattened animals.
Spare me the din of your songs;And let me not hear the melodies of your stringed instruments.
Let justice flow down like waters,And righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.
Did you bring me sacrifices and gift offeringsFor those 40 years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
Now you will have to carry away Sakʹkuth your king and Kaiʹwan,Your images, the star of your god, whom you made for yourselves,
And I will send you into exile beyond Damascus,’ says he whose name is Jehovah the God of armies.”
“Hear this word, you cows of Baʹshan,Who are on the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a,You women who are defrauding the lowly and crushing the poor,Who say to their husbands, ‘Bring us something to drink!’
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by his holiness,‘“Look! The days are coming upon you when he will lift you up with butcher hooksAnd the rest of you with fishhooks.
You will go out through the breaches in the wall, each one straight ahead;And you will be cast out to Harʹmon,” declares Jehovah.’
‘Come to Bethʹel and commit transgression,To Gilʹgal and transgress even more! Bring your sacrifices in the morning,And your tithes on the third day.
Burn a thanksgiving sacrifice of leavened bread;Loudly proclaim your voluntary offerings! For that is what you love to do, O people of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
‘And for my part, I made your teeth clean of food in all your citiesAnd caused a lack of bread in all your houses;But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
‘I also withheld rain from you three months before the harvest;I made it rain on one city but not on another city. One plot of land would have rain,But another plot of land where there was no rain would dry up.
People of two or three cities staggered to one city to drink water,And they would not get satisfied;But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
‘I struck you with scorching heat and mildew. You multiplied your gardens and vineyards,But the locust would devour your fig trees and olive trees;And you still did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
‘I sent among you a pestilence like that of Egypt. With the sword I killed your young men and captured your horses. I made the stench of your camps rise up into your nostrils;But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
‘I caused an overthrow among youLike God’s overthrow of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah. And you were like a log snatched out of the fire;But you did not come back to me,’ declares Jehovah.
So that is what I will do to you, O Israel. Because this is what I will do to you,Get ready to meet your God, O Israel.
For look! he is the One who formed the mountains and created the wind;He tells man what His thoughts are,He turns the dawn into darkness,And he treads on earth’s high places;Jehovah the God of armies is his name.”
“Woe to the self-assured ones in Zion,To those feeling secure in the mountain of Sa·marʹi·a,The prominent men of the foremost of nations,Those to whom the house of Israel comes!
Cross over to Calʹneh and see. Go from there to Great Haʹmath,And go down to Gath of the Phi·lisʹtines. Are they better than these kingdoms,Or is their territory larger than yours?
Are you putting out of your mind the day of calamityAnd bringing in a reign of violence?
They lie on beds of ivory and sprawl out on couches,Eating the rams of the flock and the fattened calves;
They improvise songs to the sound of the harp,And like David, they invent musical instruments;
They drink wine by the bowlfulAnd anoint themselves with the choicest oils. But they are unconcerned about the catastrophe of Joseph.
So they will go into exile at the head of the exiles,And the revelry of those sprawled out will come to an end.
‘The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has sworn by himself,’ declares Jehovah the God of armies,‘“I detest the pride of Jacob,I hate his fortified towers,And I will hand over the city and what fills it.
“‘“And if ten men are left in one house, they will also die.
A relative will come to carry them out and burn them one by one. He will bring their bones out from the house; then he will say to whoever is in the inner rooms of the house, ‘Are there any more with you?’ And he will say, ‘Nobody!’ Then he will say, ‘Keep silent! For it is not the time to make any mention of the name of Jehovah.’”
For it is Jehovah giving the command,And he will strike down the great house into rubble,And the small house into debris.
Do horses run on a crag,Or will one plow there with cattle? For you have turned justice into a poisonous plant,And the fruit of righteousness into wormwood.
You rejoice over what is worthless,And you say, “Have we not become powerful in our own strength?”
Therefore, O house of Israel, I will bring against you a nation,’ declares Jehovah the God of armies,‘And they will oppress you from Leʹbo-haʹmath down to the Wadi of the Arʹa·bah.’”
This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah showed me: Look! There was a basket of summer fruit.
Then he said, “What do you see, Aʹmos?” I replied, “A basket of summer fruit.” Then Jehovah said to me: “The end has come for my people Israel. I will no longer pardon them.
‘The songs of the temple will turn into wailing in that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘There will be many carcasses thrown everywhere—hush!’
Hear this, you who trample on the poorAnd who bring the meek of the land to an end,
Who say, ‘When will the new moon festival be over, that we may sell our grain,And the Sabbath, that we may offer grain for sale? So that we may make the eʹphah measure smallerAnd the shekel weight greater,To falsify our scales of deception;
So that we may buy the needy for silverAnd the poor for a pair of sandals,And sell the worthless part of the grain.’
Jehovah has sworn by the Pride of Jacob,‘Never will I forget all their deeds.
On this account the land will tremble,And every inhabitant in it will mourn. Will it not all rise like the Nile,And surge and sink down like the Nile of Egypt?’
‘In that day,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah,‘I will make the sun go down at high noon,And I will darken the land on a bright day.
I will turn your festivals into mourningAnd all your songs into dirges. I will put sackcloth on all hips and make every head bald;I will make it like the mourning for an only son,And the end of it like a bitter day.’
‘Look! The days are coming,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah,‘When I will send a famine into the land,Not a famine for bread or a thirst for water,But for hearing the words of Jehovah.
They will stagger from sea to seaAnd from the north to the east. They will rove about searching for the word of Jehovah, but they will not find it.
In that day beautiful virgins will faint,Also young men, because of the thirst;
Those who swear by the guilt of Sa·marʹi·a and who say,“As surely as your god lives, O Dan!” And, “As surely as the way of Beʹer-sheʹba lives!” They will fall, and they will not rise up again.’”
The vision of O·ba·diʹah: This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says regarding Eʹdom: “We have heard a report from Jehovah,An envoy has been sent among the nations: ‘Rise up, let us prepare for battle against her.’”
“Look! I have made you insignificant among the nations;You are utterly despised.
The presumptuousness of your heart has deceived you,You who reside in the retreats of the crag,Dwelling in the height, saying in your heart,‘Who will bring me down to the earth?’
Even if you make your dwelling high like the eagle,Or if you place your nest among the stars,I would bring you down from there,” declares Jehovah.
“If thieves would come to you, robbers by night,(How utterly you will be destroyed!) Would they not steal only what they wanted? Or if it were grape gatherers who would come to you,Would they not leave some gleanings behind?
O how Eʹsau has been searched out! How his hidden treasures have been sought after!
They have driven you to the border. All your allies have deceived you. The men at peace with you have prevailed against you. Those eating bread with you will place a net under you,But you will not discern it.
In that day,” declares Jehovah,“Will I not destroy the wise ones out of EʹdomAnd discernment out of the mountainous region of Eʹsau?
And your warriors will become terrified, O Teʹman,Because each one in the mountainous region of Eʹsau will be destroyed in the slaughter.
Because of the violence done to your brother Jacob,Shame will cover you,And you will perish forever.
On the day when you stood off to the side,On the day when strangers took his army into captivity,When foreigners entered his gate and cast lots over Jerusalem,You acted like one of them.
You should not gloat over your brother’s day on the day of his misfortune,You should not rejoice over the people of Judah on the day of their perishing,And you should not speak so arrogantly on the day of their distress.
You should not come into the gate of my people in the day of their disaster,You should not gloat over his calamity in the day of his disaster,And you should not lay your hands on his wealth in the day of his disaster.
You should not stand at the crossroads to slaughter his escapees,And you should not hand over his survivors in the day of distress.
For the day of Jehovah against all the nations is near. As you have done, so it will be done to you. The way you treated others will come back on your own head.
For in the way that you have drunk on my holy mountain,All the nations will keep drinking constantly. They will drink and gulp down,And they will be as though they had never existed.
But on Mount Zion will be those who escape,And it will be holy;And the house of Jacob will take possession of the things belonging to them.
The house of Jacob will become a fire,The house of Joseph a flame,And the house of Eʹsau like stubble;They will set them ablaze and consume them,And there will be no survivor of the house of Eʹsau,For Jehovah himself has spoken.
They will take possession of the Negʹeb and the mountainous region of Eʹsau,Of the She·pheʹlah and the land of the Phi·lisʹtines. They will take possession of the field of Eʹphra·im and the field of Sa·marʹi·a,And Benjamin will take possession of Gilʹe·ad.
To the exiles of this rampart,To the people of Israel will belong the land of the Caʹnaan·ites as far as Zarʹe·phath. And the exiles of Jerusalem, who were in Se·pharʹad, will possess the cities of the Negʹeb.
And saviors will go up on Mount ZionTo judge the mountainous region of Eʹsau,And the kingship will become Jehovah’s.”
The word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah the son of A·mitʹtai, saying:
“Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim judgment against her, for their wickedness has come to my attention.”
But Joʹnah got up to run away from Jehovah to Tarʹshish; he went down to Jopʹpa and found a ship going to Tarʹshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to go with them to Tarʹshish, away from Jehovah.
Then Jehovah hurled a strong wind at the sea, and there was such a violent storm on the sea that the ship was about to be wrecked.
The mariners were so frightened that each of them began to call on his god for help. And they began throwing the articles of the ship into the sea, to make it lighter. But Joʹnah had gone down into the inner part of the ship, where he lay down and fell fast asleep.
The ship captain approached and said to him: “Why are you sleeping? Get up, call out to your god! Perhaps the true God will show his concern for us, and we will not perish.”
Then they said to one another: “Come, let us cast lots to find out who is to blame for this calamity.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell to Joʹnah.
They said to him: “Please tell us, who is to blame for this calamity that has come upon us? What is your work, and where do you come from? What is your country, and from what people are you?”
He replied: “I am a Hebrew, and I fear Jehovah the God of the heavens, the One who made the sea and the dry land.”
At this the men became even more afraid, and they asked him: “What have you done?” (The men learned that he was running away from Jehovah, because he had told them.)
So they said to him: “What should we do to you to make the sea calm down for us?” For the sea was growing more and more stormy.
He replied: “Lift me up and throw me into the sea, and the sea will calm down for you; for I know that it is because of me that this violent storm has come upon you.”
However, the men rowed hard to bring the ship back to dry land, but they could not, because the sea grew more and more stormy around them.
Then they called out to Jehovah and said: “Ah, now, O Jehovah, please, may we not perish because of this man! Do not hold us responsible for innocent blood, since you have done as you pleased, O Jehovah.”
Then they lifted Joʹnah up and threw him into the sea; and the sea ceased its raging.
Then the men were struck with great fear of Jehovah, and they offered a sacrifice to Jehovah and made vows.
Jehovah now sent a huge fish to swallow Joʹnah, so that Joʹnah came to be in the belly of the fish for three days and three nights.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Joʹnah a second time, saying:
“Get up, go to Ninʹe·veh the great city, and proclaim to her the message that I tell you.”
So Joʹnah got up and went to Ninʹe·veh in obedience to the word of Jehovah. Now Ninʹe·veh was a very large city—a walking distance of three days.
Then Joʹnah entered the city, and walking a day’s journey, he was proclaiming: “In just 40 days more, Ninʹe·veh will be overthrown.”
And the men of Ninʹe·veh put faith in God, and they proclaimed a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest to the least of them.
When the message reached the king of Ninʹe·veh, he rose up from his throne and took off his royal garment and covered himself with sackcloth and sat down in the ashes.
Furthermore, he issued a proclamation throughout Ninʹe·veh,“By the decree of the king and his nobles: No man or beast, herd or flock, should eat anything at all. They should not take food, nor should they drink any water.
Let them be covered with sackcloth, both man and beast; and let them call out earnestly to God and turn from their evil ways and from the violence they practice.
Who knows whether the true God may reconsider what he intends to do and turn from his burning anger, so that we may not perish?”
When the true God saw what they did, how they had turned back from their evil ways, he reconsidered the calamity that he said he would bring on them, and he did not bring it.
Then Joʹnah prayed to Jehovah his God from the belly of the fish,
and he said: “Out of my distress I called out to Jehovah, and he answered me. Out of the depths of the Grave I cried for help. You heard my voice.
When you threw me to the depths, into the heart of the open sea,Then the currents engulfed me. All your breakers and waves swept over me.
And I said, ‘I have been driven away from your sight! How will I gaze again upon your holy temple?’
Waters engulfed me and threatened my life;The watery deep closed in on me. Weeds were wrapped around my head.
To the bottoms of the mountains I sank down. The bars of the earth were closing upon me forever. But out of the pit you brought up my life, O Jehovah my God.
When my life was ebbing away, Jehovah was the One whom I remembered. Then my prayer came in to you, into your holy temple.
Those who are devoted to the worthless idols forsake their source of loyal love.
But as for me, with the voice of thanksgiving I will sacrifice to you. What I have vowed, I will pay. Salvation is from Jehovah.”
In time Jehovah commanded the fish, and it vomited Joʹnah out onto the dry land.
But this was highly displeasing to Joʹnah, and he became hot with anger.
So he prayed to Jehovah: “Ah, now, Jehovah, was this not my concern when I was in my own land? That is why I tried to flee to Tarʹshish in the first place; for I knew that you are a compassionate and merciful God, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love, one who feels grieved over calamity.
Now, O Jehovah, please take away my life, for it is better for me to die than to live.”
Jehovah asked: “Is it right for you to be so angry?”
Joʹnah then went out of the city and sat down east of the city. He made a shelter for himself there and sat in its shade to see what would happen to the city.
Jehovah God then provided a bottle-gourd plant to grow up over Joʹnah, to give him shade for his head and to relieve his misery. And Joʹnah was very pleased with the bottle-gourd plant.
But the true God sent a worm at the break of dawn on the next day, and it attacked the bottle-gourd plant, and it withered.
When the sun began to shine, God also sent a scorching east wind, and the sun beat down on Joʹnah’s head, and he grew faint. He kept asking to die, and he kept saying, “It is better for me to die than to live.”
God asked Joʹnah: “Is it right for you to be so angry over the bottle-gourd plant?” At that he said: “I have a right to be angry, so angry that I want to die.”
But Jehovah said: “You felt sorry for the bottle-gourd plant, which you did not work for, nor did you make it grow; it grew in one night and perished in one night.
Should I not also feel sorry for Ninʹe·veh the great city, in which there are more than 120,000 men who do not even know right from wrong, as well as their many animals?”
The word of Jehovah that came to Miʹcah of Moʹresh·eth, in the days of Joʹtham, Aʹhaz, and Hez·e·kiʹah, kings of Judah, and that he received in a vision concerning Sa·marʹi·a and Jerusalem:
“Hear, all you peoples! Pay attention, O earth and what fills you,And let the Sovereign Lord Jehovah serve as a witness against you—Jehovah from his holy temple.
For look! Jehovah is going out from his place;He will come down and tread on earth’s high places.
The mountains will melt under him,And the valleys will split apartLike wax before the fire,Like waters poured down a steep slope.
All of this is because of the revolt of Jacob,Because of the sins of the house of Israel. What is the revolt of Jacob? Is it not Sa·marʹi·a? And what are the high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?
I will make Sa·marʹi·a a heap of ruins of the field,A place for planting vineyards;I will hurl her stones down into the valley,And I will lay bare her foundations.
All her graven images will be crushed to pieces,And all the gifts for which she hired herself out will be burned in the fire. I will devastate all her idols. For she collected them from the wages of prostitution,And they will again become the wages of prostitutes.”
Because of this I will wail and howl;I will walk barefoot and naked. My wailing will be like that of jackals,And my mourning like that of ostriches.
For her wound cannot be healed;It has come as far as Judah. The plague has spread to the gate of my people, to Jerusalem.
“Do not announce it in Gath;You must not weep at all. In Beth-aphʹrah roll in the dust.
Cross over in nakedness and shame, O inhabitants of Shaʹphir. The inhabitants of Zaʹa·nan have not come out. There will be wailing in Beth-eʹzel, and it will take its support away from you.
For the inhabitants of Maʹroth have waited for good,But what is bad has come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
Harness the chariot to the team of horses, O inhabitants of Laʹchish. You were the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion,For in you were found the revolts of Israel.
So you will give parting gifts to Moʹresh·eth-gath. The houses of Achʹzib were something deceitful to the kings of Israel.
The conqueror I will yet bring in to you, O inhabitants of Ma·reʹshah. As far as A·dulʹlam the glory of Israel will come.
Make yourselves bald and shear off your hair for your cherished children. Make yourselves as bald as an eagle,For they have been taken away from you into exile.”
Woe to me! I am like one who,After the gathering of summer fruitAnd the gleaning following a grape harvest,Finds no cluster of grapes to eat,No early fig that I crave.
The loyal one has perished from the earth;Among men there is no one upright. All of them lie in ambush for bloodshed. Each hunts his own brother with a dragnet.
Their hands are expert at doing what is bad;The prince is making demands,The judge asks for a reward,The prominent one makes known his desires,And they work it out together.
Their best one is like thorns,Their most upright one is worse than a thorn hedge. The day of your watchmen and of your reckoning will come. Now they will panic.
Do not put faith in your companionOr trust a close friend. Guard what you say to the one who lies in your embrace.
For a son despises his father,A daughter rises up against her mother,And a daughter-in-law is against her mother-in-law;A man’s enemies are the men of his household.
But as for me, I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah. I will show a waiting attitude for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy. Although I have fallen, I will rise up;Although I dwell in the darkness, Jehovah will be my light.
The wrath of Jehovah I will bear—For I have sinned against him—Until he pleads my legal case and brings about justice for me. He will bring me out to the light;I will look upon his righteousness.
My enemy will also see,And shame will cover her who said to me: “Where is Jehovah your God?” My eyes will look upon her. Now she will be trampled like mud in the streets.
It will be a day for building your stone walls;On that day the boundary will be extended.
On that day they will come to youAll the way from As·syrʹi·a and the cities of Egypt,From Egypt all the way to the River;From sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.
And the land will become desolate because of its inhabitants,As a result of what they have done.
Shepherd your people with your staff, the flock of your inheritance,The one who was living alone in a forest—in the midst of an orchard. Let them feed on Baʹshan and Gilʹe·ad as in the days of old.
“As in the days when you came out of the land of Egypt,I will show him wonderful things.
Nations will see and be ashamed despite all their might. They will put their hand over their mouth;Their ears will become deaf.
They will lick the dust like serpents;Like the reptiles of the earth they will come trembling out of their strongholds. To Jehovah our God they will come in dread,And they will be in fear of you.”
Who is a God like you,Pardoning error and passing over the transgression of the remnant of his inheritance? He will not hold onto his anger forever,For he delights in loyal love.
He will again show us mercy; he will conquer our errors. You will throw all their sins into the depths of the sea.
You will show faithfulness to Jacob,Loyal love to Abraham,As you swore to our forefathers from the days of old.
I said: “Hear, please, you heads of JacobAnd you commanders of the house of Israel. Should you not know what is just?
But you hate what is good and love what is bad;You tear off the skin from my people and the flesh from their bones.
You also eat the flesh of my peopleAnd strip off their skin,Smashing their bones, crushing them to pieces,Like what is cooked in a pot, like meat in a cooking pot.
At that time they will call to Jehovah for help,But he will not answer them. He will hide his face from them at that time,Because of their wicked deeds.
This is what Jehovah says against the prophets who are leading my people astray,Who proclaim ‘Peace!’ while they bite with their teethBut who declare war against him who puts nothing into their mouths:
‘You will have night; there will be no vision;There will only be darkness for you, no divination. The sun will set on the prophets,And the day will turn dark for them.
The visionaries will be put to shame,And the diviners will be disappointed. All of them will have to cover over the mustache,For there is no answer from God.’”
As for me, I am filled with power by the spirit of Jehovah,And with justice and might,To tell to Jacob his revolt and to Israel his sin.
Hear this, please, you heads of the house of JacobAnd you commanders of the house of Israel,Who detest justice and who make crooked all that is straight,
Who build Zion with bloodshed and Jerusalem with unrighteousness.
Her leaders judge for a bribe,Her priests instruct for a price,And her prophets practice divination for money. And yet they lean on Jehovah, saying: “Is not Jehovah with us? No calamity will come upon us.”
So because of you,Zion will be plowed up as a field,Jerusalem will become heaps of ruins,And the mountain of the House will become like high places in a forest.
“Woe to those who scheme what is harmful,Who work out evil on their beds! When morning light comes they carry it out,Because it is in the power of their hand.
They desire fields and seize them;Also houses, and they take them;They defraud a man of his house,A man of his inheritance.
Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am devising against this family a calamity from which you will not escape. You will no longer walk haughtily, for it is a time of calamity.
In that day people will recite a proverb concerning you,And they will bitterly lament over you. They will say: “We are completely devastated! He caused the portion of my people to change hands—how he removes it from me! To the unfaithful one he assigns our fields.”
So you will have no one to stretch the measuring cord,To allot the land in the congregation of Jehovah.
“Stop preaching!” they preach,“They should not preach these things;Humiliation will not overtake us!”
Is it being said, O house of Jacob: “Has the spirit of Jehovah become impatient? Are these his deeds?” Do not my own words bring good to those walking uprightly?
But lately my own people have risen up as an enemy. You openly strip off the majestic ornament with the garmentFrom those passing by confidently, like those returning from war.
You drive the women of my people out from their delightful houses;From their children you take away my splendor forever.
Get up and go, for this is no place of rest. Because of uncleanness, there is destruction, grievous destruction.
If a man walks after wind and deception and tells this lie: “I will preach to you about wine and alcoholic drink,” Then he would be just the preacher for this people!
I will certainly gather all of you, O Jacob;I will surely collect the remaining ones of Israel together. In unity I will place them, like sheep in the pen,Like a flock in its pasture;It will be noisy with people.’
The one breaking out will go before them;They will break out and pass through the gate and go out by it. Their king will pass through before them,With Jehovah at their head.”
“Now you are slashing yourself,O daughter under attack;A siege is laid against us. With a rod they strike the judge of Israel on the cheek.
And you, O Bethʹle·hem Ephʹra·thah,The one too little to be among the thousands of Judah,From you will come out for me the one to be ruler in Israel,Whose origin is from ancient times, from the days of long ago.
So he will give them upUntil the time that she who is to give birth has given birth. And the rest of his brothers will return to the people of Israel.
He will stand up and shepherd in the strength of Jehovah,In the superiority of the name of Jehovah his God. And they will dwell in security,For now his greatness will reach the ends of the earth.
And he will bring peace. Should the As·syrʹi·an invade our land and tread on our fortified towers,We will raise up against him seven shepherds, yes, eight princes of mankind.
They will shepherd the land of As·syrʹi·a with the sword,And the land of Nimʹrod at its entrances. And he will rescue us from the As·syrʹi·an,When he invades our land and treads on our territory.
The remaining ones of Jacob will be in the midst of many peoplesLike dew from Jehovah,Like showers of rain on vegetationThat do not put hope in manOr wait for the sons of men.
The remaining ones of Jacob will be among the nations,In the midst of many peoples,Like a lion among the beasts of a forest,Like a young lion among flocks of sheep,That passes through and pounces and tears in pieces;And there is no one to rescue them.
Your hand will be raised over your adversaries,And all your enemies will be destroyed.”
“In that day,” declares Jehovah,“I will do away with your horses from your midst and destroy your chariots.
I will destroy the cities of your landAnd tear down all your fortified places.
I will put an end to the sorcery you practice,And no one practicing magic will remain among you.
I will destroy your graven images and your pillars from your midst,And you will no longer bow down to the work of your hands.
I will uproot your sacred poles from your midstAnd annihilate your cities.
In anger and wrath I will execute vengeanceOn the nations that have not obeyed.”
In the final part of the days,The mountain of the house of JehovahWill become firmly established above the top of the mountains,And it will be raised up above the hills,And to it peoples will stream.
And many nations will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of JehovahAnd to the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways,And we will walk in his paths.” For law will go out of Zion,And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.
He will render judgment among many peoplesAnd set matters straight respecting mighty nations far away. They will beat their swords into plowsharesAnd their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation,Nor will they learn war anymore.
They will sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree,And no one will make them afraid,For the mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken.
For all the peoples will walk, each in the name of its god,But we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.
“In that day,” declares Jehovah,“I will gather the one who was limping,And collect together the dispersed one,Along with those I treated harshly.
I will make the one who was limping a remnant,And the one far removed a mighty nation;And Jehovah will rule as king over them in Mount Zion,From now on and forever.
As for you, O tower of the flock,The mound of the daughter of Zion,To you it will come, yes, the first dominion will come,The kingdom belonging to the daughter of Jerusalem.
Now why are you shouting loudly? Have you no king,Or has your adviser perished,So that pain has seized you like a woman giving birth?
Writhe and groan, O daughter of Zion,Like a woman giving birth,For now you will go from the city and reside in the field. You will go as far as to Babylon,And there you will be rescued;There Jehovah will buy you back from the hand of your enemies.
Now many nations will be gathered against you;They will say, ‘Let her be defiled,And let our eyes see this happen to Zion.’
But they do not know the thoughts of Jehovah,They do not understand his purpose;For he will gather them like a row of newly cut grain to the threshing floor.
Get up and thresh, O daughter of Zion;For I will change your horns into iron,And I will change your hooves into copper,And you will pulverize many peoples. You will devote their dishonest profit to Jehovah,And their resources to the true Lord of the whole earth.”
Hear, please, what Jehovah is saying. Get up, present a legal case before the mountains,And may the hills hear your voice.
Hear, O mountains, the legal case of Jehovah,You firm foundations of the earth,For Jehovah has a legal case with his people;It is against Israel that he will argue:
“My people, what have I done to you? How have I tired you out? Testify against me.
For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt,From the house of slavery I redeemed you;I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Mirʹi·am.
My people, remember, please, what King Baʹlak of Moʹab proposed,And what Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor answered him—What took place from Shitʹtim to Gilʹgal—So that you may know the righteous acts of Jehovah.”
With what will I come before Jehovah? With what will I bow before God on high? Will I come before him with whole burnt offerings,With year-old calves?
Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams,With tens of thousands of torrents of oil? Will I give my firstborn son for my revolt,The fruit of my body for my sin?
He has told you, O man, what is good. And what is Jehovah requiring of you? Only to exercise justice, to cherish loyalty,And to walk in modesty with your God!
The voice of Jehovah calls out to the city;Those with practical wisdom will fear your name. Pay attention to the rod and to the one who appointed it.
Are there still the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wickedAnd the incomplete eʹphah measure that is detestable?
Can I be morally clean with wicked scales,With a bag of fraudulent stone weights?
For her rich men are full of violence,And her inhabitants speak lies;Their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
“Therefore, I will wound you by striking you,Making you desolate because of your sins.
You will eat but not be satisfied;You will be empty inside. What you remove, you will not carry off safely,And what you do carry off, I will give to the sword.
You will sow seed, but you will not reap. You will tread olives, but you will not use the oil;And you will make new wine, but you will drink no wine.
For you observe the statutes of Omʹri and all the work of the house of Aʹhab,And you walk in accord with their advice. That is why I will make you an object of horrorAnd her inhabitants something to be whistled at;And you will bear the scorn of the peoples.”
A pronouncement against Ninʹe·veh: The book of the vision of Naʹhum the Elʹkosh·ite:
Jehovah is a God who requires exclusive devotion and takes vengeance;Jehovah takes vengeance and is ready to express his wrath. Jehovah takes vengeance against his foes,And he stores up wrath for his enemies.
Jehovah is slow to anger and great in power,But by no means will Jehovah hold back due punishment. His path is in destructive wind and storm,And the clouds are the dust of his feet.
He rebukes the sea, and he dries it up;And he makes all the rivers run dry. Baʹshan and Carʹmel wither,And the blossoms of Lebʹa·non wither.
Mountains quake because of him,And the hills melt. The earth will be in an upheaval because of his face,Along with the land and all those dwelling in it.
Who can stand before his indignation? And who can withstand the heat of his anger? His wrath will be poured out like fire,And the rocks will be shattered because of him.
Jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of distress. He is mindful of those seeking refuge in him.
With a sweeping flood he will make a complete extermination of her place,And darkness will pursue his enemies.
What will you plot against Jehovah? He is causing a complete extermination. Distress will not arise a second time.
For they are interwoven like thorns,And they are like those drunk with beer;But they will be consumed like dry stubble.
From you will come one who plots evil against Jehovah,Giving worthless advice.
This is what Jehovah says: “Though they were at full strength and numerous,Even so they will be cut down and will pass away. I have afflicted you, but I will afflict you no more.
And now I will break his yoke bar from off you,And I will tear your bonds in two.
Jehovah has commanded concerning you,‘Your name will not be perpetuated further. I will do away with the carved images and metal statues from the house of your gods. I will make a grave for you, because you are contemptible.’
Look! On the mountains are the feet of one bringing good news,The one proclaiming peace. Celebrate your festivals, O Judah, pay your vows,For the worthless one will never pass through you again. He will be utterly destroyed.”
Woe to the city of bloodshed! She is completely full of deception and robbery. She is never without prey!
There is the crack of the whip and the rattle of wheels,The dashing horse and the bounding chariot.
The mounted horseman, the flashing sword, and the glittering spear,The multitude of the slain and the heaps of carcasses—There is no end to the dead bodies. They keep stumbling over the dead bodies.
This is because of the many acts of prostitution of the prostitute,She who is attractive and charming, a mistress of sorceries,Who ensnares nations by her prostitution and families by her sorceries.
“Look! I am against you,” declares Jehovah of armies,“I will lift your skirts up over your face;I will cause nations to see your nakedness,And kingdoms your disgrace.
And I will throw filth on youAnd make you despicable;I will make a spectacle of you.
Everyone who sees you will flee from you and say,‘Ninʹe·veh has been devastated! Who will sympathize with her?’ Where will I find comforters for you?
Are you better than No-aʹmon, which sat by the Nile canals? Waters surrounded her;Her wealth was the sea and her wall was the sea.
E·thi·oʹpi·a was her source of boundless strength, also Egypt. Put and the Libʹy·ans were your helpers.
But even she became an exile;She went into captivity. Her children also were dashed to pieces on every street corner. They cast lots over her honored men,And all her great men have been bound with fetters.
You will also become drunk;You will go into hiding. You will seek refuge from the enemy.
All your fortifications are like fig trees with the first ripe fruits;If they are shaken, they will fall into the mouth of devourers.
Look! Your troops are like women in your midst. The gates of your land will be wide open for your enemies. Fire will consume the bars of your gates.
Draw water for the siege! Strengthen your fortifications. Go down into the mire and tread the clay;Grab hold of the brick mold.
Even there fire will consume you. A sword will cut you down. It will devour you as the young locusts do. Make yourself as numerous as the young locusts! Yes, make yourself as numerous as the locusts!
You have multiplied your merchants more than the stars of the heavens. The young locust strips off its skin and flies away.
Your guards are like the locust,And your officers like a locust swarm. They camp in the stone pens on a cold day,But when the sun shines, they fly away;And no one knows where they are.
Your shepherds are drowsy, O king of As·syrʹi·a;Your nobles stay in their residences. Your people are scattered on the mountains,And no one is gathering them together.
There is no relief for your catastrophe. Your wound is beyond healing. All those hearing the report about you will clap their hands;For who has not suffered from your relentless cruelty?”
One who scatters has come up against you. Guard the fortifications. Keep watch over the road. Brace yourselves and muster all your strength.
For Jehovah will restore the pride of Jacob,Along with the pride of Israel,For the devastators have devastated them;And they have ruined their shoots.
The shields of his mighty men are dyed red,His warriors are dressed in crimson. The iron fittings of his war chariots flash like fireIn the day he prepares for battle,And the juniper spears are brandished.
The war chariots race madly through the streets. They rush up and down the public squares. They shine like burning torches and flash like lightning.
He will summon his officers. They will stumble as they advance. They rush to her wall;They set up the barricade.
The gates of the rivers will be opened,And the palace will be dissolved.
It has been decreed: She is exposed,She is carried away, and her slave girls moan;They sound like doves as they beat their breasts.
Throughout her days Ninʹe·veh was like a pool of waters,But now they are fleeing. “Stand still! Stand still!” But no one is turning back.
Plunder silver, plunder gold! There is no end to the treasures. It is stocked with all sorts of precious things.
The city is empty, desolate, devastated! Their hearts melt in fear, their knees buckle, their hips tremble;All their faces are flushed.
Where is the lair of lions, where the young lions feed,Where the lion goes out leading its cub,With no one to make them afraid?
The lion tore apart enough prey for his cubsAnd strangled for his lionesses. He kept his dens filled with prey,His lairs with torn animals.
“Look! I am against you,” declares Jehovah of armies,“I will burn up her war chariots in smoke,And the sword will devour your young lions. I will cut off your prey from the earth,And the sound of your messengers will be heard no more.”
A pronouncement that Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet received in a vision:
How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear? How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?
Why do you make me witness wrongdoing? And why do you tolerate oppression? Why are destruction and violence before me? And why do quarreling and conflict abound?
So law is paralyzed,And justice is never carried out. For the wicked surround the righteous;That is why justice is perverted.
“Look among the nations and pay attention! Stare in amazement and be astounded;For something will happen in your daysThat you will not believe even if it is told to you.
For here I am raising up the Chal·deʹans,The ruthless and impetuous nation. They sweep through vast stretches of the earthTo seize homes not theirs.
They are frightening and fearsome. They establish their own justice and authority.
Their horses are swifter than leopards,And they are fiercer than wolves in the night. Their warhorses gallop forward;Their horses come from far away. They swoop down like the eagle rushing to feed.
All of them come bent on violence. The assembling of their faces is like the east wind,And they scoop up captives like sand.
They scoff at kingsAnd laugh at high officials. They laugh at every fortified place;They pile up a dirt ramp and capture it.
Then they move forward like the wind and pass through,But they will become guilty,Because they credit their power to their god.”
Are you not from everlasting, O Jehovah? O my God, my Holy One, you do not die. O Jehovah, you appointed them to execute judgment;My Rock, you established them for punishment.
Your eyes are too pure to look on what is evil,And you cannot tolerate wickedness. Why, then, do you tolerate the treacherousAnd keep silent when a wicked man swallows up someone more righteous than he is?
Why do you make man like the fish of the sea,Like creeping things that have no ruler?
All of these he hauls up with a fishhook. He catches them in his dragnet,And he gathers them in his fishing net. That is why he rejoices greatly.
That is why he offers sacrifices to his dragnetAnd makes sacrifices to his fishing net;For by them his portion is rich,And his food is choice.
Will he then keep emptying out his dragnet? Will he go on slaughtering nations without compassion?
The prayer of Ha·bakʹkuk the prophet, in dirges:
O Jehovah, I have heard the report about you. I am in awe, O Jehovah, of your activity. In the midst of the years bring it to life! In the midst of the years make it known. May you remember to show mercy during the turmoil.
God came from Teʹman,The Holy One from Mount Paʹran. (Selah) His majesty covered the heavens;With his praise the earth was filled.
His brightness was like the light. Two rays flashed from his hand,Where his strength was hidden.
Before him went pestilence,And burning fever followed at his feet.
He stood still and shook the earth. With a look, he made nations leap. The eternal mountains were smashed,And the ancient hills bowed down. The paths of long ago are his.
I saw trouble in the tents of Cuʹshan. The tent cloths of the land of Midʹi·an trembled.
Is it against the rivers, O Jehovah,Is it against the rivers that your anger is burning? Or is your fury against the sea? For you rode on your horses;Your chariots were victorious.
Your bow is uncovered and ready. The rods are assigned with an oath. (Selah) You split the earth with rivers.
Mountains writhed in pain at the sight of you. A downpour of waters swept through. The deep roared with its voice. It lifted its hands high.
Sun and moon stood still in their lofty abode. Your arrows went out like the light. The lightning of your spear was brilliant.
You marched through the earth with indignation. You trampled the nations in anger.
You went out for the salvation of your people, to save your anointed one. You crushed the leader of the house of the wicked. It was exposed from the foundation to the top. (Selah)
You pierced the head of his warriors with his own weaponsWhen they stormed out to scatter me. They were overjoyed to devour an afflicted one in secret.
Through the sea you trod with your horses,Through the surging of vast waters.
I heard and I trembled within;At the sound my lips quivered. Rottenness entered my bones;My legs beneath me were shaking. But I quietly wait for the day of distress,For it is coming upon the people who attack us.
Although the fig tree may not blossom,And there may be no fruit on the vines;Although the olive crop may fail,And the fields may produce no food;Although the flock may disappear from the pen,And there may be no cattle in the stalls;
Yet, as for me, I will exult in Jehovah;I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.
The Sovereign Lord Jehovah is my strength;He will make my feet like those of a deerAnd cause me to tread on high places.
At my guardpost I will keep standing,And I will station myself on the rampart. I will keep watch to see what he will speak by means of meAnd what I will reply when I am reproved.
Jehovah then answered me: “Write down the vision, and inscribe it clearly on tablets,So that the one reading aloud from it may do so easily.
For the vision is yet for its appointed time,And it is rushing toward its end, and it will not lie. Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it! For it will without fail come true. It will not be late!
Look at the one who is proud;He is not upright within himself. But the righteous one will live by his faithfulness.
Indeed, because the wine is treacherous,The arrogant man will not reach his goal. He makes his appetite as large as the Grave;He is like death and cannot be satisfied. He keeps gathering all the nationsAnd collecting for himself all the peoples.
Will not all of these speak a proverb, an allusion, and riddles against him? They will say: ‘Woe to him who accumulates what is not his—For how long?—And who makes even greater his own debt!
Will not your creditors rise up suddenly? They will wake up and violently shake you,And you will become something for them to plunder.
Because you plundered many nations,All the rest of the peoples will plunder you,Because of your shedding men’s bloodAnd your violence to the earth,To the cities and those living in them.
Woe to the one who makes evil gain for his house,So as to set his nest on the height,To escape the grasp of calamity!
You have plotted shame against your house. By wiping out many peoples you sin against yourself.
For a stone will cry out from the wall,And from the woodwork a rafter will answer it.
Woe to the one who builds a city by bloodshed,And who establishes a town by unrighteousness!
Look! Is it not from Jehovah of armies that peoples will work hard to feed the fire,And that nations tire themselves out for nothing?
For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of JehovahAs the waters cover the sea.
Woe to the one who gives his companions something to drink,Adding to it rage and anger, to make them drunk,In order to look on their nakedness!
You will be glutted with dishonor rather than glory. You too—drink and expose your uncircumcised condition. The cup in the right hand of Jehovah will come around to you,And disgrace will cover over your glory;
For the violence done to Lebʹa·non will cover you,And the destruction that terrified the beasts will come upon you,Because of your shedding men’s bloodAnd your violence to the earth,To the cities and those living in them.
Of what benefit is a carved imageWhen its maker has carved it? Of what benefit is a metal statue and a teacher of lies,Even though its maker trusts in it,Making worthless gods that are speechless?
Woe to the one who says to a piece of wood, “Awake!” Or to a speechless stone, “Wake up! Instruct us!” Look! It is overlaid in gold and silver,And there is no breath at all within it.
But Jehovah is in his holy temple. Be silent before him, all the earth!’”
The word of Jehovah that came to Zeph·a·niʹah son of Cushʹi son of Ged·a·liʹah son of Am·a·riʹah son of Hez·e·kiʹah in the days of Jo·siʹah son of Aʹmon the king of Judah:
“I will completely sweep away everything from the surface of the ground,” declares Jehovah.
“I will sweep away man and beast. I will sweep away the birds of the heavens and the fish of the sea,And the stumbling blocks along with the wicked ones;And I will remove mankind from the surface of the ground,” declares Jehovah.
“I will stretch out my hand against JudahAnd against all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,And I will wipe out from this place every vestige of Baʹal,The name of the foreign-god priests along with the priests,
And those who bow down on the rooftops to the army of the heavens,And those who bow down and pledge loyalty to JehovahWhile pledging loyalty to Malʹcam;
And those who turn away from following JehovahAnd who do not seek Jehovah or inquire of him.”
Be silent before the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, for the day of Jehovah is near. Jehovah has prepared a sacrifice; he has sanctified those he invited.
“On the day of Jehovah’s sacrifice I will call to account the princes,The sons of the king, and all those wearing foreign clothing.
I will call to account everyone who climbs onto the platform on that day,Those who fill their master’s house with violence and deception.
On that day,” declares Jehovah,“There will be the sound of an outcry from the Fish Gate,A wailing from the second quarter of the city,And a loud crash from the hills.
Wail, you inhabitants of Makʹtesh,For all the tradesmen have been done away with;All those weighing out silver have been destroyed.
At that time I will carefully search Jerusalem with lamps,And I will call to account the complacent ones, who say in their heart,‘Jehovah will not do good, and he will not do bad.’
Their wealth will be plundered and their houses will be devastated. They will build houses, but they will not occupy them;And they will plant vineyards, but they will not drink wine from them.
The great day of Jehovah is near! It is near and it is approaching very quickly! The sound of the day of Jehovah is bitter. There a warrior cries out.
That day is a day of fury,A day of distress and anguish,A day of storm and desolation,A day of darkness and gloom,A day of clouds and thick gloom,
A day of the horn and of the battle cry,Against the fortified cities and against the high corner towers.
I will cause distress to mankind,And they will walk like blind men,Because it is against Jehovah they have sinned. Their blood will be poured out like dust,And their flesh like the dung.
Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to save them in the day of Jehovah’s fury;For by the fire of his zeal the whole earth will be consumed,Because he will make an extermination, indeed a terrible one, of all the inhabitants of the earth.”
Woe to the rebellious, the polluted, the oppressive city!
She has obeyed no voice; she has accepted no discipline. In Jehovah she has not trusted; she has not drawn near to her God.
Her princes within her are roaring lions. Her judges are wolves in the night;They do not leave even a bone to gnaw until morning.
Her prophets are insolent, treacherous men. Her priests defile what is holy;They do violence to the law.
Jehovah is righteous in her midst; he does no wrong. Morning by morning he makes known his judgments,As unfailing as the daylight. But the unrighteous one knows no shame.
“I destroyed nations; their corner towers were left desolate. I devastated their streets, so that no one was passing through. Their cities were left in ruins, without a man, without an inhabitant.
I said, ‘Surely you will fear me and accept discipline,’ So that her dwelling place might not be destroyed—I must call her to account for all these things. But they were all the more eager to act corruptly.
‘So keep yourselves in expectation of me,’ declares Jehovah,‘Until the day when I rise up to take plunder,For my judicial decision is to gather nations, to assemble kingdoms,To pour out on them my indignation, all my burning anger;For by the fire of my zeal the whole earth will be consumed.
For then I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language,So that all of them may call on the name of Jehovah,To serve him shoulder to shoulder.’
From the region of the rivers of E·thi·oʹpi·a,Those entreating me, the daughter of my scattered ones, will bring a gift to me.
On that day you will not be put to shameBecause of all your deeds with which you rebelled against me,For then I will remove the haughty boasters from among you;And you will never again be haughty in my holy mountain.
I will allow a humble and lowly people to remain in your midst,And they will take refuge in the name of Jehovah.
Those remaining of Israel will practice no unrighteousness;They will not speak a lie, nor will a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths;They will feed and lie down, and no one will make them afraid.”
Shout joyfully, O daughter of Zion! Shout in triumph, O Israel! Be joyful and rejoice with all your heart, O daughter of Jerusalem!
Jehovah has removed the judgments against you. He has turned away your enemy. The King of Israel, Jehovah, is in your midst. You will fear calamity no more.
On that day it will be said to Jerusalem: “Do not be afraid, O Zion. Do not let your hands drop down.
Jehovah your God is in your midst. As a mighty One, he will save. He will exult over you with great joy. He will become silent in his love. He will rejoice over you with shouts of joy.
I will gather together those grieving over their absence from your festivals;They were absent from you because of bearing reproach for her.
Look! At that time I will act against all those oppressing you;And I will save the one limping,And I will gather together the dispersed. I will make them an object of praise and fameIn all the land of their shame.
At that time I will bring you in,At the time I gather you together. For I will make you an object of fame and praise among all the peoples of the earth,When I gather back your captives before your eyes,” says Jehovah.
Gather together, yes, gather yourselves,O nation that feels no shame.
Before the decree takes effect,Before the day passes by like chaff,Before the burning anger of Jehovah comes upon you,Before the day of Jehovah’s anger comes upon you,
Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones of the earth,Who observe his righteous decrees. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. Probably you will be concealed on the day of Jehovah’s anger.
For Gazʹa will be an abandoned city;And Ashʹke·lon will be desolated. Ashʹdod will be driven away in broad daylight,And Ekʹron will be uprooted.
“Woe to those who inhabit the seacoast, the nation of Cherʹe·thites! The word of Jehovah is against you. O Caʹnaan, land of the Phi·lisʹtines, I will destroy you,So that there will be no inhabitant left.
And the seacoast will become pasture grounds,With wells for shepherds and stone pens for sheep.
It will become a region for the remaining ones of the house of Judah;There they will feed. In the houses of Ashʹke·lon they will lie down in the evening. For Jehovah their God will turn his attention to them,And he will gather back their captives.”
“I have heard the reproach by Moʹab and the insults of the Amʹmon·ites,Who have taunted my people and made boasts against their territory.
Therefore as surely as I am alive,” declares Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel,“Moʹab will become just like Sodʹom,And the Amʹmon·ites like Go·morʹrah,A place of nettles, a salt pit, and a permanent wasteland. The remaining ones of my people will plunder them,And the remnant of my nation will dispossess them.
This is what they will have instead of their pride,Because they taunted and exalted themselves against the people of Jehovah of armies.
Jehovah will be awe-inspiring against them;For he will bring to nothing all the gods of the earth,And all the islands of the nations will bow down to him,Each one from its place.
You E·thi·oʹpi·ans will also be slain by my sword.
He will stretch out his hand toward the north and destroy As·syrʹi·a,And he will make Ninʹe·veh desolate, as dry as a desert.
Herds will lie down within her, all sorts of wild animals. Both pelican and porcupine will spend the night among her pillar capitals. A voice will sing in the window. There will be devastation at the threshold;For he will expose the cedar panels.
This is the proud city that was sitting in security,That was saying in her heart, ‘I am the one, and there is nobody else.’ How she has become an object of horror,A place for the wild animals to lie down! Everyone passing by her will whistle and shake his fist.”
In the second year of King Da·riʹus, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came through Hagʹgai the prophet to Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘These people say, “The time has not yet come for the house of Jehovah to be built.”’”
And the word of Jehovah again came through Hagʹgai the prophet, saying:
“Is it the time for you to dwell in your paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins?
Now this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on your ways.
You have sown much seed, but you harvest little. You eat, but it is not to satisfaction. You drink, but you do not drink your fill. You put on clothing, but no one gets warm. The one who hires himself out puts his wages in a bag full of holes.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on your ways.’
“‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber. And build the house, so that I may take pleasure in it and I may be glorified,’ Jehovah says.”
“‘You were expecting much and receiving little; and when you brought it into the house, I blew it away. For what reason?’ declares Jehovah of armies. ‘Because my house is in ruins, while each of you runs around taking care of his own house.
So the heavens above you withheld their dew, and the earth withheld its produce.
And I kept calling for a drought on the earth, on the mountains, on the grain, on the new wine, on the oil, on what grows from the ground, on humans and livestock, and on all the labor of your hands.’”
Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el and Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and all the rest of the people listened to the voice of Jehovah their God and to the words of Hagʹgai the prophet, because Jehovah their God had sent him; and the people began to show fear because of Jehovah.
Then Hagʹgai, the messenger of Jehovah, gave this message to the people in harmony with his commission from Jehovah: “‘I am with you people,’ declares Jehovah.”
So Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Ze·rubʹba·bel the son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people; and they came and began to work on the house of Jehovah of armies, their God.
This was on the 24th day of the sixth month in the second year of King Da·riʹus.
In the seventh month, on the 21st day of the month, the word of Jehovah came through Hagʹgai the prophet, saying,
“Please ask Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el, the governor of Judah, and Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest, and the rest of the people:
‘Who is left among you who saw this house in its former glory? How does it look to you now? Does it not seem like nothing in comparison?’
“‘But now be strong, Ze·rubʹba·bel,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and be strong, Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest.’ “‘And be strong, all you people of the land,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and work.’ “‘For I am with you,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
‘Remember what I promised you when you came out of Egypt, and my spirit remains among you. Do not be afraid.’”
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Yet once more—in a little while—and I will shake the heavens and the earth and the sea and the dry land.’
“‘And I will shake all the nations, and the precious things of all the nations will come in; and I will fill this house with glory,’ says Jehovah of armies.
“‘The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
“‘The future glory of this house will be greater than the former,’ says Jehovah of armies. “‘And in this place I will grant peace,’ declares Jehovah of armies.”
On the 24th day of the ninth month, in the second year of Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to Hagʹgai the prophet, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Ask, please, the priests about the law:
“If a man carries holy flesh in the fold of his clothing, and his clothing touches bread or stew or wine or oil or any sort of food, will it become holy?”’” The priests answered: “No!”
Hagʹgai then asked: “If someone who is unclean from contact with a dead body touches any of these things, will it become unclean?” The priests answered: “It will become unclean.”
So Hagʹgai said: “‘That is how this people is, and that is how this nation is before me,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and that is how all the work of their hands is; whatever they present there is unclean.’
“‘But now, please, set your heart on this from this day forward: Before a stone was placed on a stone in the temple of Jehovah,
how was it then? When someone came to a heap of grain expecting 20 measures, there were only 10; and when someone came to the vat to draw 50 measures from the wine trough, there were only 20;
I struck you—all the works of your hands—with scorching blight and mildew and hail, but not one of you turned to me,’ declares Jehovah.
“‘Please, set your heart on this from this day forward, from the 24th day of the ninth month, from the day that the foundation of the temple of Jehovah was laid; set your heart on this:
Is there seed yet in the storehouse? The vine, the fig, the pomegranate, and the olive tree—they have not yet borne fruit, have they? From this day I will send a blessing.’”
The word of Jehovah came a second time to Hagʹgai on the 24th day of the month, saying:
“Say to Ze·rubʹba·bel, the governor of Judah, ‘I am going to shake the heavens and the earth.
I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms and annihilate the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; and I will overthrow the chariot and its riders, and the horses and their riders will fall, each one by the sword of his brother.’”
“‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘I will take you, my servant Ze·rubʹba·bel son of She·alʹti·el,’ declares Jehovah, ‘and I will make you like a seal ring, because you are the one whom I have chosen,’ declares Jehovah of armies.”
“Open your doors, O Lebʹa·non,So that a fire may consume your cedars.
Wail, you juniper, for the cedar has fallen;The majestic trees have been destroyed! Wail, you oaks of Baʹshan,For the dense forest has come down!
Listen! The wailing of shepherds,For their majesty has been devastated. Listen! The roaring of young lions,For the dense thickets along the Jordan have been destroyed.
“This is what Jehovah my God says, ‘Shepherd the flock meant for the slaughter,
whose buyers slaughtered them and are not held guilty. And those who sell them say, “May Jehovah be praised, for I will become rich.” And their shepherds have no compassion for them.’
“‘For I will no longer show compassion on the inhabitants of the land,’ declares Jehovah. ‘So I will cause each man to fall into the hand of his neighbor and his king; and they will crush the land, and I will not rescue them out of their hand.’”
And I began to shepherd the flock meant for slaughter, in your behalf, O afflicted ones of the flock. So I took two staffs, and I called one Pleasantness, and the other Union, and I began to shepherd the flock.
And I dismissed three shepherds in one month, for I became impatient with them, and they detested me as well.
And I said: “I will not keep shepherding you. Let the one who is dying die, and let the one perishing perish. As for those who are left, let them devour one another’s flesh.”
So I took my staff Pleasantness and cut it up, breaking my covenant that I had made with all the peoples.
So it was broken in that day, and the afflicted ones of the flock who were watching me knew that it was the word of Jehovah.
Then I said to them: “If it seems good to you, give me my wages; but if not, withhold them.” And they paid my wages, 30 pieces of silver.
Then Jehovah said to me: “Throw it into the treasury—the magnificent value with which they valued me.” So I took the 30 pieces of silver and threw it into the treasury at the house of Jehovah.
Then I cut up my second staff, the Union, breaking the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
And Jehovah said to me: “Now take the equipment of a useless shepherd.
For I am letting a shepherd rise up in the land. He will not take care of the sheep that are perishing; he will not seek out the young or heal the injured or feed those able to stand. Instead, he devours the flesh of the fat one and tears off the hooves of the sheep.
Woe to my worthless shepherd, who is abandoning the flock! A sword will strike his arm and his right eye. His arm will wither completely,And his right eye will go completely blind.”
In the eighth month in the second year of Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Zekariah son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Idʹdo, saying:
“Jehovah grew greatly indignant at your fathers.
“Say to them, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “‘Return to me,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and I will return to you,’ says Jehovah of armies.”’
“‘Do not become like your fathers, to whom the former prophets proclaimed: “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Turn away, please, from your evil ways and your evil deeds.’”’ “‘But they did not listen, and they paid no attention to me,’ declares Jehovah.
“‘Where are your fathers now? And did the prophets live forever?
However, my words and my decrees that I commanded my servants, the prophets, caught up with your fathers, did they not?’ So they returned to me and said: ‘Jehovah of armies has dealt with us according to our ways and our deeds, just as he had determined to do.’”
On the 24th day of the 11th month, that is, the month of Sheʹbat, in the second year of Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Zekariah son of Ber·e·chiʹah son of Idʹdo, saying:
“I saw a vision in the night. There was a man riding on a red horse, and he stood still among the myrtle trees in the ravine; and behind him there were red, reddish-brown, and white horses.”
So I said: “Who are these, my lord?” The angel who was speaking with me replied: “I will show you who these are.”
Then the man who was standing still among the myrtle trees said: “These are the ones whom Jehovah has sent out to walk about in the earth.”
And they said to the angel of Jehovah who was standing among the myrtle trees: “We have walked about in the earth, and look! the whole earth is quiet and undisturbed.”
So the angel of Jehovah said: “O Jehovah of armies, how long will you withhold your mercy from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with whom you have been indignant these 70 years?”
Jehovah answered the angel who was speaking with me, with kind and comforting words.
Then the angel who was speaking with me told me: “Call out, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I am zealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great zeal.
With great indignation I am indignant with the nations that are at ease, because I felt indignant to a small extent, but they added to the calamity.”’
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says: ‘“I will return to Jerusalem with mercy, and my own house will be built in her,” declares Jehovah of armies, “and a measuring line will be stretched out over Jerusalem.”’
“Call out once more and say, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “My cities will again overflow with goodness; and Jehovah will again comfort Zion and again choose Jerusalem.”’”
Then I looked up and saw four horns.
So I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What are these?” He replied: “These are the horns that dispersed Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.”
Jehovah then showed me four craftsmen.
I asked: “What are these coming to do?” He said: “These are the horns that dispersed Judah to such an extent that no one was able to raise his head. These others will come to terrify them, to cast down the horns of the nations that lifted up their horns against the land of Judah, in order to disperse her.”
And in the fourth year of King Da·riʹus, the word of Jehovah came to Zekariah on the fourth day of the ninth month, that is, the month of Chisʹlev.
The people of Bethʹel sent Shar·eʹzer and Reʹgem-melʹech and his men to beg for the favor of Jehovah,
saying to the priests of the house of Jehovah of armies and to the prophets: “Should I weep in the fifth month and abstain from food, as I have done for so many years?”
The word of Jehovah of armies again came to me, saying:
“Say to all the people of the land and to the priests, ‘When you fasted and wailed in the fifth month and in the seventh month for 70 years, did you really fast for me?
And when you would eat and drink, were you not eating for yourselves and drinking for yourselves?
Should you not obey the words that Jehovah proclaimed through the former prophets, while Jerusalem and her surrounding cities were inhabited and at peace, and while the Negʹeb and the She·pheʹlah were inhabited?’”
The word of Jehovah again came to Zekariah, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Judge with true justice, and deal with one another in loyal love and mercy.
Do not defraud the widow or the fatherless child, the foreigner or the poor; and do not scheme evil against one another in your hearts.’
But they kept refusing to pay attention, and they stubbornly turned their backs, and they stopped up their ears so as not to hear.
They made their heart like a diamond and would not obey the law and the words that Jehovah of armies sent by his spirit through the former prophets. So there came great indignation from Jehovah of armies.”
“‘Just as they did not listen when I called, so I would not listen when they called,’ says Jehovah of armies.
‘And I scattered them with a storm wind throughout all the nations that they had not known, and the land was left desolate behind them, with no one passing through or returning; for they turned the desirable land into an object of horror.’”
“In that day a well will be opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for cleansing sin and impurity.
“In that day,” declares Jehovah of armies, “I will erase the names of the idols from the land, and they will no longer be remembered; and I will rid the land of the prophets and the spirit of uncleanness.
And if a man should prophesy again, his father and his mother who caused his birth will say to him, ‘You will not live, because you have spoken lies in the name of Jehovah.’ And his father and his mother who caused his birth will pierce him through because of his prophesying.
“In that day each of the prophets will be ashamed of his vision when he prophesies; and they will not wear an official garment of hair in order to deceive.
And he will say, ‘I am no prophet. I am a man cultivating the soil, because a man bought me when I was young.’
And if someone asks him, ‘What are these wounds between your shoulders?’ he will answer, ‘Wounds I received in the house of my friends.’”
“O sword, awake against my shepherd,Against the man who is my companion,” declares Jehovah of armies. “Strike the shepherd, and let the flock be scattered;And I will turn my hand against those who are insignificant.”
“And in all the land,” declares Jehovah,“Two parts in it will be cut off and perish;And the third part will be left remaining in it.
And I will bring the third part through the fire;And I will refine them as silver is refined,And test them as gold is tested. They will call on my name,And I will answer them. I will say, ‘They are my people,’ And they will say, ‘Jehovah is our God.’”
And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of Jehovah, and Satan was standing at his right hand to resist him.
Then the angel of Jehovah said to Satan: “May Jehovah rebuke you, O Satan, yes, may Jehovah, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this one a burning log snatched out of the fire?”
Now Joshua was clothed in filthy garments and standing before the angel.
The angel said to those standing before him, “Remove his filthy garments.” Then he said to him, “See, I have caused your error to pass away from you, and you will be clothed with fine garments.”
So I said: “Let a clean turban be put on his head.” And they put the clean turban on his head and clothed him with garments; and the angel of Jehovah was standing nearby.
The angel of Jehovah then declared to Joshua:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘If you will walk in my ways and carry out your responsibilities before me, then you will serve as a judge in my house and take care of my courtyards; and I will give you free access among these who are standing here.’
“‘Hear, please, O High Priest Joshua, you and your companions who sit before you, for these men serve as a sign; look! I am bringing in my servant Sprout!
See the stone that I have set before Joshua! On the one stone are seven eyes; and I am engraving an inscription on it,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and I will take away the guilt of that land in one day.’
“‘In that day,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘Each of you will invite your neighbor to come under your vine and under your fig tree.’”
A pronouncement: “The word of Jehovah is against the land of Haʹdrach,And Damascus is its target—For Jehovah’s eye is on mankindAnd on all the tribes of Israel—
And against Haʹmath, which borders on her,And against Tyre and Siʹdon, for they are so wise.
Tyre built herself a rampart. She piled up silver like dustAnd gold like the dirt of the streets.
Look! Jehovah will take away her possessions,And he will strike down her army into the sea;And she will be consumed in the fire.
Ashʹke·lon will see it and be afraid;Gazʹa will feel great anguish,Also Ekʹron, because her hope is put to shame. A king will perish from Gazʹa,And Ashʹke·lon will not be inhabited.
An illegitimate son will settle in Ashʹdod,And I will do away with the pride of the Phi·lisʹtine.
I will remove the bloodstained things from his mouthAnd the disgusting things from between his teeth,And he will be left remaining for our God;And he will become like a sheikh in Judah,And Ekʹron like the Jebʹu·site.
I will encamp as a guard for my house,So that there will be no one passing through and no one returning;And no taskmaster will pass through again,For now I have seen it with my eyes.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion. Shout in triumph, O daughter of Jerusalem. Look! Your king is coming to you. He is righteous, bringing salvation,Humble and riding on a donkey,On a colt, the foal of a female donkey.
I will take away the war chariot from Eʹphra·imAnd the horse from Jerusalem. The battle bow will be taken away. And he will proclaim peace to the nations;His rulership will be from sea to seaAnd from the River to the ends of the earth.
As for you, O woman, by the blood of your covenant,I will send your prisoners out of the waterless pit.
Return to the stronghold, you prisoners with hope. Today I am telling you,‘I will repay to you, O woman, a double portion.
For I will bend Judah as my bow. The bow I will fill with Eʹphra·im,And I will awaken your sons, O Zion,Against your sons, O Greece,And I will make you like a warrior’s sword.’
Jehovah will be seen over them,And his arrow will go out like lightning. The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will sound the horn,And he will advance with the windstorms of the south.
Jehovah of armies will defend them,And they will devour and subdue the slingstones. They will drink and be boisterous, as if with wine;And they will be filled like the bowl,Like the corners of the altar.
Jehovah their God will save them in that dayAs the flock of his people;For they will be like the gemstones of a crown glittering over his soil.
For how great his goodness is,And how great his handsomeness is! Grain will make the young men thrive,And new wine the virgins.”
And I looked up and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.
So I asked: “Where are you going?” He replied: “To measure Jerusalem, to see what is her width and what is her length.”
And look! the angel who was speaking with me went out, and another angel came to meet him.
Then he said to him: “Run over there and tell that young man, ‘“Jerusalem will be inhabited as open rural country, because of all the men and livestock within her.
And I will become to her,” declares Jehovah, “a wall of fire all around, and I will become the glory in her midst.”’”
“Come! Come! Flee from the land of the north,” declares Jehovah. “For I have scattered you to the four winds of the heavens,” declares Jehovah.
“Come, Zion! Make your escape, you who are dwelling with the daughter of Babylon.
For this is what Jehovah of armies says, who after being glorified has sent me to the nations that were plundering you: ‘Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.
For now I will wave my hand against them, and they will become plunder for their own slaves.’ And you will certainly know that Jehovah of armies has sent me.
“Shout for joy, O daughter of Zion; for I am coming, and I will reside in your midst,” declares Jehovah.
“Many nations will join themselves to Jehovah in that day, and they will become my people; and I will reside in your midst.” And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
Jehovah will take possession of Judah as his portion on the holy ground, and he will again choose Jerusalem.
Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah, for he is taking action from his holy dwelling.
“Ask Jehovah for rain in the time of the spring rain. It is Jehovah who makes the storm clouds,Who pours rain for them,And gives vegetation in the field to everyone.
For the teraphim statues have spoken deception;And the diviners have visioned a lie. They speak about worthless dreams,And in vain they try to comfort. That is why they will wander like sheep. They will suffer, for there is no shepherd.
Against the shepherds my anger burns,And against the oppressive leaders I will hold an accounting;For Jehovah of armies has turned his attention to his flock, to the house of Judah,And he has made them like his majestic horse in the battle.
From him comes the keyman,From him comes the supporting ruler,From him comes the battle bow;From him goes forth every overseer, all of them together.
And they will become like warriors,Trampling down the mud of the streets in the battle. They will wage war, for Jehovah is with them;And the riders of horses will be put to shame.
I will make the house of Judah superior,And the house of Joseph I will save. I will restore them,For I will show them mercy;And they will be as though I had never cast them off;For I am Jehovah their God, and I will answer them.
Those of Eʹphra·im must become like a mighty warrior,And their heart will rejoice as though from wine. Their sons will see this and rejoice;Their heart will be joyful in Jehovah.
‘I will whistle for them and gather them together;For I will redeem them, and they will become many,And continue to be many.
Though I scatter them like seed among the peoples,They will remember me in the distant places;With their sons they will revive and return.
I will bring them back from the land of EgyptAnd gather them from As·syrʹi·a;I will bring them to the land of Gilʹe·ad and Lebʹa·non,And there will be no more room for them.
He must pass through the sea with distress;And in the sea he will strike down the waves;All the depths of the Nile will dry up. The pride of As·syrʹi·a will be brought down,And the scepter of Egypt will depart.
I will make them superior in Jehovah,And they will walk about in his name,’ declares Jehovah.”
Again I looked up, and I saw a flying scroll.
He asked me: “What do you see?” I replied: “I see a flying scroll, which is 20 cubits long and 10 cubits wide.”
Then he said to me: “This is the curse that is going out over the face of all the earth, because everyone who steals, as written on its one side, has gone unpunished; and everyone who makes a sworn oath, as written on its other side, has gone unpunished.
‘I have sent it out,’ declares Jehovah of armies, ‘and it will enter into the house of the thief and into the house of the one who makes a false oath in my name; and it will remain inside that house and consume it and its timbers and its stones.’”
Then the angel who was speaking with me came forward and said to me: “Look up, please, and see what is going out.”
So I asked: “What is it?” He replied: “This is the eʹphah container that is going out.” He continued: “This is their appearance in all the earth.”
And I saw that the round lid of lead was lifted up, and there was a woman sitting inside the container.
So he said: “This is Wickedness.” Then he threw her back into the eʹphah container, after which he thrust the lead weight over its mouth.
Then I looked up and saw two women coming forward, and they were soaring in the wind. They had wings like the wings of a stork. And they lifted up the container between the earth and heaven.
So I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “Where are they taking the eʹphah container?”
He replied: “To the land of Shiʹnar to build her a house; and when it is prepared, she will be deposited there in her proper place.”
“Look! The day is coming, a day belonging to Jehovah, when the spoil from you will be divided in your midst.
I will gather all the nations against Jerusalem for the war; and the city will be captured and the houses plundered and the women raped. And half of the city will go into exile, but the remaining ones of the people will not be cut off from the city.
“Jehovah will go out and war against those nations as when he fights in the day of a battle.
In that day his feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, which faces Jerusalem on the east; and the Mount of Olives will be split in half, from east to west, forming a very great valley; and half of the mountain will move to the north, and half of it to the south.
You will flee to the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains will extend all the way to Aʹzel. You will have to flee, just as you fled because of the earthquake in the days of King Uz·ziʹah of Judah. And Jehovah my God will come, and all the holy ones will be with him.
“In that day there will be no precious light—things will be congealed.
And it will become one day that is known as belonging to Jehovah. It will not be day, nor will it be night; and at evening time there will be light.
In that day living waters will flow out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the eastern sea and half of them toward the western sea. It will happen in summer and in winter.
And Jehovah will be King over all the earth. In that day Jehovah will be one, and his name one.
“The whole land will become like the Arʹa·bah, from Geʹba to Rimʹmon south of Jerusalem; and she will rise and be inhabited in her place, from the Gate of Benjamin all the way to the site of the First Gate, all the way to the Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Ha·nanʹel all the way to the winepresses of the king.
And people will inhabit her; and there will never again be a curse of destruction, and Jerusalem will be inhabited in security.
“And this is the scourge with which Jehovah will scourge all the peoples who wage war against Jerusalem: Their flesh will rot away while they stand on their feet, their eyes will rot away in their sockets, and their tongues will rot away in their mouths.
“In that day confusion from Jehovah will be widespread among them; and each one will grab hold of the hand of his companion, and his hand will come against the hand of his companion.
Judah will also be involved in the war at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the surrounding nations will be gathered, gold and silver and garments in vast quantity.
“And a scourge like that scourge will also come against the horses, the mules, the camels, the donkeys, and all the livestock that are in those camps.
“Everyone who is left remaining out of all the nations that come against Jerusalem will go up from year to year to bow down to the King, Jehovah of armies, and to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
But if anyone among the families of the earth does not go up to Jerusalem to bow down to the King, Jehovah of armies, no rain will fall on them.
And if the family of Egypt does not come up and does not come in, they will have no rain. Instead, they will have the scourge with which Jehovah scourges the nations that do not come up to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
This will be the punishment for the sin of Egypt and the sin of all the nations that do not come up to celebrate the Festival of Booths.
“In that day the words ‘Holiness belongs to Jehovah!’ will be written on the bells of the horses. And the cooking pots in the house of Jehovah will be like the bowls before the altar.
And every cooking pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy and will belong to Jehovah of armies, and all those who are sacrificing will come in and use some of them for boiling. In that day there will no longer be a Caʹnaan·ite in the house of Jehovah of armies.”
The angel who had been speaking with me came back and woke me up, as when waking someone from sleep.
Then he said to me: “What do you see?” So I said: “I see, and look! a lampstand entirely of gold, with a bowl on top of it. There are seven lamps on it, yes, seven, and the lamps, which are at the top of it, have seven pipes.
And next to it are two olive trees, one on the right of the bowl and one on the left.”
Then I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What do these things mean, my lord?”
So the angel who was speaking with me asked: “Do you not know what these things mean?” I replied: “No, my lord.”
He then said to me: “This is the word of Jehovah to Ze·rubʹba·bel: ‘“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah of armies.
Who are you, O great mountain? Before Ze·rubʹba·bel you will become a level land. And he will bring out the top stone amid shouts of: “How wonderful! How wonderful!”’”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“The hands of Ze·rubʹba·bel have laid the foundation of this house, and his own hands will finish it. And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you.
For who has despised the day of small beginnings? For they will rejoice and see the plumb line in the hand of Ze·rubʹba·bel. These seven are the eyes of Jehovah, which are roving about in all the earth.”
Then I asked him: “What is the meaning of these two olive trees on the right and on the left of the lampstand?”
I asked him a second time: “What is the meaning of the two bunches of twigs of the olive trees that are pouring out the golden liquid through the two golden tubes?”
So he asked me: “Do you not know what these things mean?” I replied: “No, my lord.”
He said: “These are the two anointed ones who are standing alongside the Lord of the whole earth.”
A pronouncement: “The word of Jehovah concerning Israel,” declares Jehovah,The One who stretched out the heavens,Who laid the foundation of the earth,And who formed the spirit of man within him.
“Here I am making Jerusalem a cup that causes all the surrounding peoples to stagger; and there will be a siege against Judah as well as against Jerusalem.
In that day I will make Jerusalem a heavy stone to all the peoples. All those who lift it are sure to be severely injured; and all the nations of the earth will be gathered against her.
In that day,” declares Jehovah, “I will strike every horse with panic and its rider with madness. I will keep my eyes on the house of Judah, but I will strike every horse of the peoples with blindness.
And the sheikhs of Judah will say in their heart, ‘The inhabitants of Jerusalem are a strength to me by means of Jehovah of armies their God.’
In that day I will make the sheikhs of Judah like a fiery pot among wood and like a fiery torch in a row of cut grain, and they will consume all the surrounding peoples on the right and on the left; and Jerusalem will again be inhabited in her place, in Jerusalem.
“And Jehovah will save the tents of Judah first, so that the beauty of the house of David and the beauty of the inhabitants of Jerusalem may not be too great over Judah.
In that day Jehovah will be a defense around the inhabitants of Jerusalem; in that day the one who stumbles among them will be like David, and the house of David like God, like Jehovah’s angel who goes before them.
And in that day I will be certain to annihilate all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
“I will pour out on the house of David and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of favor and supplication, and they will look to the one whom they pierced, and they will wail over him as they would wail over an only son; and they will grieve bitterly over him as they would grieve over a firstborn son.
In that day the wailing in Jerusalem will be great, like the wailing at Ha·dad·rimʹmon in the Plain of Me·gidʹdo.
And the land will wail, each family by itself; the family of David’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of Nathan’s house by itself, and their women by themselves;
the family of Leʹvi’s house by itself, and their women by themselves; the family of the Shimʹe·ites by itself, and their women by themselves;
and all the families that are left remaining, each family by itself, and their women by themselves.
Then I looked up again and saw four chariots coming from between two mountains, and the mountains were of copper.
The first chariot had red horses, and the second chariot, black horses.
The third chariot had white horses, and the fourth chariot, speckled and dappled horses.
I asked the angel who was speaking with me: “What are these, my lord?”
The angel answered me: “These are the four spirits of the heavens that are going out after having taken their station before the Lord of the whole earth.
The one with the black horses is going out to the land of the north; the white ones are going out beyond the sea; and the speckled ones are going out to the land of the south.
And the dappled ones were eager to go out to walk about through the earth.” Then he said: “Go, walk about through the earth.” And they began walking about through the earth.
He then called out to me and said: “See, those going out to the land of the north have caused the spirit of Jehovah to rest in the land of the north.”
The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying:
“Take from Helʹdai, To·biʹjah, and Je·daʹiah what they brought from the people in exile; and on that day, you must go to the house of Jo·siʹah the son of Zeph·a·niʹah along with these who have come from Babylon.
You should take silver and gold and make a crown and put it on the head of Joshua son of Je·hozʹa·dak, the high priest.
And say to him,“‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “Here is the man whose name is Sprout. He will sprout from his own place, and he will build the temple of Jehovah.
He is the one who will build the temple of Jehovah, and he is the one who will assume the majesty. He will sit down on his throne and rule, and he will also be a priest on his throne, and there will be a peaceable agreement between the two.
And the crown will serve as a memorial for Heʹlem, To·biʹjah, Je·daʹiah, and Hen the son of Zeph·a·niʹah, in the temple of Jehovah.
And those who are far away will come and take part in building the temple of Jehovah.” And you will have to know that Jehovah of armies has sent me to you. And it will occur—if you do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.’”
The word of Jehovah of armies again came, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘I will be zealous for Zion with a great zeal, and with great wrath I will be zealous for her.’”
“This is what Jehovah says, ‘I will return to Zion and reside in Jerusalem; and Jerusalem will be called the city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah of armies, the holy mountain.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Old men and women will again sit in the public squares of Jerusalem, each with his staff in his hand because of his great age.
And the public squares of the city will be filled with boys and girls playing there.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Although it may seem too difficult to the remaining ones of this people in those days, should it seem too difficult also to me?’ declares Jehovah of armies.”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Here I am saving my people from the lands of the east and the west.
And I will bring them in, and they will reside in Jerusalem; and they will become my people, and I will become their God in truth and in righteousness.’”
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words from the mouth of the prophets, the same words that were spoken on the day the foundation of the house of Jehovah of armies was laid for the temple to be built.
For before that time, there were no wages being paid either for man or for beast; and it was not safe to come and go because of the adversary, for I turned all men one against another.’
“‘But now I will not deal with the remaining ones of this people as in the former days,’ declares Jehovah of armies.
‘For the seed of peace will be sown; the vine will produce its fruit and the earth its yield, and the heavens will give their dew; and I will cause the remaining ones of this people to inherit all these things.
And just as you became an object of cursing among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you, and you will become a blessing. Do not be afraid! Let your hands be strong.’
“For this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘“Just as I had determined to bring calamity on you because your forefathers made me indignant,” says Jehovah of armies, “and I felt no regret,
so at this time I have determined to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Do not be afraid!”’
“‘These are the things you should do: Speak the truth with one another, and the judgments in your gates must promote truth and peace.
Do not scheme calamity against one another in your hearts, and do not love any false oath; for these are all things that I hate,’ declares Jehovah.”
The word of Jehovah of armies again came to me, saying:
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘The fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth month, the fast of the seventh month, and the fast of the tenth month will be occasions for exultation and joy for the house of Judah—festivals of rejoicing. So love truth and peace.’
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘It will yet come to pass that peoples and the inhabitants of many cities will come;
and the inhabitants of one city will go to those of another and say: “Let us earnestly go to beg for the favor of Jehovah and to seek Jehovah of armies. I am also going.”
And many peoples and mighty nations will come to seek Jehovah of armies in Jerusalem and to beg for the favor of Jehovah.’
“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: “We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.”’”
A pronouncement: The word of Jehovah to Israel through Malʹa·chi:
“I have shown love to you people,” says Jehovah. But you say: “How have you shown us love?” “Was not Eʹsau the brother of Jacob?” declares Jehovah. “But I loved Jacob,
and Eʹsau I hated; and I made his mountains desolate and left his inheritance for the jackals of the wilderness.”
“Though Eʹdom says, ‘We have been shattered, but we will return and rebuild the ruins,’ this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘They will build, but I will tear down, and they will be called “the territory of wickedness” and “the people whom Jehovah has forever condemned.”
Your own eyes will see it, and you will say: “May Jehovah be magnified over the territory of Israel.”’”
“‘A son honors a father, and a servant his master. So if I am a father, where is the honor due me? And if I am a master, where is the fear due me?’ Jehovah of armies says to you priests who are despising my name. “‘But you say: “How have we despised your name?”’
“‘By presenting polluted food on my altar.’ “‘And you say: “How have we polluted you?”’ “‘By saying: “The table of Jehovah is something to be despised.”
And when you present a blind animal as a sacrifice, you say: “It is nothing bad.” And when you present a lame animal or a sick one: “It is nothing bad.”’” “Try presenting them, please, to your governor. Will he be pleased with you or receive you with favor?” says Jehovah of armies.
“And now, please, appeal to God, that he may show us favor. With such offerings from your own hand, will he receive any of you with favor?” says Jehovah of armies.
“And who among you is willing to shut the doors? For you will not even light my altar without charge. I find no delight in you,” says Jehovah of armies, “and I take no pleasure in any gift offering from your hand.”
“For from the rising of the sun to its setting, my name will be great among the nations. In every place sacrifices will be made to smoke, and offerings will be made to my name, as a pure gift; because my name will be great among the nations,” says Jehovah of armies.
“But you are profaning it by saying, ‘The table of Jehovah is polluted, and its fruit, its food, is to be despised.’
You also say, ‘Look! How tiresome!’ and you sniff scornfully at it,” says Jehovah of armies. “And you bring stolen, lame, and sick animals. Yes, you bring such things as a gift! Should I accept it from your hand?” says Jehovah.
“Cursed is the cunning one who has a sound male animal in his flock, but he makes a vow and sacrifices a blemished one to Jehovah. For I am a great King,” says Jehovah of armies, “and my name will be awe-inspiring among the nations.”
“Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.
“But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye of laundrymen.
And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness.
And the gift offering of Judah and of Jerusalem will actually be pleasing to Jehovah, as in the days of long ago and as in the years of antiquity.
“I will come near to you for judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who take false oaths, against those who defraud the hired worker, the widow, and the fatherless child, and against those who refuse to help the foreigner. These have not feared me,” says Jehovah of armies.
“For I am Jehovah; I do not change. And you are sons of Jacob; you have not yet come to your finish.
From the days of your forefathers you have turned aside from my regulations and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you,” says Jehovah of armies. But you say: “How are we supposed to return?”
“Will a mere human rob God? But you are robbing me.” And you say: “How have we robbed you?” “In the tithes and in the contributions.
You are certainly cursed, for you are robbing me—yes, the entire nation is doing so.
Bring the entire tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in my house; and test me out, please, in this regard,” Jehovah of armies says, “to see whether I will not open to you the floodgates of the heavens and pour out on you a blessing until there is nothing lacking.”
“And I will rebuke the devouring one for you, and it will not ruin the fruit of your land, nor will the vine in your field be fruitless,” says Jehovah of armies.
“All the nations will have to declare you happy, for you will become a land of delight,” says Jehovah of armies.
“Your words against me have been strong,” says Jehovah. And you say: “How have we spoken against you among ourselves?”
“You say, ‘It is of no value to serve God. How have we benefited by keeping our obligations to him and by walking somberly before Jehovah of armies?
Now we consider presumptuous people happy. Also, those who practice wickedness are successful. They dare to put God to the test and get away with it.’”
At that time those who fear Jehovah spoke with one another, each one with his companion, and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah and for those meditating on his name.
“And they will be mine,” says Jehovah of armies, “in the day when I produce a special property. I will show them compassion, just as a man shows compassion to his son who serves him.
And you will again see the distinction between a righteous person and a wicked person, between one serving God and one not serving him.”
“And now, O priests, this commandment is for you.
If you refuse to listen and to take it to heart to glorify my name,” says Jehovah of armies, “I will send on you the curse, and I will turn your blessings into curses. Yes, I have turned the blessings into curses, because you are not taking it to heart.”
“Look! I will ruin your sown seed because of you, and I will scatter dung on your faces, the dung of your festivals; and you will be carried away to it.
Then you will know that I have given this commandment to you so that my covenant with Leʹvi may continue,” says Jehovah of armies.
“My covenant with him was one of life and of peace, which I gave to him, along with fear. He feared me, yes, he stood in awe of my name.
The law of truth was in his mouth, and no unrighteousness was found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and in uprightness, and he turned many back from error.
For the lips of a priest should safeguard knowledge, and people should seek the law from his mouth, because he is the messenger of Jehovah of armies.
“But you yourselves have turned aside from the way. You have made many stumble with regard to the law. You have ruined the covenant of Leʹvi,” says Jehovah of armies.
“So I will make you despised and low before all the people, because you did not keep my ways but showed partiality in applying the law.”
“Do we not all have one father? Was it not one God who created us? So why do we deal treacherously with one another, profaning the covenant of our forefathers?
Judah has dealt treacherously, and something detestable has been done in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has profaned the holiness of Jehovah, which He loves, and he has taken as a bride the daughter of a foreign god.
Jehovah will cut off from the tents of Jacob anyone who does this, whoever he may be, though he presents a gift offering to Jehovah of armies.”
“And there is another thing that you do, which results in covering the altar of Jehovah with tears and with weeping and sighing, so that he no longer pays attention to your gift offering or looks favorably on anything from your hand.
And you say, ‘For what reason?’ It is because Jehovah has acted as a witness between you and the wife of your youth, with whom you have dealt treacherously, although she is your partner and your wife by covenant.
But there was one who did not do it, for he had what remained of the spirit. And what was that one seeking? The offspring of God. So guard yourselves respecting your spirit, and do not deal treacherously with the wife of your youth.
For I hate divorce,” says Jehovah the God of Israel, “and the one who covers his garment with violence,” says Jehovah of armies. “And guard yourselves respecting your spirit, and you must not deal treacherously.
“You have made Jehovah weary with your words. But you say, ‘How have we made him weary?’ By saying, ‘Everyone who does bad is good in the eyes of Jehovah, and he finds pleasure in him,’ or by saying, ‘Where is the God of justice?’”
“For look! the day is coming, burning like a furnace, when all the presumptuous ones and all those practicing wickedness will become like stubble. The coming day will certainly devour them,” says Jehovah of armies, “and it will leave them neither root nor branch.
But on you who honor my name, the sun of righteousness will shine, with healing in its rays; and you will skip about like fattened calves.”
“And you will tread the wicked underfoot, for they will be like dust under the soles of your feet on the day when I take action,” says Jehovah of armies.
“Remember the Law of my servant Moses, the regulations and judgments that I commanded at Hoʹreb for all Israel to obey.
“Look! I am sending to you E·liʹjah the prophet before the coming of the great and awe-inspiring day of Jehovah.
And he will turn the hearts of fathers back toward sons, and the hearts of sons back toward fathers, so that I may not come and strike the earth, devoting it to destruction.”
Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them; his face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant as the light.
And look! there appeared to them Moses and E·liʹjah conversing with him.
Then Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, it is fine for us to be here. If you wish, I will erect three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
While he was still speaking, look! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and look! a voice out of the cloud said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.”
At hearing this, the disciples fell facedown and became very much afraid.
Then Jesus came near, and touching them, he said: “Get up. Have no fear.”
When they looked up, they saw no one but Jesus himself.
As they were descending from the mountain, Jesus commanded them: “Tell the vision to no one until the Son of man is raised up from the dead.”
However, the disciples put the question to him: “Why, then, do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
In reply he said: “E·liʹjah is indeed coming and will restore all things.
However, I say to you that E·liʹjah has already come, and they did not recognize him but did whatever they wanted with him. In this way also, the Son of man is going to suffer at their hands.”
Then the disciples perceived that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.
When they came toward the crowd, a man approached him, knelt down to him, and said:
“Lord, have mercy on my son, because he is an epileptic and is ill. He falls often into the fire and often into the water.
I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.”
In reply Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring him here to me.”
Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said: “Why could we not expel it?”
He said to them: “Because of your little faith. For truly I say to you, if you have faith the size of a mustard grain, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move, and nothing will be impossible for you.”
It was while they were gathered together in Galilee that Jesus said to them: “The Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands,
and they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised up.” And they were very much grieved.
After they arrived in Ca·perʹna·um, the men collecting the two drachmas tax approached Peter and said: “Does your teacher not pay the two drachmas tax?”
He said: “Yes.” However, when he entered the house, Jesus spoke to him first and said: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From their sons or from the strangers?”
When he said: “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him: “Really, then, the sons are tax-free.
But that we do not cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a fishhook, and take the first fish that comes up, and when you open its mouth, you will find a silver coin. Take that and give it to them for me and you.”
When Jesus had finished speaking these things, he departed from Galilee and came to the borders of Ju·deʹa across the Jordan.
Also, large crowds followed him, and he cured them there.
And Pharisees came to him intent on testing him, and they asked: “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife on every sort of grounds?”
In reply he said: “Have you not read that the one who created them from the beginning made them male and female
and said: ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh’?
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”
They said to him: “Why, then, did Moses direct giving a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her?”
He said to them: “Out of regard for your hard-heartedness, Moses made the concession to you of divorcing your wives, but that has not been the case from the beginning.
I say to you that whoever divorces his wife, except on the grounds of sexual immorality, and marries another commits adultery.”
The disciples said to him: “If that is the situation of a man with his wife, it is not advisable to marry.”
He said to them: “Not all men make room for the saying, but only those who have the gift.
For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs on account of the Kingdom of the heavens. Let the one who can make room for it make room for it.”
Then young children were brought to him for him to place his hands on them and offer prayer, but the disciples reprimanded them.
Jesus, however, said: “Let the young children alone, and do not try to stop them from coming to me, for the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to such ones.”
And he placed his hands on them and departed from there.
Now look! someone came up to him and said: “Teacher, what good must I do to gain everlasting life?”
He said to him: “Why do you ask me about what is good? One there is who is good. If, though, you want to enter into life, observe the commandments continually.”
He said to him: “Which ones?” Jesus said: “You must not murder, you must not commit adultery, you must not steal, you must not bear false witness,
honor your father and your mother, and you must love your neighbor as yourself.”
The young man said to him: “I have kept all of these; what am I still lacking?”
Jesus said to him: “If you want to be perfect, go sell your belongings and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come be my follower.”
When the young man heard this, he went away grieved, for he had many possessions.
Then Jesus said to his disciples: “Truly I say to you that it will be difficult for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of the heavens.
Again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.”
When the disciples heard that, they were greatly astounded, saying: “Who really can be saved?”
Looking at them intently, Jesus said to them: “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Then Peter said in reply: “Look! We have left all things and followed you; what, then, will there be for us?”
Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you, in the re-creation, when the Son of man sits down on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will sit on 12 thrones, judging the 12 tribes of Israel.
And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit everlasting life.
“But many who are first will be last and the last first.
When Jesus had finished giving instructions to his 12 disciples, he set out from there to teach and preach in their cities.
But John, having heard in jail about the works of the Christ, sent his disciples
to ask him: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
In reply Jesus said to them: “Go and report to John what you are hearing and seeing:
The blind are now seeing and the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up and the poor are being told the good news.
Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
While these were on their way, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed being tossed by the wind?
What, then, did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft garments? Why, those wearing soft garments are in the houses of kings.
Really, then, why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way ahead of you!’
Truly I say to you, among those born of women, there has not been raised up anyone greater than John the Baptist, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of the heavens is the goal toward which men press, and those pressing forward are seizing it.
For all, the Prophets and the Law, prophesied until John;
and if you are willing to accept it, he is ‘E·liʹjah who is to come.’
Let the one who has ears listen.
“With whom will I compare this generation? It is like young children sitting in the marketplaces who call out to their playmates,
saying: ‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we wailed, but you did not beat yourselves in grief.’
Likewise, John came neither eating nor drinking, but people say, ‘He has a demon.’
The Son of man did come eating and drinking, but people say, ‘Look! A man who is a glutton and is given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by its works.”
Then he began to reproach the cities in which most of his powerful works had taken place, for they did not repent:
“Woe to you, Cho·raʹzin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place in Tyre and Siʹdon, they would long ago have repented in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say to you, it will be more endurable for Tyre and Siʹdon on Judgment Day than for you.
And you, Ca·perʹna·um, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to the Grave you will come; because if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place in Sodʹom, it would have remained until this very day.
But I say to you, it will be more endurable for the land of Sodʹom on Judgment Day than for you.”
At that time Jesus said in response: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to young children.
Yes, O Father, because this is the way you approved.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one fully knows the Son except the Father; neither does anyone fully know the Father except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.
Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you.
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for yourselves.
For my yoke is kindly, and my load is light.”
Now when Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples:
“You know that two days from now the Passover takes place, and the Son of man will be handed over to be executed on the stake.”
Then the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in the courtyard of the high priest, who was named Caʹia·phas,
and they conspired together to seize Jesus by cunning and to kill him.
However, they were saying: “Not at the festival, so that there may not be an uproar among the people.”
While Jesus was in Bethʹa·ny in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman with an alabaster jar of costly perfumed oil approached him, and she began pouring it on his head as he was dining.
On seeing this, the disciples became indignant and said: “Why this waste?
For this could have been sold for a great deal of money and given to the poor.”
Aware of this, Jesus said to them: “Why do you try to make trouble for the woman? She did a fine deed toward me.
For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.
When she put this perfumed oil on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her.”
Then one of the Twelve, the one called Judas Is·carʹi·ot, went to the chief priests
and said: “What will you give me to betray him to you?” They stipulated to him 30 silver pieces.
So from then on, he kept looking for a good opportunity to betray him.
On the first day of the Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying: “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
He said: “Go into the city to So-and-so and say to him, ‘The Teacher says: “My appointed time is near; I will celebrate the Passover with my disciples at your home.”’”
So the disciples did as Jesus instructed them and prepared for the Passover.
When evening came, he was reclining at the table with the 12 disciples.
While they were eating, he said: “Truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
Being very much grieved at this, each and every one began to say to him: “Lord, it is not I, is it?”
In reply he said: “The one who dips his hand with me into the bowl is the one who will betray me.
True, the Son of man is going away, just as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
Judas, who was about to betray him, replied: “It is not I, is it, Rabbi?” Jesus said to him: “You yourself said it.”
As they continued eating, Jesus took a loaf, and after saying a blessing, he broke it, and giving it to the disciples, he said: “Take, eat. This means my body.”
And taking a cup, he offered thanks and gave it to them, saying: “Drink out of it, all of you,
for this means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many for forgiveness of sins.
But I say to you: I will by no means drink again any of this product of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father.”
Finally, after singing praises, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Then Jesus said to them: “All of you will be stumbled in connection with me on this night, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered about.’
But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
But Peter, in response, said to him: “Although all the others are stumbled in connection with you, I will never be stumbled!”
Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you, on this night, before a rooster crows, you will disown me three times.”
Peter said to him: “Even if I should have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” All the other disciples also said the same thing.
Then Jesus came with them to the spot called Geth·semʹa·ne, and he said to the disciples: “Sit down here while I go over there and pray.”
And taking along Peter and the two sons of Zebʹe·dee, he began to feel grieved and to be greatly troubled.
Then he said to them: “I am deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch with me.”
And going a little way forward, he fell facedown, praying: “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me. Yet, not as I will, but as you will.”
He returned to the disciples and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: “Could you not so much as keep on the watch for one hour with me?
Keep on the watch and pray continually, so that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
Again, a second time, he went off and prayed: “My Father, if it is not possible for this to pass away unless I drink it, let your will take place.”
And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
So leaving them, he again went off and prayed for a third time, saying once more the same thing.
Then he returned to the disciples and said to them: “At such a time as this, you are sleeping and resting! Look! The hour has drawn near for the Son of man to be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has drawn near.”
While he was still speaking, look! Judas, one of the Twelve, came and with him a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people.
Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying: “Whoever it is I kiss, he is the one; take him into custody.”
And going straight up to Jesus, he said: “Greetings, Rabbi!” and gave him a tender kiss.
But Jesus said to him: “Fellow, for what purpose are you present?” Then they came forward and seized Jesus and took him into custody.
But look! one of those with Jesus reached out his hand and drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his ear.
Then Jesus said to him: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword.
Or do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father to supply me at this moment more than 12 legions of angels?
In that case, how would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must take place this way?”
In that hour Jesus said to the crowds: “Did you come out to arrest me with swords and clubs as against a robber? Day after day I used to sit in the temple teaching, and yet you did not take me into custody.
But all of this has taken place for the writings of the prophets to be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples abandoned him and fled.
Those who took Jesus into custody led him away to Caʹia·phas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together.
But Peter kept following him from a good distance, as far as the courtyard of the high priest, and after going inside, he sat with the house attendants to see the outcome.
Now the chief priests and the entire Sanʹhe·drin were looking for false testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death.
But they found none, although many false witnesses came forward. Later two came forward
and said: “This man said, ‘I am able to throw down the temple of God and build it up in three days.’”
With that the high priest stood up and said to him: “Do you say nothing in reply? What is it these men are testifying against you?”
But Jesus kept silent. So the high priest said to him: “I put you under oath by the living God to tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God!”
Jesus said to him: “You yourself said it. But I say to you: From now on you will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
Then the high priest ripped his outer garments, saying: “He has blasphemed! What further need do we have of witnesses? See! Now you have heard the blasphemy.
What is your opinion?” They answered: “He deserves to die.”
Then they spat in his face and hit him with their fists. Others slapped him on the face,
saying: “Prophesy to us, you Christ. Who struck you?”
Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard, and a servant girl came up to him and said: “You too were with Jesus the Gal·i·leʹan!”
But he denied it before them all, saying: “I do not know what you are talking about.”
When he went out to the gatehouse, another girl noticed him and said to those there: “This man was with Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.”
Again he denied it, with an oath: “I do not know the man!”
After a little while, those standing around came up and said to Peter: “Certainly you are also one of them, for in fact, your dialect gives you away.”
Then he started to curse and swear: “I do not know the man!” And immediately a rooster crowed.
And Peter called to mind what Jesus had said, namely: “Before a rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
The book of the history of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
Abraham became father to Isaac;Isaac became father to Jacob;Jacob became father to Judah and his brothers;
Judah became father to Peʹrez and Zeʹrah by Taʹmar;Peʹrez became father to Hezʹron;Hezʹron became father to Ram;
Ram became father to Am·minʹa·dab;Am·minʹa·dab became father to Nahʹshon;Nahʹshon became father to Salʹmon;
Salʹmon became father to Boʹaz by Raʹhab;Boʹaz became father to Oʹbed by Ruth;Oʹbed became father to Jesʹse;
Jesʹse became father to David the king. David became father to Solʹo·mon by the wife of U·riʹah;
Solʹo·mon became father to Re·ho·boʹam;Re·ho·boʹam became father to A·biʹjah;A·biʹjah became father to Aʹsa;
Aʹsa became father to Je·hoshʹa·phat;Je·hoshʹa·phat became father to Je·hoʹram;Je·hoʹram became father to Uz·ziʹah;
Uz·ziʹah became father to Joʹtham;Joʹtham became father to Aʹhaz;Aʹhaz became father to Hez·e·kiʹah;
Hez·e·kiʹah became father to Ma·nasʹseh;Ma·nasʹseh became father to Aʹmon;Aʹmon became father to Jo·siʹah;
Jo·siʹah became father to Jec·o·niʹah and to his brothers at the time of the deportation to Babylon.
After the deportation to Babylon, Jec·o·niʹah became father to She·alʹti·el;She·alʹti·el became father to Ze·rubʹba·bel;
Ze·rubʹba·bel became father to A·biʹud;A·biʹud became father to E·liʹa·kim;E·liʹa·kim became father to Aʹzor;
Aʹzor became father to Zaʹdok;Zaʹdok became father to Aʹchim;Aʹchim became father to E·liʹud;
E·liʹud became father to El·e·aʹzar;El·e·aʹzar became father to Matʹthan;Matʹthan became father to Jacob;
Jacob became father to Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ.
All the generations, then, from Abraham until David were 14 generations; from David until the deportation to Babylon, 14 generations; from the deportation to Babylon until the Christ, 14 generations.
But this is how the birth of Jesus Christ took place. During the time his mother Mary was promised in marriage to Joseph, she was found to be pregnant by holy spirit before they were united.
However, because her husband Joseph was righteous and did not want to make her a public spectacle, he intended to divorce her secretly.
But after he had thought these things over, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a dream, saying: “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take your wife Mary home, for what has been conceived in her is by holy spirit.
She will give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
All of this actually came about to fulfill what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying:
“Look! The virgin will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and they will name him Im·manʹu·el,” which means, when translated, “With Us Is God.”
Then Joseph woke up from his sleep and did as the angel of Jehovah had directed him, and he took his wife home.
But he did not have sexual relations with her until she gave birth to a son, and he named him Jesus.
“Stop judging that you may not be judged;
for with the judgment you are judging, you will be judged, and with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you.
Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye but do not notice the rafter in your own eye?
Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Allow me to remove the straw from your eye,’ when look! a rafter is in your own eye?
Hypocrite! First remove the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw from your brother’s eye.
“Do not give what is holy to dogs nor throw your pearls before swine, so that they may never trample them under their feet and turn around and rip you open.
“Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you;
for everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
Indeed, which one of you, if his son asks for bread, will hand him a stone?
Or if he asks for a fish, he will not hand him a serpent, will he?
Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him!
“All things, therefore, that you want men to do to you, you also must do to them. This, in fact, is what the Law and the Prophets mean.
“Go in through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are going in through it;
whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.
“Be on the watch for the false prophets who come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.
By their fruits you will recognize them. Never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, do they?
Likewise, every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit.
A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, nor can a rotten tree produce fine fruit.
Every tree not producing fine fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.
“Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of the heavens, but only the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.
Many will say to me in that day: ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many powerful works in your name?’
And then I will declare to them: ‘I never knew you! Get away from me, you workers of lawlessness!’
“Therefore, everyone who hears these sayings of mine and does them will be like a discreet man who built his house on the rock.
And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and lashed against that house, but it did not cave in, for it had been founded on the rock.
Furthermore, everyone hearing these sayings of mine and not doing them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand.
And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and struck against that house, and it caved in, and its collapse was great.”
When Jesus finished these sayings, the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching,
for he was teaching them as a person having authority, and not as their scribes.
“Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.
For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them,
whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps.
While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’
Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order.
The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’
The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’
While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.
Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’
In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’
“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour.
“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them.
He gave five talents to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad.
Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more.
Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more.
But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.
“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them.
So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’
His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’
His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow.
So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’
In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow?
Well, then, you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest.
“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents.
For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’
“When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.
All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.
“Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.
For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably;
naked and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’
Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you?
When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’
In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’
“Then he will say to those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.
For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink.
I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’
Then they too will answer with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’
Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’
These will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”
On that day Jesus left the house and was sitting by the sea.
And such large crowds gathered to him that he went aboard a boat and sat down, and all the crowd was standing on the beach.
Then he told them many things by illustrations, saying: “Look! A sower went out to sow.
As he was sowing, some seeds fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate them up.
Others fell on rocky ground where there was not much soil, and they immediately sprang up because the soil was not deep.
But when the sun rose, they were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them.
Still others fell on the fine soil, and they began to yield fruit, this one 100 times more, that one 60, the other 30.
Let the one who has ears listen.”
So the disciples came and said to him: “Why do you speak to them by the use of illustrations?”
In reply he said: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of the heavens, but to them it is not granted.
For whoever has, more will be given him, and he will be made to abound; but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
That is why I speak to them by the use of illustrations; for looking, they look in vain, and hearing, they hear in vain, nor do they get the sense of it.
And the prophecy of Isaiah is being fulfilled in their case. It says: ‘You will indeed hear but by no means get the sense of it, and you will indeed look but by no means see.
For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes, so that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and get the sense of it with their hearts and turn back and I heal them.’
“However, happy are your eyes because they see and your ears because they hear.
For truly I say to you, many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things you are observing but did not see them, and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them.
“Now listen to the illustration of the man who sowed.
Where anyone hears the word of the Kingdom but does not get the sense of it, the wicked one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart; this is the one sown alongside the road.
As for the one sown on rocky ground, this is the one hearing the word and at once accepting it with joy.
Yet, he has no root in himself but continues for a time, and after tribulation or persecution has arisen on account of the word, he is at once stumbled.
As for the one sown among the thorns, this is the one hearing the word, but the anxiety of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
As for the one sown upon the fine soil, this is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit and produces, this one 100 times more, that one 60, the other 30.”
He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field.
While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left.
When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared.
So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’
He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’
He said, ‘No, for fear that while collecting the weeds, you uproot the wheat with them.
Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”
He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like a mustard grain that a man took and planted in his field.
It is, in fact, the tiniest of all the seeds, but when it has grown, it is the largest of the vegetable plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and find lodging among its branches.”
He told them another illustration: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like leaven that a woman took and mixed with three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.”
All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations. Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them,
in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet who said: “I will open my mouth with illustrations; I will proclaim things hidden since the founding.”
Then after dismissing the crowds, he went into the house. His disciples came to him and said: “Explain to us the illustration of the weeds in the field.”
In response he said: “The sower of the fine seed is the Son of man;
the field is the world. As for the fine seed, these are the sons of the Kingdom, but the weeds are the sons of the wicked one,
and the enemy who sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is a conclusion of a system of things, and the reapers are angels.
Therefore, just as the weeds are collected and burned with fire, so it will be in the conclusion of the system of things.
The Son of man will send his angels, and they will collect out from his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling and people who practice lawlessness,
and they will pitch them into the fiery furnace. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.
At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Let the one who has ears listen.
“The Kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure, hidden in the field, that a man found and hid; and because of his joy, he goes and sells everything he has and buys that field.
“Again the Kingdom of the heavens is like a traveling merchant seeking fine pearls.
Upon finding one pearl of high value, he went away and promptly sold all the things he had and bought it.
“Again the Kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet let down into the sea and gathering fish of every kind.
When it was full, they hauled it up onto the beach, and sitting down, they collected the fine ones into containers, but the unsuitable they threw away.
That is how it will be in the conclusion of the system of things. The angels will go out and separate the wicked from among the righteous
and will cast them into the fiery furnace. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.
“Did you get the sense of all these things?” They said to him: “Yes.”
Then he said to them: “That being the case, every public instructor who is taught about the Kingdom of the heavens is like a man, the master of the house, who brings out of his treasure store things both new and old.”
When Jesus had finished these illustrations, he departed from there.
After coming into his home territory, he began to teach them in their synagogue, so that they were astounded and said: “Where did this man get this wisdom and these powerful works?
Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?
And his sisters, are they not all with us? Where, then, did he get all of this?”
So they began to stumble because of him. But Jesus said to them: “A prophet is not without honor except in his home territory and in his own house.”
And he did not perform many powerful works there on account of their lack of faith.
When they got close to Jerusalem and arrived at Bethʹpha·ge on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and you will at once find a donkey tied and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me.
If someone says anything to you, you must say, ‘The Lord needs them.’ At that he will immediately send them.”
This actually took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet, who said:
“Tell the daughter of Zion: ‘Look! Your king is coming to you, mild-tempered and mounted on a donkey, yes, on a colt, the offspring of a beast of burden.’”
So the disciples went and did just as Jesus had instructed them.
They brought the donkey and its colt, and they put their outer garments on them, and he sat on them.
Most of the crowd spread their outer garments on the road, while others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road.
Moreover, the crowds going ahead of him and those following him kept shouting: “Save, we pray, the Son of David! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name! Save him, we pray, in the heights above!”
And when he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was in an uproar, saying: “Who is this?”
The crowds kept saying: “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazret of Galilee!”
Jesus entered the temple and threw out all those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
And he said to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it a cave of robbers.”
Also, blind and lame people came to him in the temple, and he cured them.
When the chief priests and the scribes saw the marvelous things he did and the boys who were shouting in the temple, “Save, we pray, the Son of David!” they became indignant
and said to him: “Do you hear what these are saying?” Jesus said to them: “Yes. Did you never read this, ‘Out of the mouth of children and infants, you have brought forth praise’?”
And leaving them behind, he went out of the city to Bethʹa·ny and spent the night there.
While returning to the city early in the morning, he felt hungry.
He caught sight of a fig tree by the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except leaves, and he said to it: “Let no fruit come from you ever again.” And the fig tree withered instantly.
When the disciples saw this, they were amazed and said: “How is it that the fig tree withered instantly?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what I did to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
And all the things you ask in prayer, having faith, you will receive.”
After he went into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came up to him while he was teaching and said: “By what authority do you do these things? And who gave you this authority?”
In reply Jesus said to them: “I will also ask you one thing. If you tell me, then I will also tell you by what authority I do these things:
The baptism by John, from what source was it? From heaven or from men?” But they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’
But if we say, ‘From men,’ we have the crowd to fear, for they all regard John as a prophet.”
So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.” He, in turn, said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.
“What do you think? A man had two children. Going up to the first, he said, ‘Child, go work today in the vineyard.’
In answer this one said, ‘I will not,’ but afterward, he felt regret and went out.
Approaching the second, he said the same. This one replied, ‘I will, Sir,’ but did not go out.
Which of the two did the will of his father?” They said: “The first.” Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are going ahead of you into the Kingdom of God.
For John came to you in a way of righteousness, but you did not believe him. However, the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him, and even when you saw this, you did not feel regret afterward so as to believe him.
“Hear another illustration: There was a man, a landowner, who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and erected a tower; then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
When the fruit season came around, he sent his slaves to the cultivators to collect his fruit.
However, the cultivators took his slaves, and they beat one up, another they killed, another they stoned.
Again he sent other slaves, more than the first group, but they did the same to these.
Lastly he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
On seeing the son, the cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and get his inheritance!’
So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those cultivators?”
They said to him: “Because they are evil, he will bring a terrible destruction on them and will lease the vineyard to other cultivators, who will give him the fruits when they become due.”
Jesus said to them: “Did you never read in the Scriptures, ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone. This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
This is why I say to you, the Kingdom of God will be taken from you and be given to a nation producing its fruits.
Also, the person falling on this stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his illustrations, they knew that he was speaking about them.
Although they wanted to seize him, they feared the crowds, because these regarded him as a prophet.
In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Ju·deʹa,
saying: “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
This, in fact, is the one spoken of through Isaiah the prophet in these words: “A voice of one calling out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.’”
Now John was clothed with camel’s hair and had a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
Then the people of Jerusalem and all Ju·deʹa and all the country around the Jordan were going out to him,
and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
When he caught sight of many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to the baptism, he said to them: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore, produce fruit that befits repentance.
Do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
The ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit is to be cut down and thrown into the fire.
I, for my part, baptize you with water because of your repentance, but the one coming after me is stronger than I am, whose sandals I am not worthy to take off. That one will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
His winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will clean up his threshing floor completely and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, in order to be baptized by him.
But the latter tried to prevent him, saying: “I am the one who needs to be baptized by you, and are you coming to me?”
Jesus replied to him: “Let it be this time, for in that way it is suitable for us to carry out all that is righteous.” Then he quit preventing him.
After being baptized, Jesus immediately came up from the water; and look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him.
Look! Also, a voice from the heavens said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.”
So boarding the boat, he traveled across and went into his own city.
And look! they were bringing him a paralyzed man lying on a stretcher. On seeing their faith, Jesus said to the paralytic: “Take courage, child! Your sins are forgiven.”
Now certain scribes said to themselves: “This fellow is blaspheming.”
Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: “Why are you thinking wicked things in your hearts?
For instance, which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
However, in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” then he said to the paralytic: “Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
And he got up and went to his home.
When the crowds saw this, they were struck with fear, and they glorified God, who gave such authority to men.
Next, while moving on from there, Jesus caught sight of a man named Matthew sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” At that he rose up and followed him.
Later as he was dining in the house, look! many tax collectors and sinners came and began dining with Jesus and his disciples.
But on seeing this, the Pharisees said to his disciples: “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
Hearing them, he said: “Healthy people do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
Go, then, and learn what this means: ‘I want mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
Then John’s disciples came to him and asked: “Why do we and the Pharisees practice fasting but your disciples do not fast?”
At this Jesus said to them: “The friends of the bridegroom have no reason to mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them, do they? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old outer garment, for the new piece pulls away from the garment and the tear becomes worse.
Nor do people put new wine into old wineskins. If they do, then the wineskins burst and the wine spills out and the wineskins are ruined. But people put new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
While he was telling them these things, look! a certain ruler who had approached did obeisance to him, saying: “By now my daughter must be dead, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will come to life.”
Then Jesus got up and, with his disciples, followed him.
And look! a woman suffering for 12 years from a flow of blood approached from behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment,
for she kept saying to herself: “If I only touch his outer garment, I will get well.”
Jesus turned around and, noticing her, said: “Take courage, daughter! Your faith has made you well.” And from that hour the woman was made well.
When, now, he came into the ruler’s house and caught sight of the flute players and the crowd making a commotion,
Jesus said: “Leave the place, for the little girl did not die but is sleeping.” At this they began to laugh at him scornfully.
As soon as the crowd had been sent outside, he went in and took hold of her hand, and the little girl got up.
Of course, the talk about this spread into all that region.
As Jesus moved on from there, two blind men followed him, shouting out: “Have mercy on us, Son of David.”
After he had gone into the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus asked them: “Do you have faith that I can do this?” They answered him: “Yes, Lord.”
Then he touched their eyes, saying: “According to your faith let it happen to you.”
And their eyes received sight. Moreover, Jesus sternly warned them, saying: “See that nobody gets to know it.”
But after going outside, they made it public about him in all that region.
When they were leaving, look! people brought him a speechless man possessed of a demon;
and after the demon had been expelled, the speechless man spoke. Well, the crowds were amazed and said: “Never has anything like this been seen in Israel.”
But the Pharisees were saying: “It is by the ruler of the demons that he expels the demons.”
And Jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.
On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.
Then he said to his disciples: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few.
Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”
Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple.
In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you,
for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many.
You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.
All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.
“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name.
Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another.
Many false prophets will arise and mislead many;
and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.
But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.
“Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment),
then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house,
and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment.
Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days!
Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day;
for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.
In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.
“Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.
Look! I have forewarned you.
Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together.
“Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
Then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity.
“Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near.
Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.
Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
“Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.
For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken along and the other abandoned.
Two women will be grinding at the hand mill; one will be taken along and the other abandoned.
Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming.
“But know one thing: If the householder had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into.
On this account, you too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of man is coming at an hour that you do not think to be it.
“Who really is the faithful and discreet slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?
Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so!
Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.
“But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’
and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards,
the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know,
and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.
When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the people consulted together against Jesus to put him to death.
After binding him, they led him off and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.
Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, felt remorse and brought the 30 pieces of silver back to the chief priests and elders,
saying: “I sinned when I betrayed innocent blood.” They said: “What is that to us? You must see to it!”
So he threw the silver pieces into the temple and departed. Then he went off and hanged himself.
But the chief priests took the silver pieces and said: “It is not lawful to put them into the sacred treasury, because they are the price of blood.”
After consulting together, they used the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for strangers.
Therefore, that field has been called Field of Blood to this very day.
Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “And they took the 30 silver pieces, the price that was set on the man, the one on whom a price was set by some of the sons of Israel,
and they gave them for the potter’s field, according to what Jehovah had commanded me.”
Jesus now stood before the governor, and the governor put the question to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus replied: “You yourself say it.”
But while he was being accused by the chief priests and elders, he made no answer.
Then Pilate said to him: “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?”
But he did not answer him, no, not a word, so that the governor was very surprised.
Now from festival to festival, it was the custom of the governor to release a prisoner to the crowd, whomever they wanted.
Just at that time they were holding a notorious prisoner called Bar·abʹbas.
So when they were gathered together, Pilate said to them: “Which one do you want me to release to you, Bar·abʹbas or Jesus the so-called Christ?”
For Pilate was aware that out of envy they had handed him over.
Moreover, while he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent a message to him, saying: “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I suffered a lot today in a dream because of him.”
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Bar·abʹbas, but to have Jesus put to death.
In response the governor said to them: “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They said: “Bar·abʹbas.”
Pilate said to them: “What, then, should I do with Jesus the so-called Christ?” They all said: “To the stake with him!”
He said: “Why? What bad thing did he do?” Still they kept shouting out all the more: “To the stake with him!”
Seeing that it did no good but, rather, an uproar was arising, Pilate took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying: “I am innocent of the blood of this man. You yourselves must see to it.”
At that all the people said in answer: “Let his blood come upon us and upon our children.”
Then he released Bar·abʹbas to them, but he had Jesus whipped and handed him over to be executed on the stake.
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor’s residence and gathered the whole body of troops together around him.
And disrobing him, they draped him with a scarlet cloak,
and they braided a crown out of thorns and put it on his head and put a reed in his right hand. And kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!”
And they spat on him and took the reed and began hitting him on his head.
Finally, after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the cloak and put his outer garments on him and led him off to be nailed to the stake.
As they were going out, they found a man of Cy·reʹne named Simon. This man they compelled into service to carry his torture stake.
And when they came to a place called Golʹgo·tha, that is, Skull Place,
they gave him wine mixed with gall to drink; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.
When they had nailed him to the stake, they distributed his outer garments by casting lots,
and they sat there keeping watch over him.
They also posted above his head the charge against him, in writing: “This is Jesus the King of the Jews.”
Then two robbers were put on stakes alongside him, one on his right and one on his left.
And those passing by spoke abusively of him, shaking their heads
and saying: “You who would throw down the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are a son of God, come down off the torture stake!”
In the same way also, the chief priests with the scribes and the elders began mocking him, saying:
“Others he saved; himself he cannot save! He is King of Israel; let him now come down off the torture stake, and we will believe in him.
He has put his trust in God; let Him now rescue him if He wants him, for he said, ‘I am God’s Son.’”
In the same way, even the robbers who were on stakes alongside him were reproaching him.
From the sixth hour on, a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour.
About the ninth hour, Jesus called out with a loud voice, saying: “Eʹli, Eʹli, laʹma sa·bach·thaʹni?” that is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
At hearing this, some of those standing there began to say: “This man is calling E·liʹjah.”
And immediately one of them ran and took a sponge and soaked it in sour wine and put it on a reed and gave it to him to drink.
But the rest of them said: “Let him be! Let us see whether E·liʹjah comes to save him.”
Again Jesus called out with a loud voice and yielded up his spirit.
And look! the curtain of the sanctuary was torn in two, from top to bottom, and the earth quaked, and the rocks were split.
And the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the holy ones who had fallen asleep were raised up
(and people coming out from among the tombs after his being raised up entered into the holy city), and they became visible to many people.
But when the army officer and those with him keeping watch over Jesus saw the earthquake and the things happening, they grew very much afraid and said: “Certainly this was God’s Son.”
And many women were there watching from a distance, who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee to minister to him;
among them were Mary Magʹda·lene and Mary the mother of James and Joʹses and the mother of the sons of Zebʹe·dee.
Now as it was late in the afternoon, a rich man of Ar·i·ma·theʹa came, named Joseph, who had also become a disciple of Jesus.
This man approached Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded that it be given to him.
Joseph took the body, wrapped it up in clean, fine linen,
and laid it in his new tomb, which he had quarried in the rock. And after rolling a big stone to the entrance of the tomb, he left.
But Mary Magʹda·lene and the other Mary continued there, sitting before the grave.
The next day, which was after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered together before Pilate,
saying: “Sir, we recall what that impostor said while he was still alive, ‘After three days I am to be raised up.’
Therefore, command that the grave be made secure until the third day, so that his disciples may not come and steal him and say to the people, ‘He was raised up from the dead!’ Then this last deception will be worse than the first.”
Pilate said to them: “You may have a guard. Go make it as secure as you know how.”
So they went and made the grave secure by sealing the stone and posting a guard.
After Jesus had been born in Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa in the days of Herod the king, look! astrologers from the East came to Jerusalem,
saying: “Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when we were in the East, and we have come to do obeisance to him.”
At hearing this, King Herod was agitated, and all Jerusalem with him.
On gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
They said to him: “In Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa, for this is how it has been written through the prophet:
‘And you, O Bethʹle·hem of the land of Judah, are by no means the most insignificant city among the governors of Judah, for out of you will come a governing one, who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
Then Herod secretly summoned the astrologers and carefully ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearing.
When sending them to Bethʹle·hem, he said: “Go make a careful search for the young child, and when you have found him, report back to me so that I too may go and do obeisance to him.”
After they had heard the king, they went their way, and look! the star they had seen when they were in the East went ahead of them until it came to a stop above where the young child was.
On seeing the star, they rejoiced with great joy.
And when they went into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and falling down, they did obeisance to him. They also opened their treasures and presented him with gifts—gold and frankincense and myrrh.
However, because they were given divine warning in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their country by another way.
After they had departed, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I give you word, for Herod is about to search for the young child to kill him.”
So Joseph got up and by night took along the young child and the child’s mother and went into Egypt.
He stayed there until the death of Herod. This fulfilled what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
Then Herod, seeing that he had been outwitted by the astrologers, flew into a great rage, and he sent out and had all the boys in Bethʹle·hem and in all its districts killed, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had carefully ascertained from the astrologers.
Then was fulfilled what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, who said:
“A voice was heard in Raʹmah, weeping and much wailing. It was Rachel weeping for her children, and she was unwilling to take comfort, because they are no more.”
When Herod had died, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
and said: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life of the young child are dead.”
So he got up and took the young child and the child’s mother and entered into the land of Israel.
But hearing that Ar·che·laʹus ruled Ju·deʹa instead of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Moreover, being given divine warning in a dream, he withdrew into the territory of Galilee.
And he came and settled in a city named Nazret, in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Naz·a·reneʹ.”
So he summoned his 12 disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, in order to expel these and to cure every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.
The names of the 12 apostles are these: First, Simon, the one called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebʹe·dee and John his brother;
Philip and Bar·tholʹo·mew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Al·phaeʹus; Thad·daeʹus;
Simon the Ca·na·naeʹan; and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who later betrayed him.
These 12 Jesus sent out, giving them these instructions: “Do not go off into the road of the nations, and do not enter any Sa·marʹi·tan city;
but instead, go continually to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’
Cure the sick, raise up the dead, make lepers clean, expel demons. You received free, give free.
Do not acquire gold or silver or copper for your money belts,
or a food pouch for the trip, or two garments, or sandals, or a staff, for the worker deserves his food.
“Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving, and stay there until you leave.
When you enter the house, greet the household.
If the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you.
Wherever anyone does not receive you or listen to your words, on going out of that house or that city, shake the dust off your feet.
Truly I say to you, it will be more endurable for the land of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah on Judgment Day than for that city.
“Look! I am sending you out as sheep among wolves; so prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.
Be on your guard against men, for they will hand you over to local courts and they will scourge you in their synagogues.
And you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them and the nations.
However, when they hand you over, do not become anxious about how or what you are to speak, for what you are to speak will be given you in that hour;
for the ones speaking are not just you, but it is the spirit of your Father that speaks by you.
Further, brother will hand brother over to death, and a father his child, and children will rise up against parents and will have them put to death.
And you will be hated by all people on account of my name, but the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
When they persecute you in one city, flee to another; for truly I say to you, you will by no means complete the circuit of the cities of Israel until the Son of man arrives.
“A student is not above his teacher, nor a slave above his master.
It is enough for the student to become as his teacher, and the slave as his master. If people have called the master of the house Be·elʹze·bub, how much more those of his household?
So do not fear them, for there is nothing covered over that will not become uncovered, and nothing secret that will not become known.
What I tell you in the darkness, say in the light, and what you hear whispered, preach from the housetops.
And do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; rather, fear him who can destroy both soul and body in Ge·henʹna.
Two sparrows sell for a coin of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
So have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
“Everyone, then, who acknowledges me before men, I will also acknowledge him before my Father who is in the heavens.
But whoever disowns me before men, I will also disown him before my Father who is in the heavens.
Do not think I came to bring peace to the earth; I came to bring, not peace, but a sword.
For I came to cause division, with a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
Indeed, a man’s enemies will be those of his own household.
Whoever has greater affection for father or mother than for me is not worthy of me; and whoever has greater affection for son or daughter than for me is not worthy of me.
And whoever does not accept his torture stake and follow after me is not worthy of me.
Whoever finds his soul will lose it, and whoever loses his soul for my sake will find it.
“Whoever receives you receives me also, and whoever receives me receives also the One who sent me.
Whoever receives a prophet because he is a prophet will get a prophet’s reward, and whoever receives a righteous man because he is a righteous man will get a righteous man’s reward.
And whoever gives one of these little ones only a cup of cold water to drink because he is a disciple, I tell you truly, he will by no means lose his reward.”
Here the Pharisees and Sadducees approached him, and to test him, they asked him to display to them a sign from heaven.
In reply he said to them: “When evening falls, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is fire-red,’
and in the morning, ‘It will be wintry, rainy weather today, for the sky is fire-red but gloomy.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but the signs of the times you cannot interpret.
A wicked and adulterous generation keeps seeking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Joʹnah.” With that he went away, leaving them behind.
Now the disciples crossed to the other side and forgot to take bread along.
Jesus said to them: “Keep your eyes open and watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “We did not take any loaves along.”
Knowing this, Jesus said: “Why are you discussing among yourselves that you have no loaves, you with little faith?
Do you not yet see the point, or do you not remember the five loaves in the case of the 5,000 and how many baskets you took up?
Or the seven loaves in the case of the 4,000 and how many large baskets you took up?
How is it you do not discern that I did not speak to you about bread? But watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
Then they grasped that he said to watch out, not for the leaven of bread, but for the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
When he had come into the region of Caes·a·reʹa Phi·lipʹpi, Jesus asked his disciples: “Who are men saying the Son of man is?”
They said: “Some say John the Baptist, others E·liʹjah, and still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
He said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?”
Simon Peter answered: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Joʹnah, because flesh and blood did not reveal it to you, but my Father in the heavens did.
Also, I say to you: You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of the Grave will not overpower it.
I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you may bind on earth will already be bound in the heavens, and whatever you may loosen on earth will already be loosened in the heavens.”
Then he sternly instructed the disciples not to tell anybody that he was the Christ.
From that time forward, Jesus began explaining to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.
At this Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this happen to you at all.”
But turning his back, he said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
Really, what good will it do a man if he gains the whole world but loses his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
For the Son of man is to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will repay each one according to his behavior.
Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.”
When he saw the crowds, he went up on the mountain; and after he sat down, his disciples came to him.
Then he opened his mouth and began teaching them, saying:
“Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
“Happy are those who mourn, since they will be comforted.
“Happy are the mild-tempered, since they will inherit the earth.
“Happy are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be filled.
“Happy are the merciful, since they will be shown mercy.
“Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God.
“Happy are the peacemakers, since they will be called sons of God.
“Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
“Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake.
Rejoice and be overjoyed, since your reward is great in the heavens, for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.
“You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt loses its strength, how will its saltiness be restored? It is no longer usable for anything except to be thrown outside to be trampled on by men.
“You are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid when located on a mountain.
People light a lamp and set it, not under a basket, but on the lampstand, and it shines on all those in the house.
Likewise, let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.
“Do not think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy, but to fulfill.
Truly I say to you that sooner would heaven and earth pass away than for one smallest letter or one stroke of a letter to pass away from the Law until all things take place.
Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these least commandments and teaches others to do so will be called least in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens. But whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in relation to the Kingdom of the heavens.
For I say to you that if your righteousness does not surpass that of the scribes and the Pharisees, you will by no means enter into the Kingdom of the heavens.
“You heard that it was said to those of ancient times: ‘You must not murder, but whoever commits a murder will be accountable to the court of justice.’
However, I say to you that everyone who continues wrathful with his brother will be accountable to the court of justice; and whoever addresses his brother with an unspeakable word of contempt will be accountable to the Supreme Court; whereas whoever says, ‘You despicable fool!’ will be liable to the fiery Ge·henʹna.
“If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you,
leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away. First make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.
“Be quick to settle matters with your legal opponent, while you are with him on the way there, so that somehow the opponent may not turn you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant, and you get thrown into prison.
I say to you for a fact, you will certainly not come out of there until you have paid over your last small coin.
“You heard that it was said: ‘You must not commit adultery.’
But I say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
If, now, your right eye is making you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you. For it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to be pitched into Ge·henʹna.
Also, if your right hand is making you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you. For it is better for you to lose one of your members than for your whole body to land in Ge·henʹna.
“Moreover, it was said: ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’
However, I say to you that everyone divorcing his wife, except on account of sexual immorality, makes her a subject for adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
“Again you heard that it was said to those of ancient times: ‘You must not swear without performing, but you must pay your vows to Jehovah.’
However, I say to you: Do not swear at all, neither by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
nor by earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Do not swear by your head, since you cannot turn one hair white or black.
Just let your word ‘Yes’ mean yes, your ‘No,’ no, for what goes beyond these is from the wicked one.
“You heard that it was said: ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
However, I say to you: Do not resist the one who is wicked, but whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn the other also to him.
And if a person wants to take you to court and get possession of your inner garment, let him also have your outer garment;
and if someone in authority compels you into service for a mile, go with him two miles.
Give to the one asking you, and do not turn away from one who wants to borrow from you.
“You heard that it was said: ‘You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
However, I say to you: Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you,
so that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.
For if you love those loving you, what reward do you have? Are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing?
And if you greet your brothers only, what extraordinary thing are you doing? Are not also the people of the nations doing the same thing?
You must accordingly be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
At that time Herod, the district ruler, heard the report about Jesus
and said to his servants: “This is John the Baptist. He was raised up from the dead, and this is why these powerful works are operating in him.”
Herod had arrested John and had bound him and imprisoned him because of He·roʹdi·as, the wife of Philip his brother.
For John had been saying to him: “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
However, although he wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, because they took him for a prophet.
But when Herod’s birthday was being celebrated, the daughter of He·roʹdi·as danced for the occasion and pleased Herod so much
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
Then she, at her mother’s prompting, said: “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
Grieved though he was, the king, out of regard for his oaths and for those dining with him, commanded it to be given.
So he sent and had John beheaded in the prison.
His head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother.
Later his disciples came and removed his corpse and buried him; then they came and reported to Jesus.
At hearing this, Jesus departed from there by boat into an isolated place to be alone. But the crowds, getting to hear of it, followed him on foot from the cities.
When he came ashore, he saw a large crowd, and he felt pity for them, and he cured their sick ones.
But when evening fell, his disciples came to him and said: “The place is isolated and the hour is already late; send the crowds away, so that they may go into the villages and buy themselves food.”
However, Jesus said to them: “They do not have to leave; you give them something to eat.”
They said to him: “We have nothing here except five loaves and two fish.”
He said: “Bring them here to me.”
And he instructed the crowds to recline on the grass. Then he took the five loaves and two fish, and looking up to heaven, he said a blessing, and after breaking the loaves, he gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
So they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the leftover fragments, 12 baskets full.
Now those eating were about 5,000 men, as well as women and young children.
Then, without delay, he made his disciples board the boat and go ahead of him to the opposite shore, while he sent the crowds away.
After sending the crowds away, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone.
By now the boat was many hundreds of yards away from land, struggling against the waves because the wind was against them.
But in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea.
When they caught sight of him walking on the sea, the disciples were troubled, saying: “It is an apparition!” And they cried out in their fear.
But at once Jesus spoke to them, saying: “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.”
Peter answered him: “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you over the waters.”
He said: “Come!” So Peter got out of the boat and walked over the waters and went toward Jesus.
But looking at the windstorm, he became afraid. And when he started to sink, he cried out: “Lord, save me!”
Immediately stretching out his hand, Jesus caught hold of him and said to him: “You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?”
After they got up into the boat, the windstorm abated.
Then those in the boat did obeisance to him, saying: “You really are God’s Son.”
And they crossed over and came to land in Gen·nesʹa·ret.
On recognizing him, the men of that place sent word into all that surrounding country, and people brought him all those who were ill.
And they pleaded with him that they might just touch the fringe of his outer garment, and all those who touched it were made completely well.
After the Sabbath, when it was growing light on the first day of the week, Mary Magʹda·lene and the other Mary came to view the grave.
And look! a great earthquake had taken place, for Jehovah’s angel had descended from heaven and had come and rolled away the stone, and he was sitting on it.
His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow.
Yes, out of their fear of him, the watchmen trembled and became as dead men.
But the angel said to the women: “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus who was executed on the stake.
He is not here, for he was raised up, just as he said. Come, see the place where he was lying.
Then go quickly and tell his disciples that he was raised up from the dead, for look! he is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there. Look! I have told you.”
So, quickly leaving the memorial tomb, with fear and great joy, they ran to report to his disciples.
And look! Jesus met them and said: “Good day!” They approached and took hold of his feet and did obeisance to him.
Then Jesus said to them: “Have no fear! Go, report to my brothers so that they may go to Galilee, and there they will see me.”
While they were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests all the things that had happened.
And after these had gathered with the elders and had consulted together, they gave a considerable number of silver pieces to the soldiers
and said: “Say, ‘His disciples came in the night and stole him while we were sleeping.’
And if this gets to the governor’s ears, we will explain the matter to him and you will not need to worry.”
So they took the silver pieces and did as they were instructed, and this story has been spread abroad among the Jews up to this very day.
However, the 11 disciples went to Galilee to the mountain where Jesus had arranged for them to meet.
When they saw him, they did obeisance, but some doubted.
Jesus approached and spoke to them, saying: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.
Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit,
teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
Once more Jesus spoke to them with illustrations, saying:
“The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who made a marriage feast for his son.
And he sent his slaves to call those invited to the marriage feast, but they were unwilling to come.
Again he sent other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those invited: “Look! I have prepared my dinner, my bulls and fattened animals are slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the marriage feast.”’
But unconcerned they went off, one to his own field, another to his business;
but the rest, seizing his slaves, treated them insolently and killed them.
“The king grew wrathful and sent his armies and killed those murderers and burned their city.
Then he said to his slaves, ‘The marriage feast is ready, but those invited were not worthy.
Therefore, go to the roads leading out of the city, and invite anyone you find to the marriage feast.’
Accordingly, those slaves went out to the roads and gathered all they found, both wicked and good; and the room for the wedding ceremonies was filled with those dining.
“When the king came in to inspect the guests, he caught sight of a man not wearing a marriage garment.
So he said to him, ‘Fellow, how did you get in here without a marriage garment?’ He was speechless.
Then the king said to his servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and throw him into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’
“For there are many invited, but few chosen.”
Then the Pharisees went and conspired together in order to trap him in his speech.
So they sent their disciples to him, together with party followers of Herod, saying: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people.
Tell us, then, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: “Why do you put me to the test, hypocrites?
Show me the tax coin.” They brought him a de·narʹi·us.
He said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?”
They said: “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”
When they heard that, they were amazed, and they left him and went away.
On that day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
“Teacher, Moses said: ‘If any man dies without having children, his brother must marry his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers with us. The first married and died, and having no offspring, he left his wife for his brother.
The same thing happened with the second and the third, through all seven.
Last of all, the woman died.
So in the resurrection, of the seven, whose wife will she be? For they all had her as a wife.”
In reply Jesus said to them: “You are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God;
for in the resurrection neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but they are as angels in heaven.
Regarding the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was spoken to you by God, who said:
‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob’? He is the God, not of the dead, but of the living.”
On hearing that, the crowds were astounded at his teaching.
After the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they came together in one group.
And one of them, versed in the Law, tested him by asking:
“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”
He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’
This is the greatest and first commandment.
The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’
On these two commandments the whole Law hangs, and the Prophets.”
Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them:
“What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him: “David’s.”
He asked them: “How is it, then, that David under inspiration calls him Lord, saying,
‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet”’?
If, then, David calls him Lord, how is he his son?”
And nobody was able to say a word in reply to him, and from that day on, no one dared to question him any further.
Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying:
“Why do your disciples overstep the tradition of the men of former times? For example, they do not wash their hands when about to eat a meal.”
In reply he said to them: “Why do you overstep the commandment of God because of your tradition?
For example, God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
But you say, ‘Whoever says to his father or mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is a gift dedicated to God,”
he need not honor his father at all.’ So you have made the word of God invalid because of your tradition.
You hypocrites, Isaiah aptly prophesied about you when he said:
‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’”
With that he called the crowd near and said to them: “Listen and get the sense of it:
It is not what enters into a man’s mouth that defiles him, but it is what comes out of his mouth that defiles him.”
Then the disciples came and said to him: “Do you know that the Pharisees were stumbled at hearing what you said?”
In reply he said: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
Let them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
Peter responded: “Make the illustration plain to us.”
At this he said: “Are you also still without understanding?
Are you not aware that whatever enters into the mouth passes through the stomach and is discharged into the sewer?
However, whatever comes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and those things defile a man.
For example, out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders, adulteries, sexual immorality, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies.
These are the things that defile a man; but to take a meal with unwashed hands does not defile a man.”
Leaving there, Jesus now went into the region of Tyre and Siʹdon.
And look! a Phoe·niʹcian woman from that region came and cried out: “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David. My daughter is cruelly demon possessed.”
But he did not say a word in answer to her. So his disciples came and began to urge him: “Send her away, because she keeps crying out after us.”
He answered: “I was not sent to anyone except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
But the woman came and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, help me!”
In answer he said: “It is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
She said: “Yes, Lord, but really the little dogs do eat of the crumbs falling from the table of their masters.”
Then Jesus replied to her: “O woman, great is your faith; let it happen to you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour on.
Departing from there, Jesus next came near the Sea of Galilee, and after going up on the mountain, he was sitting there.
Then large crowds approached him, bringing along people who were lame, maimed, blind, speechless, and many others, and they laid them at his feet, and he cured them.
So the crowd felt amazement as they saw the speechless speaking and the maimed being made sound and the lame walking and the blind seeing, and they glorified the God of Israel.
But Jesus called his disciples to him and said: “I feel pity for the crowd, because they have already stayed with me for three days and they have had nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away hungry, for they may give out on the road.”
However, the disciples said to him: “Where in this isolated place are we going to get enough bread to satisfy a crowd of this size?”
At this Jesus said to them: “How many loaves do you have?” They said: “Seven, and a few small fish.”
So after instructing the crowd to recline on the ground,
he took the seven loaves and the fish, and after offering thanks, he broke them and began giving them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
And all ate and were satisfied, and they took up seven large baskets full of leftover fragments.
Now those eating were 4,000 men, as well as women and young children.
Finally, after sending the crowds away, he got into the boat and came into the region of Magʹa·dan.
Then Jesus was led by the spirit up into the wilderness to be tempted by the Devil.
After he had fasted for 40 days and 40 nights, he felt hungry.
And the Tempter approached and said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.”
But he answered: “It is written: ‘Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every word that comes from Jehovah’s mouth.’”
Then the Devil took him along into the holy city, and he stationed him on the battlement of the temple
and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written: ‘He will give his angels a command concerning you,’ and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, so that you may not strike your foot against a stone.’”
Jesus said to him: “Again it is written: ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
Again the Devil took him along to an unusually high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
And he said to him: “All these things I will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.”
Then Jesus said to him: “Go away, Satan! For it is written: ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
Then the Devil left him, and look! angels came and began to minister to him.
Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee.
Further, after leaving Nazret, he came and took up residence in Ca·perʹna·um beside the sea in the districts of Zebʹu·lun and Naphʹta·li,
so as to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
“O land of Zebʹu·lun and land of Naphʹta·li, along the road of the sea, on the other side of the Jordan, Galilee of the nations!
The people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and as for those sitting in a region of deathly shadow, light rose on them.”
From that time on, Jesus began preaching and saying: “Repent, for the Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
Walking alongside the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
And he said to them: “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
At once they abandoned their nets and followed him.
Going on from there, he saw two others who were brothers, James the son of Zebʹe·dee and his brother John. They were in the boat with Zebʹe·dee their father, mending their nets, and he called them.
At once they left the boat and their father and followed him.
Then he went throughout the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people.
And the report about him spread throughout all Syria, and they brought him all those who were suffering with various diseases and torments, those who were demon-possessed and epileptic and paralyzed, and he cured them.
Consequently, large crowds followed him from Galilee and De·capʹo·lis and Jerusalem and Ju·deʹa and from the other side of the Jordan.
“For the Kingdom of the heavens is like the master of a house who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
After he had agreed with the workers for a de·narʹi·us a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Going out also about the third hour, he saw others standing unemployed in the marketplace;
and to those he said, ‘You too go into the vineyard, and I will give you whatever is fair.’
So off they went. Again he went out about the sixth hour and the ninth hour and did likewise.
Finally, about the 11th hour, he went out and found others standing around, and he said to them, ‘Why have you been standing here all day unemployed?’
They replied, ‘Because nobody has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘You too go into the vineyard.’
“When evening came, the master of the vineyard said to his man in charge, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, starting with the last and ending with the first.’
When the 11th-hour men came, they each received a de·narʹi·us.
So when the first came, they assumed that they would receive more, but they too were paid at the rate of a de·narʹi·us.
On receiving it, they began to complain against the master of the house
and said, ‘These last men put in one hour’s work; still you made them equal to us who bore the burden of the day and the burning heat!’
But he said in reply to one of them, ‘Fellow, I do you no wrong. You agreed with me for a de·narʹi·us, did you not?
Take what is yours and go. I want to give to this last one the same as to you.
Do I not have the right to do what I want with my own things? Or is your eye envious because I am good?’
In this way, the last ones will be first, and the first ones last.”
While going up to Jerusalem, Jesus took the 12 disciples aside privately and said to them on the road:
“Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death
and hand him over to men of the nations to be mocked and scourged and executed on a stake; and on the third day he will be raised up.”
Then the mother of the sons of Zebʹe·dee approached him with her sons, doing obeisance and asking for something from him.
He said to her: “What do you want?” She replied to him: “Give the word that these two sons of mine may sit down, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your Kingdom.”
Jesus answered: “You do not know what you are asking for. Can you drink the cup that I am about to drink?” They said to him: “We can.”
He said to them: “You will indeed drink my cup, but to sit down at my right hand and at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
When the ten others heard about it, they became indignant at the two brothers.
But Jesus called them to him and said: “You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them and the great men wield authority over them.
This must not be the way among you; but whoever wants to become great among you must be your minister,
and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave.
Just as the Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many.”
As they were going out of Jerʹi·cho, a large crowd followed him.
And look! two blind men sitting beside the road heard that Jesus was passing by and cried out: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
But the crowd rebuked them, telling them to keep silent; yet they cried all the louder, saying: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
So Jesus stopped, called them, and said: “What do you want me to do for you?”
They said to him: “Lord, let our eyes be opened.”
Moved with pity, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately they recovered their sight, and they followed him.
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples got hungry and started to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
At seeing this, the Pharisees said to him: “Look! Your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
He said to them: “Have you not read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
How he entered into the house of God and they ate the loaves of presentation, something that it was not lawful for him or those with him to eat, but for the priests only?
Or have you not read in the Law that on the Sabbaths the priests in the temple violate the Sabbath and continue guiltless?
But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
However, if you had understood what this means, ‘I want mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the guiltless ones.
For the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
After departing from that place, he went into their synagogue,
and look! there was a man with a withered hand! So they asked him, “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath?” so that they might accuse him.
He said to them: “If you have one sheep and that sheep falls into a pit on the Sabbath, is there a man among you who will not grab hold of it and lift it out?
How much more valuable is a man than a sheep! So it is lawful to do a fine thing on the Sabbath.”
Then he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and it was restored sound like the other hand.
But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him to kill him.
Having come to know this, Jesus departed from there. Many also followed him, and he cured them all,
but he sternly ordered them not to make him known,
in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
“Look! My servant whom I chose, my beloved, whom I have approved! I will put my spirit upon him, and what justice is he will make clear to the nations.
He will not quarrel nor cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the main streets.
No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering wick will he extinguish, until he brings justice with success.
Indeed, in his name nations will hope.”
Then they brought him a demon-possessed man who was blind and speechless, and he cured him, so that the speechless man could speak and see.
Well, all the crowds were astounded and began to say: “May this not perhaps be the Son of David?”
At hearing this, the Pharisees said: “This fellow does not expel the demons except by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
In the same way, if Satan expels Satan, he has become divided against himself; how, then, will his kingdom stand?
Moreover, if I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
But if it is by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
Or how can anyone invade the house of a strong man and seize his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Only then can he plunder his house.
Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
“For this reason I say to you, every sort of sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
For example, whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the holy spirit, it will not be forgiven him, no, not in this system of things nor in that to come.
“Either you make the tree fine and its fruit fine or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten, for by its fruit the tree is known.
Offspring of vipers, how can you speak good things when you are wicked? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
The good man out of his good treasure sends out good things, whereas the wicked man out of his wicked treasure sends out wicked things.
I tell you that men will render an account on Judgment Day for every unprofitable saying that they speak;
for by your words you will be declared righteous, and by your words you will be condemned.”
Then as an answer to him, some of the scribes and the Pharisees said: “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
In reply he said to them: “A wicked and adulterous generation keeps on seeking a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Joʹnah the prophet.
For just as Joʹnah was in the belly of the huge fish for three days and three nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights.
Men of Ninʹe·veh will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, because they repented at what Joʹnah preached. But look! something more than Joʹnah is here.
The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solʹo·mon. But look! something more than Solʹo·mon is here.
“When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place and finds none.
Then it says, ‘I will go back to my house from which I moved,’ and on arriving, it finds the house unoccupied but swept clean and adorned.
Then it goes and takes along with it seven different spirits more wicked than itself, and after getting inside, they dwell there; and the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first. That is how it will be also with this wicked generation.”
While he was yet speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers were standing outside, seeking to speak to him.
So someone said to him: “Look! Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak to you.”
In reply he said to the one who spoke to him: “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
And extending his hand toward his disciples, he said: “Look! My mother and my brothers!
For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, that one is my brother and sister and mother.”
In that hour the disciples came near to Jesus and said: “Who really is greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens?”
So calling a young child to him, he stood him in their midst
and said: “Truly I say to you, unless you turn around and become as young children, you will by no means enter into the Kingdom of the heavens.
Therefore, whoever will humble himself like this young child is the one who is the greatest in the Kingdom of the heavens;
and whoever receives one such young child on the basis of my name receives me also.
But whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him to have hung around his neck a millstone that is turned by a donkey and to be sunk in the open sea.
“Woe to the world because of the stumbling blocks! Of course, it is inevitable that stumbling blocks will come, but woe to the man through whom the stumbling block comes!
If, then, your hand or your foot makes you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or lame than to be thrown with two hands or two feet into the everlasting fire.
Also, if your eye makes you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you. It is better for you to enter one-eyed into life than to be thrown with two eyes into the fiery Ge·henʹna.
See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my Father who is in heaven.
“What do you think? If a man has 100 sheep and one of them strays, will he not leave the 99 on the mountains and set out on a search for the one that is straying?
And if he finds it, I certainly tell you, he rejoices more over it than over the 99 that have not strayed.
Likewise, it is not a desirable thing to my Father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.
“Moreover, if your brother commits a sin, go and reveal his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
But if he does not listen, take along with you one or two more, so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.
If he does not listen to them, speak to the congregation. If he does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.
“Truly I say to you, whatever things you may bind on earth will be things already bound in heaven, and whatever things you may loosen on earth will be things already loosened in heaven.
Again I tell you truly, if two of you on earth agree concerning anything of importance that they should request, it will take place for them on account of my Father in heaven.
For where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.”
Then Peter came and said to him: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?”
Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times.
“That is why the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves.
When he started to settle them, a man was brought in who owed him 10,000 talents.
But because he did not have the means to pay it back, his master ordered him and his wife and his children and all the things he owned to be sold and payment to be made.
So the slave fell down and did obeisance to him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay back everything to you.’
Moved with pity at this, the master of that slave let him off and canceled his debt.
But that slave went out and found one of his fellow slaves, who owed him 100 de·narʹi·i, and grabbed him and began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back whatever you owe.’
So his fellow slave fell down and began to beg him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.’
However, he was not willing, but he went and had him thrown into prison until he could pay back what he owed.
When his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they became greatly distressed, and they went and reported to their master all the things that had happened.
Then his master summoned him and said to him: ‘Wicked slave, I canceled all that debt for you when you pleaded with me.
Should you not also have shown mercy to your fellow slave as I showed mercy to you?’
With that his master, provoked to wrath, handed him over to the jailers until he repaid all that he owed.
My heavenly Father will also deal with you in the same way if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.”
Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, saying:
“The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselves in the seat of Moses.
Therefore, all the things they tell you, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds, for they say but they do not practice what they say.
They bind up heavy loads and put them on the shoulders of men, but they themselves are not willing to budge them with their finger.
All the works they do, they do to be seen by men, for they broaden the scripture-containing cases that they wear as safeguards and lengthen the fringes of their garments.
They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues
and the greetings in the marketplaces and to be called Rabbi by men.
But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.
Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One.
Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ.
But the greatest one among you must be your minister.
Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you shut up the Kingdom of the heavens before men; for you yourselves do not go in, neither do you permit those on their way in to go in.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you travel over sea and dry land to make one proselyte, and when he becomes one, you make him a subject for Ge·henʹna twice as much so as yourselves.
“Woe to you, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is under obligation.’
Fools and blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gold or the temple that has sanctified the gold?
Moreover, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is under obligation.’
Blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
Therefore, whoever swears by the altar is swearing by it and by all the things on it;
and whoever swears by the temple is swearing by it and by the One inhabiting it;
and whoever swears by heaven is swearing by the throne of God and by the One sitting on it.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin, but you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness. These things it was necessary to do, yet not to disregard the other things.
Blind guides, who strain out the gnat but gulp down the camel!
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of greediness and self-indulgence.
Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the dish, so that the outside of it may also become clean.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you resemble whitewashed graves, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful but inside are full of dead men’s bones and of every sort of uncleanness.
In the same way, on the outside you appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you build the graves of the prophets and decorate the tombs of the righteous ones,
and you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have shared with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
Therefore, you are testifying against yourselves that you are sons of those who murdered the prophets.
Well, then, fill up the measure of your forefathers.
“Serpents, offspring of vipers, how will you flee from the judgment of Ge·henʹna?
For this reason, I am sending to you prophets and wise men and public instructors. Some of them you will kill and execute on stakes, and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city,
so that there may come upon you all the righteous blood spilled on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zekariah son of Bar·a·chiʹah, whom you murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.
Truly I say to you, all these things will come upon this generation.
“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together the way a hen gathers her chicks under her wings! But you did not want it.
Look! Your house is abandoned to you.
For I say to you, you will by no means see me from now until you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!’”
“Take care not to practice your righteousness in front of men to be noticed by them; otherwise you will have no reward with your Father who is in the heavens.
So when you make gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But you, when making gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
so that your gifts of mercy may be in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
“Also, when you pray, do not act like the hypocrites, for they like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the main streets to be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But when you pray, go into your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
When praying, do not say the same things over and over again as the people of the nations do, for they imagine they will get a hearing for their use of many words.
So do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need even before you ask him.
“You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.
Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.
Give us today our bread for this day;
and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
And do not bring us into temptation, but deliver us from the wicked one.’
“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you;
whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
“When you fast, stop becoming sad-faced like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces so they may appear to men to be fasting. Truly I say to you, they have their reward in full.
But you, when fasting, put oil on your head and wash your face,
so that you may not appear to be fasting to men but only to your Father who is in secret. Then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
“Stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and rust consume and where thieves break in and steal.
Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
“The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused, your whole body will be bright.
But if your eye is envious, your whole body will be dark. If the light that is in you is really darkness, how great that darkness is!
“No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.
“On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life mean more than food and the body than clothing?
Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are?
Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin;
but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith?
So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’
For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.
“Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.
So never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Each day has enough of its own troubles.
After he came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
And look! a leper came up and did obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately his leprosy was cleansed away.
Then Jesus said to him: “See that you tell no one, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses appointed, for a witness to them.”
When he entered Ca·perʹna·um, an army officer came to him, pleading with him
and saying: “Sir, my servant is laid up in the house with paralysis, and he is suffering terribly.”
He said to him: “When I get there, I will cure him.”
The army officer replied: “Sir, I am not worthy to have you come under my roof, but just say the word and my servant will be healed.
For I too am a man under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard that, he was amazed and said to those following him: “I tell you the truth, with no one in Israel have I found so great a faith.
But I tell you that many from east and west will come and recline at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of the heavens;
whereas the sons of the Kingdom will be thrown into the darkness outside. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.”
Then Jesus said to the army officer: “Go. Just as you have shown faith, so let it come to pass for you.” And the servant was healed in that hour.
And Jesus, on coming into Peter’s house, saw his mother-in-law lying down and sick with fever.
So he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up and began ministering to him.
But after it became evening, people brought him many demon-possessed ones; and he expelled the spirits with a word, and he cured all who were suffering,
in order to fulfill what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet: “He himself took our sicknesses and carried our diseases.”
When Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave the command to depart for the other side.
And a scribe came up and said to him: “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.”
But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
Then another of the disciples said to him: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
Jesus said to him: “Keep following me, and let the dead bury their dead.”
And when he went aboard a boat, his disciples followed him.
Now look! a great storm arose on the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves; but he was sleeping.
And they came and woke him up, saying: “Lord, save us, we are about to perish!”
But he said to them: “Why are you so afraid, you with little faith?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm set in.
So the men were amazed and said: “What sort of person is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him.”
When he came to the other side into the region of the Gad·a·renesʹ, two demon-possessed men coming out from among the tombs met him. They were unusually fierce, so nobody had the courage to pass by on that road.
And look! they screamed, saying: “What have we to do with you, Son of God? Did you come here to torment us before the appointed time?”
A long way off from them, a herd of many swine was feeding.
So the demons began to plead with him, saying: “If you expel us, send us into the herd of swine.”
And he said to them: “Go!” With that they came out and went off into the swine, and look! the entire herd rushed over the precipice into the sea and died in the waters.
But the herders fled, and going into the city, they reported everything, including the account of the demon-possessed men.
And look! all the city turned out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they urged him to depart from their region.
Now when they were getting near to Jerusalem, to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples
and told them: “Go into the village that is within sight, and as soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied on which no man has sat until now. Untie it and bring it here.
And if anyone says to you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it and will send it back here right away.’”
So they went away and found the colt tied at a door, outside on the side street, and they untied it.
But some of those standing there said to them: “What are you doing untying the colt?”
They told them just what Jesus had said, and they let them go.
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and they put their outer garments on it, and he sat on it.
Also, many spread their outer garments on the road, but others cut down foliage from the fields.
And those going in front and those coming behind kept shouting: “Save, we pray! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!
Blessed is the coming Kingdom of our father David! Save, we pray, in the heights above!”
And he entered Jerusalem and went into the temple, and he looked around at everything, but since the hour was already late, he went out to Bethʹa·ny with the Twelve.
The next day when they were leaving Bethʹa·ny, he felt hungry.
From a distance he caught sight of a fig tree that had leaves, and he went to see whether he could find something on it. But on coming to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
So he said to it: “Let no one eat fruit from you ever again.” And his disciples were listening.
They now came to Jerusalem. There he entered the temple and started to throw out those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
and he would not let anyone carry a utensil through the temple.
He was teaching and saying to them: “Is it not written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But you have made it a cave of robbers.”
And the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and they began to seek how to kill him; for they were in fear of him, because all the crowd was astounded at his teaching.
When it became late in the day, they went out of the city.
But when they were passing by early in the morning, they saw the fig tree already withered from its roots.
Peter, remembering it, said to him: “Rabbi, see! the fig tree that you cursed has withered.”
In reply Jesus said to them: “Have faith in God.
Truly I say to you that whoever tells this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but has faith that what he says is going to happen, he will have it happen.
This is why I tell you, all the things you pray and ask for, have faith that you have received them, and you will have them.
And when you stand praying, forgive whatever you have against anyone, so that your Father who is in the heavens may also forgive you your trespasses.”
They came again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests and the scribes and the elders came
and said to him: “By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?”
Jesus said to them: “I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
Was the baptism by John from heaven or from men? Answer me.”
So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why, then, did you not believe him?’
But dare we say, ‘From men’?” They were in fear of the crowd, for these all held that John had really been a prophet.
So they answered Jesus: “We do not know.” Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
The beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ, the Son of God:
Just as it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “(Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way.)
A voice of one crying out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.’”
John the Baptizer was in the wilderness, preaching baptism in symbol of repentance for forgiveness of sins.
And all the territory of Ju·deʹa and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem were going out to him, and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
Now John wore clothing of camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
And he was preaching: “Someone stronger than I am is coming after me, the lace of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
I baptized you with water, but he will baptize you with holy spirit.”
In the course of those days, Jesus came from Nazret of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
And immediately on coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens being parted and, like a dove, the spirit coming down upon him.
And a voice came out of the heavens: “You are my Son, the beloved; I have approved you.”
And immediately the spirit impelled him to go into the wilderness.
So he continued in the wilderness for 40 days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild beasts, but the angels were ministering to him.
Now after John was arrested, Jesus went into Galilee, preaching the good news of God
and saying: “The appointed time has been fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God has drawn near. Repent, and have faith in the good news.”
While walking alongside the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Simon’s brother Andrew casting their nets into the sea, for they were fishermen.
So Jesus said to them: “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
And at once they abandoned their nets and followed him.
After going a little farther, he saw James the son of Zebʹe·dee and his brother John, while they were in their boat mending their nets,
and without delay he called them. So they left their father Zebʹe·dee in the boat with the hired men and went off after him.
And they went into Ca·perʹna·um. As soon as the Sabbath began, he went into the synagogue and started to teach.
And they were astounded at his way of teaching, for he was teaching them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.
Just then there was a man in their synagogue who was under the power of an unclean spirit, and he shouted:
“What have we to do with you, Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God!”
But Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent, and come out of him!”
And the unclean spirit, after throwing the man into a convulsion and yelling at the top of its voice, came out of him.
Well, the people were all so astonished that they began to discuss it among themselves, saying: “What is this? A new teaching! He authoritatively orders even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.”
So the report about him spread quickly in all directions throughout the entire region of Galilee.
At that they left the synagogue and went to the home of Simon and Andrew with James and John.
Now Simon’s mother-in-law was lying down sick with a fever, and they at once told him about her.
Going to her, he took her by the hand and raised her up. The fever left her, and she began ministering to them.
After evening had fallen, when the sun had set, the people began bringing to him all who were ill and demon possessed;
and the whole city was gathered right at the door.
So he cured many who were ill with various sicknesses, and he expelled many demons, but he would not let the demons speak, for they knew him to be Christ.
Early in the morning, while it was still dark, he got up and went outside and left for an isolated place, and there he began praying.
However, Simon and those with him hunted him down
and found him, and they said to him: “Everyone is looking for you.”
But he said to them: “Let us go somewhere else, into the towns nearby, so that I may preach there also, for this is why I have come.”
And he went, preaching in their synagogues throughout the whole of Galilee and expelling the demons.
There also came to him a leper, pleading with him even on bended knee, saying to him: “If you just want to, you can make me clean.”
At that he was moved with pity, and he stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him: “I want to! Be made clean.”
Immediately the leprosy vanished from him, and he became clean.
Then he gave him strict orders and at once sent him away,
saying to him: “See that you say nothing to anyone, but go show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing the things Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
But after going away, the man started to proclaim it a great deal and to spread the account widely, so that Jesus was no longer able to enter openly into a city, but he stayed outside in isolated places. Yet they kept coming to him from all sides.
Now the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around him.
And they saw some of his disciples eat their meal with defiled hands, that is, unwashed ones.
(For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands up to the elbow, clinging to the tradition of the men of former times,
and when they come from the market, they do not eat unless they wash themselves. There are many other traditions that they have received and cling to, such as baptisms of cups, pitchers, and copper vessels.)
So these Pharisees and scribes asked him: “Why do your disciples not observe the tradition of the men of former times, but they eat their meal with defiled hands?”
He said to them: “Isaiah aptly prophesied about you hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’
You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”
Further, he said to them: “You skillfully disregard the commandment of God in order to keep your tradition.
For example, Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let the one who speaks abusively of his father or mother be put to death.’
But you say, ‘If a man says to his father or his mother: “Whatever I have that could benefit you is corban (that is, a gift dedicated to God),”’
you no longer let him do a single thing for his father or his mother.
Thus you make the word of God invalid by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like this.”
So calling the crowd to him again, he said to them: “Listen to me, all of you, and understand the meaning.
Nothing from outside a man that enters into him can defile him; but the things that come out of a man are the things that defile him.”
Now when he had entered a house away from the crowd, his disciples began to question him about the illustration.
So he said to them: “Are you also without understanding like them? Are you not aware that nothing from outside that enters into a man can defile him,
since it enters, not into his heart, but into his stomach, and it passes out into the sewer?” Thus he declared all foods clean.
Further, he said: “That which comes out of a man is what defiles him.
For from inside, out of the heart of men, come injurious reasonings, sexual immorality, thefts, murders,
acts of adultery, greed, acts of wickedness, deceit, brazen conduct, an envious eye, blasphemy, haughtiness, and unreasonableness.
All these wicked things come from within and defile a man.”
He rose up from there and went into the region of Tyre and Siʹdon. There he entered into a house and did not want anyone to know it, but he could not escape notice.
Immediately, a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit heard about him and came and fell down at his feet.
The woman was a Greek, a Sy·ro·phoe·niʹcian by nationality; and she kept asking him to expel the demon from her daughter.
But he said to her: “First let the children be satisfied, for it is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
But she replied to him: “Yes, sir, and yet even the little dogs underneath the table eat of the crumbs of the little children.”
At that he said to her: “Because you said this, go; the demon has gone out of your daughter.”
So she went away to her home and found the young child lying on the bed, and the demon was gone.
When Jesus returned from the region of Tyre, he went through Siʹdon to the Sea of Galilee, through the region of De·capʹo·lis.
Here they brought him a deaf man with a speech impediment, and they pleaded with him to lay his hand on him.
And he took him aside privately, away from the crowd. Then he put his fingers into the man’s ears, and after spitting, he touched his tongue.
And looking up into heaven, he sighed deeply and said to him: “Ephʹpha·tha,” that is, “Be opened.”
At this his ears were opened, and his speech impediment was removed, and he began speaking normally.
With that he ordered them not to tell anyone, but the more he would order them, the more they would proclaim it.
Indeed, they were astounded beyond measure, and they said: “He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf hear and the speechless speak.”
As he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him: “Teacher, see! what wonderful stones and buildings!”
However, Jesus said to him: “Do you see these great buildings? By no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives with the temple in view, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately:
“Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are to come to a conclusion?”
So Jesus began to tell them: “Look out that nobody misleads you.
Many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and will mislead many.
Moreover, when you hear of wars and reports of wars, do not be alarmed; these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom; there will be earthquakes in one place after another; there will also be food shortages. These are a beginning of pangs of distress.
“As for you, look out for yourselves. People will hand you over to local courts, and you will be beaten in synagogues and be put on the stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them.
Also, in all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.
And when they are taking you to hand you over, do not be anxious beforehand about what to say; but whatever is given you in that hour, say this, for you are not the ones speaking, but the holy spirit is.
Furthermore, brother will deliver brother over to death, and a father a child, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death.
And you will be hated by all people on account of my name. But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.
“However, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation standing where it should not be (let the reader use discernment), then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains.
Let the man on the housetop not come down nor go inside to take anything out of his house;
and let the man in the field not return to the things behind to pick up his outer garment.
Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days!
Keep praying that it may not occur in wintertime;
for those days will be days of a tribulation such as has not occurred from the beginning of the creation that God created until that time, and will not occur again.
In fact, unless Jehovah had cut short the days, no flesh would be saved. But on account of the chosen ones whom he has chosen, he has cut short the days.
“Then, too, if anyone says to you, ‘See! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘See! There he is,’ do not believe it.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform signs and wonders to lead astray, if possible, the chosen ones.
You, then, watch out. I have told you all things beforehand.
“But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,
and the stars will be falling out of heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
And then he will send out the angels and will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from earth’s extremity to heaven’s extremity.
“Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near.
Likewise also you, when you see these things happening, know that he is near at the doors.
Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
“Concerning that day or the hour nobody knows, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but the Father.
Keep looking, keep awake, for you do not know when the appointed time is.
It is like a man traveling abroad who left his house and gave the authority to his slaves, to each one his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to keep on the watch.
Keep on the watch, therefore, for you do not know when the master of the house is coming, whether late in the day or at midnight or before dawn or early in the morning,
in order that when he comes suddenly, he does not find you sleeping.
But what I say to you, I say to all: Keep on the watch.”
Once again he entered into a synagogue, and a man with a withered hand was there.
So they were watching him closely to see whether he would cure the man on the Sabbath, in order to accuse him.
He said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and come to the center.”
Next he said to them: “Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to kill?” But they kept silent.
After looking around at them with indignation, being thoroughly grieved at the insensibility of their hearts, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
At that the Pharisees went out and immediately began holding council with the party followers of Herod against him, in order to kill him.
But Jesus departed for the sea along with his disciples, and a great multitude from Galilee and from Ju·deʹa followed him.
Even from Jerusalem and from Id·u·meʹa and from across the Jordan and from around Tyre and Siʹdon, a great multitude came to him when they heard about the many things he was doing.
And he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him so that the crowd would not press in on him.
Because he cured many, all those who had serious diseases were crowding around him to touch him.
Even the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, would fall down before him and cry out and say: “You are the Son of God.”
But many times he sternly ordered them not to make him known.
He ascended a mountain and summoned those whom he wanted, and they came to him.
And he formed a group of 12, whom he also named apostles, those who were to accompany him and whom he would send out to preach
and to have authority to expel demons.
And the group of 12 that he formed were Simon, to whom he also gave the name Peter,
James the son of Zebʹe·dee and John the brother of James (he also gave these the name Bo·a·nerʹges, which means “Sons of Thunder”),
Andrew, Philip, Bar·tholʹo·mew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, Thad·daeʹus, Simon the Ca·na·naeʹan,
and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who later betrayed him. Then he went into a house,
and again the crowd gathered, so that they were not able even to eat a meal.
But when his relatives heard about it, they went out to seize him, for they were saying: “He has gone out of his mind.”
Also, the scribes who came down from Jerusalem were saying: “He has Be·elʹze·bub, and he expels the demons by means of the ruler of the demons.”
So after calling them to him, he spoke to them with illustrations: “How can Satan expel Satan?
If a kingdom becomes divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand;
and if a house becomes divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.
Also, if Satan has risen up against himself and has become divided, he cannot stand but is coming to an end.
In fact, no one who enters the house of a strong man is able to steal his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. Only then can he plunder his house.
Truly I say to you that all things will be forgiven the sons of men, no matter what sins they commit and what blasphemies they speak.
But whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit has no forgiveness forever but is guilty of everlasting sin.”
He said this because they were saying: “He has an unclean spirit.”
Now his mother and his brothers came, and standing outside, they sent someone in to call him.
As there was a crowd sitting around him, they said to him: “Look! Your mother and your brothers are outside asking for you.”
But he replied to them: “Who are my mother and my brothers?”
Then he looked at those sitting around him in a circle and said: “See, my mother and my brothers!
Whoever does the will of God, this one is my brother and sister and mother.”
Furthermore, he said to them: “Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Kingdom of God already having come in power.”
Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves. And he was transfigured before them;
his outer garments began to glisten, becoming far whiter than any clothes cleaner on earth could whiten them.
Also, E·liʹjah with Moses appeared to them, and they were conversing with Jesus.
Then Peter said to Jesus: “Rabbi, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.”
In fact, he did not know how to react, for they were quite fearful.
And a cloud formed, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud: “This is my Son, the beloved. Listen to him.”
Then suddenly they looked around and saw that no one was with them any longer except Jesus.
As they were coming down from the mountain, he strictly ordered them not to relate to anybody what they had seen until after the Son of man had risen from the dead.
They took the word to heart, but discussed among themselves what this rising from the dead meant.
And they began to question him, saying: “Why do the scribes say that E·liʹjah must come first?”
He said to them: “E·liʹjah does come first and restore all things; but how is it that it is written about the Son of man that he must undergo many sufferings and be treated with contempt?
But I say to you that E·liʹjah, in fact, has come, and they did to him whatever they wanted, just as it is written about him.”
When they came to the other disciples, they noticed a large crowd around them, and there were scribes arguing with them.
But as soon as all the crowd caught sight of him, they were astonished, and they ran up to him to greet him.
So he asked them: “What are you arguing about with them?”
And one of the crowd answered him: “Teacher, I brought my son to you because he has a speechless spirit.
Wherever it seizes him, it throws him to the ground, and he foams at the mouth and grinds his teeth and loses his strength. I asked your disciples to expel it, but they were not able to do so.”
In response he said to them: “O faithless generation, how long must I continue with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring him to me.”
So they brought the boy to him, but at the sight of him, the spirit at once threw the child into convulsions. After falling on the ground, he kept rolling about, foaming at the mouth.
Then Jesus asked the father: “How long has this been happening to him?” He said: “From childhood on,
and often it would throw him into the fire and also into the water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have pity on us and help us.”
Jesus said to him: “That expression, ‘If you can’! Why, all things are possible for the one who has faith.”
Immediately the child’s father cried out and said: “I have faith! Help me out where I need faith!”
Jesus, now noticing that a crowd was rushing toward them, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it: “You speechless and deaf spirit, I order you, get out of him and do not enter into him again!”
After crying out and going through many convulsions, it came out, and the child seemed to be dead, so that most of the people were saying: “He is dead!”
But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up, and he stood up.
So after he entered into a house, his disciples asked him privately: “Why could we not expel it?”
He said to them: “This kind can come out only by prayer.”
They departed from there and went through Galilee, but he did not want anyone to get to know about it.
For he was teaching his disciples and telling them: “The Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands, and they will kill him, but despite being killed, he will rise three days later.”
However, they did not understand his statement, and they were afraid to question him.
And they came into Ca·perʹna·um. Now when he was inside the house, he put the question to them: “What were you arguing about on the road?”
They kept silent, for on the road they had been arguing among themselves about who is greater.
So he sat down and called the Twelve and said to them: “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and minister of all.”
Then he took a young child and stood him in their midst; and putting his arms around him, he said to them:
“Whoever receives one of such young children on the basis of my name receives me also; and whoever receives me receives not me only but also Him who sent me.”
John said to him: “Teacher, we saw someone expelling demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he was not following us.”
But Jesus said: “Do not try to prevent him, for there is no one who will do a powerful work on the basis of my name who will quickly be able to say anything bad about me.
For whoever is not against us is for us.
And whoever gives you a cup of water to drink because you belong to Christ, I tell you truly, he will by no means lose his reward.
But whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith, it would be better for him if a millstone that is turned by a donkey were put around his neck and he were pitched into the sea.
“If ever your hand makes you stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed than to go off with two hands into Ge·henʹna, into the fire that cannot be put out.
And if your foot makes you stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame than to be thrown with two feet into Ge·henʹna.
And if your eye makes you stumble, throw it away. It is better for you to enter one-eyed into the Kingdom of God than to be thrown with two eyes into Ge·henʹna,
where the maggot does not die and the fire is not put out.
“For everyone must be salted with fire.
Salt is fine, but if the salt ever loses its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and keep peace with one another.”
However, after some days he again entered into Ca·perʹna·um, and the word spread that he was at home.
And so many gathered that there was no more room, not even around the door, and he began to speak the word to them.
And they brought him a paralytic carried by four men.
But they could not bring him right to Jesus because of the crowd, so they removed the roof above Jesus, and after digging an opening, they lowered the stretcher on which the paralytic was lying.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic: “Child, your sins are forgiven.”
Now some of the scribes were there, sitting and reasoning in their hearts:
“Why is this man talking this way? He is blaspheming. Who can forgive sins except one, God?”
But immediately Jesus discerned by his spirit that they were reasoning that way among themselves, so he said to them: “Why are you reasoning these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and pick up your stretcher and walk’?
But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority to forgive sins on earth—” he said to the paralytic:
“I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
At that he got up and immediately picked up his stretcher and walked out in front of them all. So they were all astonished, and they glorified God, saying: “We have never seen anything like this.”
Again he went out alongside the sea, and all the crowd kept coming to him, and he began to teach them.
And as he was passing by, he caught sight of Leʹvi the son of Al·phaeʹus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” At that he rose up and followed him.
Later he was dining in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners were dining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many of them who were following him.
But when the scribes of the Pharisees saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, they began saying to his disciples: “Does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
On hearing this, Jesus said to them: “Those who are strong do not need a physician, but those who are ill do. I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees practiced fasting. So they came and said to him: “Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees practice fasting, but your disciples do not practice fasting?”
So Jesus said to them: “While the bridegroom is with them, the friends of the bridegroom have no reason to fast, do they? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast on that day.
Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old outer garment. If he does, the new piece pulls away from the old, and the tear becomes worse.
Also, no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost as well as the skins. But new wine is put into new wineskins.”
Now as he was passing through the grainfields on the Sabbath, his disciples started to pluck the heads of grain as they went.
So the Pharisees said to him: “Look here! Why are they doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
But he said to them: “Have you never read what David did when he was in need and he and the men with him were hungry?
How, in the account about A·biʹa·thar the chief priest, he entered into the house of God and ate the loaves of presentation, which it is not lawful for anybody to eat except the priests, and he also gave some to the men who were with him?”
Then he said to them: “The Sabbath came into existence for the sake of man, and not man for the sake of the Sabbath.
So the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
From there he got up and came to the borders of Ju·deʹa across the Jordan, and again crowds gathered to him. As he was accustomed to do, he again began teaching them.
And Pharisees approached, intent on testing him, and they asked whether it was lawful for a man to divorce a wife.
He answered them: “What did Moses command you?”
They said: “Moses allowed the writing of a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her.”
But Jesus said to them: “Out of regard for your hard-heartedness, he wrote this commandment for you.
However, from the beginning of creation, ‘He made them male and female.
For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother,
and the two will be one flesh,’ so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.”
When they were again in the house, the disciples began to question him about this.
He said to them: “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her,
and if ever a woman after divorcing her husband marries another, she commits adultery.”
People now began bringing him young children for him to touch them, but the disciples reprimanded them.
At seeing this, Jesus was indignant and said to them: “Let the young children come to me; do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
And he took the children into his arms and began blessing them, laying his hands on them.
As he was going on his way, a man ran up and fell on his knees before him and put the question to him: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.
You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not bear false witness, do not defraud, honor your father and your mother.’”
The man said to him: “Teacher, all these things I have kept from my youth on.”
Jesus looked at him and felt love for him and said, “One thing is missing about you: Go, sell what things you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come be my follower.”
But he grew sad at the answer and went away grieved, for he had many possessions.
After looking around, Jesus said to his disciples: “How difficult it will be for those with money to enter into the Kingdom of God!”
But the disciples were surprised at his words. Jesus then responded: “Children, how difficult it is to enter into the Kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.”
They became still more astounded and said to him: “Who possibly can be saved?”
Looking straight at them, Jesus said: “With men it is impossible but not so with God, for all things are possible with God.”
Peter began to say to him: “Look! We have left all things and followed you.”
Jesus said: “Truly I say to you, no one has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for my sake and for the sake of the good news
who will not get 100 times more now in this period of time—houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and fields, with persecutions—and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.
But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”
Now they were going on the road up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going ahead of them, and they were astonished, but those who followed began to fear. Once again he took the Twelve aside and started to tell them these things that were about to happen to him:
“Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be handed over to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death and hand him over to men of the nations,
and these will mock him and spit on him and scourge him and kill him, but three days later he will rise.”
James and John, the sons of Zebʹe·dee, approached him and said to him: “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you.”
He said to them: “What do you want me to do for you?”
They replied: “Grant us to sit down, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.”
But Jesus said to them: “You do not know what you are asking for. Can you drink the cup that I am drinking or be baptized with the baptism with which I am being baptized?”
They said to him: “We can.” At that Jesus said to them: “The cup I am drinking, you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am being baptized, you will be baptized.
However, to sit down at my right hand or at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared.”
When the ten others heard about it, they became indignant at James and John.
But Jesus called them to him and said to them: “You know that those who appear to be ruling the nations lord it over them and their great ones wield authority over them.
This must not be the way among you; but whoever wants to become great among you must be your minister,
and whoever wants to be first among you must be the slave of all.
For even the Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his life as a ransom in exchange for many.”
They then came into Jerʹi·cho. But as he and his disciples and a considerable crowd were going out of Jerʹi·cho, Bar·ti·maeʹus (the son of Ti·maeʹus), a blind beggar, was sitting beside the road.
When he heard that it was Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, he started shouting and saying: “Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me!”
At this many began rebuking him, telling him to be silent, but all the more he kept shouting: “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
So Jesus stopped and said: “Call him to me.” So they called the blind man, saying to him: “Take courage! Get up; he is calling you.”
Throwing off his outer garment, he leaped to his feet and went to Jesus.
Then Jesus said to him: “What do you want me to do for you?” The blind man said to him: “Rab·boʹni, let me recover my sight.”
And Jesus said to him: “Go. Your faith has made you well.” And immediately he recovered his sight, and he began to follow him on the road.
So when the Sabbath was over, Mary Magʹda·lene, Mary the mother of James, and Sa·loʹme bought spices in order to come and apply them to his body.
And very early on the first day of the week when the sun had risen, they came to the tomb.
They were saying to one another: “Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb for us?”
But when they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled away, although it was very large.
When they entered into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were stunned.
He said to them: “Do not be stunned. You are looking for Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ who was executed on the stake. He was raised up. He is not here. Look, here is the place where they laid him.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galilee. You will see him there, just as he told you.’”
So when they came out, they fled from the tomb, trembling and overwhelmed with emotion. And they said nothing to anyone, for they were in fear.
Then they came to the other side of the sea into the region of the Gerʹa·senes.
And immediately after Jesus got out of the boat, a man under the power of an unclean spirit met him from among the tombs.
His haunt was among the tombs, and up to that time, absolutely no one was able to bind him securely, even with a chain.
He had often been bound with fetters and chains, but he snapped the chains apart and smashed the fetters; and nobody had the strength to subdue him.
And continually, night and day, he was crying out in the tombs and in the mountains and slashing himself with stones.
But on catching sight of Jesus from a distance, he ran and bowed down to him.
Then he cried out with a loud voice: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I put you under oath by God not to torment me.”
For Jesus had been saying to it: “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.”
But Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” And he replied: “My name is Legion, because there are many of us.”
And he kept pleading with Jesus not to send the spirits out of the country.
Now a great herd of swine was feeding there at the mountain.
So the spirits pleaded with him: “Send us into the swine, so that we may enter into them.”
And he gave them permission. With that the unclean spirits came out and went into the swine, and the herd rushed over the precipice into the sea, about 2,000 of them, and were drowned in the sea.
But their herders fled and reported it in the city and in the countryside, and people came to see what had happened.
So they came to Jesus and saw the demon-possessed man, the one who previously had the Legion, sitting clothed and in his right mind, and they grew fearful.
Also, those who had seen it related to them how this had happened to the demon-possessed man and the swine.
So they began to plead with Jesus to go away from their region.
Now as he was boarding the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed pleaded to go with him.
However, he did not let him but said to him: “Go home to your relatives, and report to them all the things Jehovah has done for you and the mercy he has shown you.”
This man went away and started to proclaim in the De·capʹo·lis all the things Jesus had done for him, and all the people were amazed.
After Jesus had crossed again by boat to the opposite shore, a large crowd gathered together to him, and he was by the sea.
One of the presiding officers of the synagogue, named Jaʹi·rus, now came, and on catching sight of him, he fell at his feet.
He pleaded with him many times, saying: “My little daughter is extremely ill. Please come and put your hands on her so that she may get well and live.”
At that Jesus went with him, and a large crowd was following him and pressing against him.
Now there was a woman who had had a flow of blood for 12 years.
She had suffered much at the hands of many physicians and had spent all her resources, and she was no better but, rather, had become worse.
When she heard the reports about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his outer garment,
for she kept saying: “If I touch just his outer garments, I will get well.”
And immediately her flow of blood dried up, and she sensed in her body that she had been healed of the grievous sickness.
Immediately Jesus realized in himself that power had gone out of him, and he turned around in the crowd and asked: “Who touched my outer garments?”
But his disciples said to him: “You see the crowd pressing in on you, and you ask, ‘Who touched me?’”
However, he was looking around to see who had done this.
The woman, frightened and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth.
He said to her: “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be healed from your grievous sickness.”
While he was yet speaking, some men from the home of the presiding officer of the synagogue came and said: “Your daughter died! Why bother the Teacher any longer?”
But Jesus overheard their words and said to the presiding officer of the synagogue: “Have no fear, only exercise faith.”
Now he did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James, and John the brother of James.
So they came to the house of the presiding officer of the synagogue, and he saw the commotion and those weeping and wailing loudly.
After stepping in, he said to them: “Why are you weeping and causing this commotion? The child has not died but is sleeping.”
At this they began to laugh at him scornfully. But after sending them all outside, he took the child’s father and mother and those with him, and he went in where the child was.
Then, taking the hand of the child, he said to her: “Talʹi·tha cuʹmi,” which, when translated, means: “Little girl, I say to you, get up!”
And immediately the girl rose and began walking. (She was 12 years old.) And at once they were beside themselves with great ecstasy.
But he ordered them again and again to let no one learn of this, and he said that something should be given her to eat.
Now the Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread was two days later. And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to seize him by cunning and kill him;
for they were saying: “Not at the festival; perhaps there might be an uproar of the people.”
And while he was at Bethʹa·ny dining in the house of Simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very expensive. She broke open the alabaster jar and began pouring it on his head.
At this some said to one another indignantly: “Why has this perfumed oil been wasted?
For this perfumed oil could have been sold for more than 300 de·narʹi·i and the money given to the poor!” And they were greatly annoyed with her.
But Jesus said: “Let her alone. Why do you try to make trouble for her? She did a fine deed toward me.
For you always have the poor with you, and you can do them good whenever you want to, but you will not always have me.
She did what she could; she poured perfumed oil on my body beforehand, in view of the burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever the good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did will also be told in memory of her.”
And Judas Is·carʹi·ot, one of the Twelve, went off to the chief priests in order to betray him to them.
When they heard it, they were delighted and promised to give him silver money. So he began seeking an opportunity to betray him.
Now on the first day of the Unleavened Bread, when they customarily offered up the Passover sacrifice, his disciples said to him: “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the Passover?”
With that he sent two of his disciples and said to them: “Go into the city, and a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him,
and wherever he goes inside, say to the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says: “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
And he will show you a large upper room, furnished and ready. Prepare it for us there.”
So the disciples went out, and they entered the city and found it just as he said to them, and they prepared for the Passover.
After evening had fallen, he came with the Twelve.
And as they were reclining at the table and eating, Jesus said: “Truly I say to you, one of you who is eating with me will betray me.”
They began to be grieved and to say to him one by one: “It is not I, is it?”
He said to them: “It is one of the Twelve, the one dipping with me into the bowl.
For the Son of man is going away, just as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
And as they continued eating, he took a loaf, said a blessing, broke it, and gave it to them, saying: “Take it; this means my body.”
And taking a cup, he offered thanks and gave it to them, and they all drank out of it.
And he said to them: “This means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many.
Truly I say to you, I will by no means drink anymore of the product of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the Kingdom of God.”
Finally, after singing praises, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
And Jesus said to them: “You will all be stumbled, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered about.’
But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
But Peter said to him: “Even if all the others are stumbled, I will not be.”
At that Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you that today, yes, on this very night, before a rooster crows twice, you will disown me three times.”
But he kept insisting: “If I have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” Also, all the others began to say the same thing.
So they came to a spot named Geth·semʹa·ne, and he said to his disciples: “Sit down here while I pray.”
And he took Peter and James and John along with him, and he began to feel deeply distressed and to be greatly troubled.
He said to them: “I am deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch.”
And going a little way forward, he fell to the ground and began praying that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.
And he said: “Abba, Father, all things are possible for you; remove this cup from me. Yet, not what I want, but what you want.”
He returned and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: “Simon, are you sleeping? Did you not have the strength to keep on the watch for one hour?
Keep on the watch and pray continually, so that you do not come into temptation. The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
And he went away again and prayed, saying the same thing.
And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were weighed down, so they did not know what to answer him.
And he returned the third time and said to them: “At such a time as this, you are sleeping and resting! It is enough! The hour has come! Look! The Son of man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has drawn near.”
And immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived and with him a crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.
Now his betrayer had given them an agreed sign, saying: “Whoever it is I kiss, he is the one; take him into custody, and lead him away under guard.”
And he came straight up and approached him and said, “Rabbi!” and gave him a tender kiss.
So they seized him and took him into custody.
However, one of those standing by drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his ear.
But in response Jesus said to them: “Did you come out to arrest me with swords and clubs as against a robber?
Day after day I was with you in the temple teaching, and yet you did not take me into custody. Nevertheless, this is to fulfill the Scriptures.”
And they all abandoned him and fled.
However, a certain young man wearing only a fine linen garment over his naked body began to follow him nearby, and they tried to seize him,
but he left his linen garment behind and got away naked.
They now led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes assembled.
But Peter, from a good distance, followed him as far as into the courtyard of the high priest; and he was sitting together with the house attendants and warming himself before a bright fire.
Now the chief priests and the entire Sanʹhe·drin were looking for testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, but they were not finding any.
Many, indeed, were giving false witness against him, but their testimonies were not in agreement.
Also, certain ones were standing up and bearing false witness against him, saying:
“We heard him say, ‘I will throw down this temple that was made with hands, and in three days I will build another not made with hands.’”
But even on these grounds, their testimony was not in agreement.
Then the high priest stood up in their midst and questioned Jesus, saying: “Do you say nothing in reply? What is it these men are testifying against you?”
But he kept silent and made no reply at all. Again the high priest began to question him and said to him: “Are you the Christ the Son of the Blessed One?”
Then Jesus said: “I am; and you will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
At this the high priest ripped his garments and said: “What further need do we have of witnesses?
You heard the blasphemy. What is your decision?” They all condemned him as deserving of death.
And some started to spit on him and to cover his face and hit him with their fists and say to him: “Prophesy!” And slapping him in the face, the court attendants took him.
Now while Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came.
On seeing Peter warming himself, she looked straight at him and said: “You too were with the Naz·a·reneʹ, this Jesus.”
But he denied it, saying: “Neither do I know him nor do I understand what you are talking about,” and he went outside to the entryway.
There the servant girl saw him and again began to say to those standing by: “This is one of them.”
Again he was denying it. And after a little while, those standing by again began saying to Peter: “Certainly you are one of them, for you are, in fact, a Gal·i·leʹan.”
But he started to curse and swear: “I do not know this man of whom you speak!”
Immediately a rooster crowed a second time, and Peter recalled what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, you will disown me three times.” And he broke down and began to weep.
Immediately at dawn, the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, indeed, the whole Sanʹhe·drin, consulted together, and they bound Jesus and led him off and handed him over to Pilate.
So Pilate put the question to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself say it.”
But the chief priests were accusing him of many things.
Now Pilate began questioning him again, saying: “Have you no reply to make? See how many charges they are bringing against you.”
But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
Well, from festival to festival, he used to release to them one prisoner whom they requested.
At the time the man named Bar·abʹbas was in prison with the seditionists, who in their sedition had committed murder.
So the crowd came up and began to make their request according to what Pilate used to do for them.
He responded to them, saying: “Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
For Pilate was aware that out of envy the chief priests had handed him over.
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Bar·abʹbas to them instead.
Again in reply Pilate said to them: “What, then, should I do with the one you call the King of the Jews?”
Once more they cried out: “To the stake with him!”
But Pilate went on to say to them: “Why? What bad thing did he do?” Still they cried out all the more: “To the stake with him!”
At that Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Bar·abʹbas to them; and after having Jesus whipped, he handed him over to be executed on the stake.
The soldiers now led him off into the courtyard, that is, into the governor’s residence, and they called the whole body of troops together.
And they dressed him in purple and braided a crown of thorns and put it on him;
and they began to call out to him: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!”
Also, they were hitting him on the head with a reed and spitting on him, and they got on their knees and bowed down to him.
Finally, after they had mocked him, they stripped him of the purple and put his outer garments on him. And they led him out to nail him to the stake.
Also, they compelled into service a passerby, a certain Simon of Cy·reʹne, coming from the countryside, the father of Alexander and Ruʹfus, to carry his torture stake.
So they brought him to the place called Golʹgo·tha, which means, when translated, “Skull Place.”
Here they tried to give him wine drugged with myrrh, but he would not take it.
And they nailed him to the stake and distributed his outer garments by casting lots over them to decide who would take what.
It was now the third hour, and they nailed him to the stake.
And the inscription of the charge against him was written: “The King of the Jews.”
Moreover, they put two robbers on stakes alongside him, one on his right and one on his left.
And those passing by spoke abusively to him, shaking their heads and saying: “Ha! You who would throw down the temple and build it in three days,
save yourself by coming down off the torture stake.”
In the same way also, the chief priests with the scribes were mocking him among themselves, saying: “Others he saved; himself he cannot save!
Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down off the torture stake, so that we may see and believe.” Even those who were on stakes alongside him were reproaching him.
When it became the sixth hour, a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour, Jesus called out with a loud voice: “Eʹli, Eʹli, laʹma sa·bach·thaʹni?” which means, when translated: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
And some of those standing near, on hearing it, began to say: “See! He is calling E·liʹjah.”
Then someone ran, soaked a sponge in sour wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying: “Let him be! Let us see whether E·liʹjah comes to take him down.”
But Jesus let out a loud cry and expired.
And the curtain of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom.
Now when the army officer who was standing by with him in view saw that he had expired under these circumstances, he said: “Certainly this man was God’s Son.”
There were also women watching from a distance, among them Mary Magʹda·lene as well as Mary the mother of James the Less and of Joʹses, and Sa·loʹme,
who used to accompany him and minister to him when he was in Galilee, and many other women who had come up together with him to Jerusalem.
Now as it was already late in the afternoon, and since it was Preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath,
there came Joseph of Ar·i·ma·theʹa, a reputable member of the Council, who also himself was waiting for the Kingdom of God. He took courage and went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
But Pilate wondered whether he could already be dead, and summoning the army officer, he asked him whether Jesus had already died.
So after making certain from the army officer, he granted the body to Joseph.
After he bought fine linen and took him down, he wrapped him in the fine linen and laid him in a tomb that was quarried out of rock; then he rolled a stone up to the entrance of the tomb.
But Mary Magʹda·lene and Mary the mother of Joʹses continued looking at where he had been laid.
Again he began teaching beside the sea, and a very large crowd gathered near him. So he went aboard a boat and sat in it away from the shore, but the whole crowd was next to the sea, along the shore.
And he began to teach them many things with illustrations, and while he was teaching, he said to them:
“Listen. Look! The sower went out to sow.
As he was sowing, some seeds fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate them up.
Others fell on rocky ground where there was not much soil, and they immediately sprang up because the soil was not deep.
But when the sun rose, they were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Other seeds fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them, and they yielded no fruit.
But others fell on the fine soil, and growing up and increasing, they began to yield fruit, and they were bearing 30, 60, and 100 times more.”
Then he added: Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
Now when he was alone, those around him with the Twelve began questioning him about the illustrations.
He said to them: To you the sacred secret of the Kingdom of God has been given, but to those outside all things are in illustrations,
so that, though looking, they may look and still not see, and though hearing, they may hear and still not get the sense of it; nor will they ever turn back and receive forgiveness.”
Further, he said to them: “You do not know this illustration, so how will you understand all the other illustrations?
The sower sows the word.
These, then, are the ones alongside the road where the word is sown; but as soon as they have heard it, Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
Likewise, these are the ones sown on rocky ground; as soon as they have heard the word, they accept it with joy.
Yet they have no root in themselves, but they continue for a time; then as soon as tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, they are stumbled.
There are still others that are sown among the thorns. These are the ones who have heard the word,
but the anxieties of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches and the desires for everything else make inroads and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
Finally, the ones that were sown on the fine soil are those who listen to the word and favorably receive it and bear fruit—30, 60, and 100 times more.”
He also said to them: “A lamp is not brought out to be put under a basket or under a bed, is it? Is it not brought out to be put on a lampstand?
For there is nothing hidden that will not be exposed; nothing is carefully concealed that will not come out in the open.
Whoever has ears to listen, let him listen.”
He further said to them: “Pay attention to what you are hearing. With the measure that you are measuring out, you will have it measured out to you, yes, you will have more added to you.
For whoever has will have more given to him, but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
So he went on to say: “In this way the Kingdom of God is just as when a man casts seeds on the ground.
He sleeps at night and rises up by day, and the seeds sprout and grow tall—just how, he does not know.
On its own the ground bears fruit gradually, first the stalk, then the head, finally the full grain in the head.
But as soon as the crop permits it, he thrusts in the sickle, because the harvesttime has come.”
And he went on to say: “With what can we compare the Kingdom of God, or with what illustration can we explain it?
It is like a mustard grain, which at the time it was sown in the ground was the tiniest of all the seeds on the earth.
But when it has been sown, it grows and becomes greater than all other vegetable plants and produces great branches, so that the birds of heaven are able to find lodging under its shadow.”
With many illustrations of that sort he spoke the word to them, to the extent that they were able to listen.
Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them, but he would explain all things privately to his disciples.
And on that day, when evening had fallen, he said to them: “Let us cross to the other shore.”
So after they had dismissed the crowd, they took him in the boat, just as he was, and there were other boats with him.
Now a great violent windstorm broke out, and the waves kept crashing into the boat, so that the boat was close to being swamped.
But he was in the stern, sleeping on the pillow. So they woke him up and said to him: “Teacher, do you not care that we are about to perish?”
With that he got up and rebuked the wind and said to the sea: “Hush! Be quiet!” And the wind abated, and a great calm set in.
So he said to them: “Why are you so afraid? Do you not yet have any faith?”
But they felt an unusual fear, and they said to one another: “Who really is this? Even the wind and the sea obey him.”
Then he started to speak to them with illustrations: “A man planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a vat for the winepress and erected a tower; then he leased it to cultivators and traveled abroad.
In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators to collect some of the fruits of the vineyard from them.
But they took him, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
Again he sent another slave to them, and that one they struck on the head and dishonored.
And he sent another, and that one they killed, and many others, some of whom they beat and some of whom they killed.
One more he had, a beloved son. He sent him to them last, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
But those cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
So they took him and killed him and threw him out of the vineyard.
What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill the cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.
Did you never read this scripture: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone.
This has come from Jehovah, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
At that they wanted to seize him, but they feared the crowd, for they knew that he spoke the illustration with them in mind. So they left him and went away.
Next they sent to him some of the Pharisees and of the party followers of Herod in order to catch him in his speech.
On arriving, these said to him: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and you do not seek anyone’s favor, for you do not look at the outward appearance of people, but you teach the way of God in line with truth. Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?
Should we pay, or should we not pay?” Detecting their hypocrisy, he said to them: “Why do you put me to the test? Bring me a de·narʹi·us to look at.”
They brought one, and he said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him: “Caesar’s.”
Jesus then said: “Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” And they were amazed at him.
Now the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
Teacher, Moses wrote us that if someone’s brother dies and leaves a wife behind but does not leave a child, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring for his brother.
There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, but when he died he left no offspring.
And the second married her but died without leaving offspring, and the third the same way.
And all seven left no offspring. Last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection, whose wife will she be? For the seven had her as a wife.”
Jesus said to them: “Is not this why you are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God?
For when they rise from the dead, neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but they are as angels in the heavens.
But concerning the dead being raised up, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the account about the thornbush, that God said to him: ‘I am the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob’?
He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living. You are very much mistaken.”
One of the scribes who had come up and heard them disputing, knowing that he had answered them in a fine way, asked him: “Which commandment is first of all?”
Jesus answered: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah,
and you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’
The second is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
The scribe said to him: “Teacher, you spoke well, in line with truth, ‘He is One, and there is no other besides him’;
and to love him with one’s whole heart, with one’s whole understanding, and with one’s whole strength and to love one’s neighbor as oneself is worth far more than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
At this Jesus, discerning that he had answered intelligently, said to him: “You are not far from the Kingdom of God.” But no one had the courage to question him anymore.
However, as Jesus continued teaching in the temple, he said: “How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is David’s son?
By the holy spirit, David himself said, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet.”’
David himself calls him Lord, so how can it be that he is his son?” And the large crowd was listening to him with pleasure.
And in his teaching he went on to say: “Beware of the scribes who want to walk around in robes and want greetings in the marketplaces
and front seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals.
They devour the houses of the widows, and for show they make long prayers. These will receive a more severe judgment.”
And he sat down with the treasury chests in view and began observing how the crowd was dropping money into the treasury chests, and many rich people were dropping in many coins.
Now a poor widow came and dropped in two small coins of very little value.
So he called his disciples to him and said to them: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than all the others who put money into the treasury chests.
For they all put in out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in everything she had, all she had to live on.”
He departed from there and came into his home territory, and his disciples followed him.
When it was the Sabbath, he started teaching in the synagogue, and most who heard him were astounded and said: “Where did this man get these things? And why should this wisdom have been given to him, and such powerful works be performed through his hands?
This is the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble because of him.
But Jesus said to them: “A prophet is not without honor except in his home territory and among his relatives and in his own house.”
So he was not able to do any powerful work there except to lay his hands on a few sick people and cure them.
Indeed, he was amazed at their lack of faith. And he went around in a circuit to the villages, teaching.
He now summoned the Twelve and started sending them out two by two, and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
Also, he gave them orders to carry nothing for the trip except a staff—no bread, no food pouch, no money in their belts—
but to put on sandals and not to wear two garments.
Further, he said to them: “Wherever you enter into a home, stay there until you leave that place.
And wherever a place will not receive you or listen to you, on going out from there, shake off the dirt that is on your feet for a witness to them.”
Then they set out and preached that people should repent,
and they expelled many demons and greased many sick people with oil and cured them.
Now King Herod heard of this, for the name of Jesus became well-known, and people were saying: “John the Baptizer has been raised up from the dead, and that is why the powerful works are operating in him.”
But others were saying: “It is E·liʹjah.” Still others were saying: “It is a prophet like one of the prophets of old.”
But when Herod heard it, he said: “The John whom I beheaded, this one has been raised up.”
For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John and had bound him in prison on account of He·roʹdi·as, the wife of Philip his brother, because he had married her.
For John had been saying to Herod: “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”
So He·roʹdi·as was nursing a grudge against him and wanted to kill him, but she could not.
For Herod was in fear of John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man, and he was keeping him safe. After hearing him, he was at a great loss as to what to do, yet he continued to hear him gladly.
But a convenient day arrived when Herod spread an evening meal on his birthday for his high officials and the military commanders and the most prominent men of Galilee.
And the daughter of He·roʹdi·as came in and danced and pleased Herod and those dining with him. The king said to the girl: “Ask me for whatever you want, and I will give it to you.”
Yes, he swore to her: “Whatever you ask me for, I will give it to you, up to half my kingdom.”
So she went out and said to her mother: “What should I ask for?” She said: “The head of John the Baptizer.”
She immediately rushed in to the king and made her request, saying: “I want you to give me right away on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
Although this deeply grieved him, the king did not want to disregard her request, because of his oaths and his guests.
So the king immediately sent a bodyguard and commanded him to bring John’s head. So he went off and beheaded him in the prison
and brought his head on a platter. He gave it to the girl, and the girl gave it to her mother.
When his disciples heard of it, they came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
The apostles gathered around Jesus and reported to him all the things they had done and taught.
And he said to them: “Come, you yourselves, privately into an isolated place and rest up a little.” For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure time even to eat a meal.
So they set off in the boat for an isolated place to be by themselves.
But people saw them going and many got to know it, and from all the cities they ran together on foot and got there ahead of them.
Well, on getting out, he saw a large crowd, and he was moved with pity for them, because they were as sheep without a shepherd. And he started to teach them many things.
By now the hour had grown late, and his disciples came up to him and said: “This place is isolated, and the hour is already late.
Send them away, so that they may go off into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat.”
He replied to them: “You give them something to eat.” At this they said to him: “Should we go off and buy 200 de·narʹi·i worth of bread and give it to the people to eat?”
He said to them: “How many loaves do you have? Go see!” After finding out, they said: “Five, besides two fish.”
And he instructed all the people to recline in groups on the green grass.
So they reclined in groups of 100 and of 50.
Taking now the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and said a blessing. Then he broke the loaves up and began giving them to the disciples to place them before the people, and he divided up the two fish for all.
So they all ate and were satisfied,
and they took up 12 baskets full of fragments, aside from the fish.
Those who ate the loaves were 5,000 men.
Then, without delay, he made his disciples board the boat and go on ahead to the opposite shore toward Bethsaida, while he himself sent the crowd away.
But after saying good-bye to them, he went to a mountain to pray.
When evening had fallen, the boat was in the middle of the sea, but he was alone on the land.
So when he saw them struggling to row, for the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he came toward them, walking on the sea; but he was inclined to pass them by.
On catching sight of him walking on the sea, they thought: “It is an apparition!” And they cried out.
For they all saw him and were troubled. But immediately he spoke to them and said: “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.”
Then he got up into the boat with them, and the wind abated. At this they were utterly amazed,
for they had not grasped the meaning of the loaves, but their hearts continued dull in understanding.
When they got across to land, they came to Gen·nesʹa·ret and anchored the boat nearby.
But as soon as they got out of the boat, people recognized him.
They ran around all that region and started to bring on stretchers those who were ailing to where they heard he was.
And wherever he would enter into villages or cities or the countryside, they would place the sick ones in the marketplaces, and they would plead with him that they might touch just the fringe of his outer garment. And all those who touched it were made well.
In those days, there was again a large crowd, and they had nothing to eat. So he summoned the disciples and said to them:
I feel pity for the crowd, because they have already stayed with me for three days and they have nothing to eat.
If I send them off to their homes hungry, they will give out on the road, and some of them are from far away.”
But his disciples answered him: “From where will anyone get enough bread in this isolated place to satisfy these people?”
At this he asked them: “How many loaves do you have?” They said: “Seven.”
And he instructed the crowd to recline on the ground. Then he took the seven loaves, gave thanks, broke them, and began giving them to his disciples to serve, and they served them to the crowd.
They also had a few small fish, and blessing these, he told them to serve these also.
So they ate and were satisfied, and they took up seven large baskets full of leftover fragments.
Now there were about 4,000 men. Then he sent them away.
Immediately he boarded the boat with his disciples and came into the region of Dal·ma·nuʹtha.
Here the Pharisees came and started disputing with him, demanding from him a sign from heaven, to put him to the test.
So he sighed deeply in his spirit and said: “Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I say, no sign will be given to this generation.”
With that he left them, got aboard again, and went to the opposite shore.
However, they forgot to take bread along, and they had nothing with them in the boat except for one loaf.
And he warned them in no uncertain terms: “Keep your eyes open; look out for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
So they began arguing with one another over the fact that they had no bread.
Noting this, he said to them: “Why do you argue over your having no bread? Do you not yet perceive and understand? Are your hearts still dull in understanding?
Though having eyes, do you not see; and though having ears, do you not hear?’ Do you not remember
when I broke the five loaves for the 5,000 men, how many baskets full of fragments you collected?” They said to him: “Twelve.”
When I broke the seven loaves for the 4,000 men, how many large baskets full of fragments did you take up?” And they said to him: “Seven.”
With that he said to them: “Do you not yet understand?”
Now they put in at Bethsaida. Here people brought him a blind man, and they pleaded with him to touch him.
And he took the blind man by the hand and brought him outside the village. After spitting on his eyes, he laid his hands on him and asked him: “Do you see anything?”
The man looked up and said: “I see people, but they look like trees walking about.”
Again he laid his hands on the man’s eyes, and the man saw clearly. His sight was restored, and he could see everything distinctly.
So he sent him home, saying: “Do not enter into the village.”
Jesus and his disciples now left for the villages of Caes·a·reʹa Phi·lipʹpi, and on the way he began to question his disciples, saying: “Who are people saying that I am?”
They said to him: “John the Baptist, but others say E·liʹjah, and still others, one of the prophets.”
And he put the question to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” Peter answered him: “You are the Christ.”
At that he strictly ordered them not to tell anyone about him.
Also, he began teaching them that the Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and rise three days later.
Indeed, he was making that statement openly. But Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
At this he turned, looked at his disciples, and rebuked Peter, saying: “Get behind me, Satan! because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
He now called the crowd to him with his disciples and said to them: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and for the sake of the good news will save it.
Really, what good will it do a man to gain the whole world and to lose his life?
What, really, would a man give in exchange for his life?
For whoever becomes ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”
Then he said to his disciples: “It is unavoidable that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they come!
It would be more advantageous for him if a millstone were hung from his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to stumble one of these little ones.
Pay attention to yourselves. If your brother commits a sin, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
Even if he sins seven times a day against you and he comes back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”
Then the Lord said: “If you had faith the size of a mustard grain, you would say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey you.
Which one of you who has a slave plowing or shepherding would say to him when he comes in from the field, ‘Come here at once and dine at the table’?
Rather, will he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me to have my evening meal, and put on an apron and serve me until I finish eating and drinking, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
He will not feel gratitude to the slave because he did what was assigned, will he?
Likewise, when you have done all the things assigned to you, say: ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’”
While he was going to Jerusalem, he was passing between Sa·marʹi·a and Galilee.
And as he was entering a village, ten men with leprosy met him, but they stood at a distance.
And they raised their voices and said: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!”
When he saw them, he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then as they were going off, they were cleansed.
One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
And he fell facedown at Jesus’ feet, thanking him. Furthermore, he was a Sa·marʹi·tan.
In reply Jesus said: “All ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?
Did no one else turn back to give glory to God except this man of another nation?”
Then he said to him: “Get up and be on your way; your faith has made you well.”
On being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God was coming, he answered them: “The Kingdom of God is not coming with striking observableness;
nor will people say, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’ For look! the Kingdom of God is in your midst.”
Then he said to the disciples: “Days will come when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.
And people will say to you, ‘See there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
For just as lightning flashes from one part of heaven to another part of heaven, so the Son of man will be in his day.
First, however, he must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by this generation.
Moreover, just as it occurred in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of the Son of man:
they were eating, they were drinking, men were marrying, women were being given in marriage until that day when Noah entered into the ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all.
Likewise, just as it occurred in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building.
But on the day that Lot went out of Sodʹom, it rained fire and sulfur from heaven and destroyed them all.
It will be the same on that day when the Son of man is revealed.
On that day let the person who is on the housetop but whose belongings are in the house not come down to pick these up, and likewise, the person out in the field must not return to the things behind.
Remember the wife of Lot.
Whoever seeks to keep his life safe will lose it, but whoever loses it will preserve it alive.
I tell you, in that night two people will be in one bed; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.
There will be two women grinding at the same mill; the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.”
So in response they said to him: “Where, Lord?” He said to them: “Where the body is, there also the eagles will be gathered together.”
He then entered Jerʹi·cho and was passing through.
Now a man named Zac·chaeʹus was there; he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
Well, he was trying to see who this Jesus was, but he could not see because of the crowd, since he was short.
So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see him, for he was about to pass that way.
Now when Jesus got to the place, he looked up and said to him: “Zac·chaeʹus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.”
With that he hurried down and joyfully welcomed him as a guest.
When they saw this, they were all muttering: “He went as a guest to the house of a man who is a sinner.”
But Zac·chaeʹus stood up and said to the Lord: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four times over.”
At this Jesus said to him: “Today salvation has come to this house, because he too is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.”
While they were listening to these things, he told another illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly.
So he said: “A man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return.
Calling ten of his slaves, he gave them ten miʹnas and told them, ‘Do business with these until I come.’
But his citizens hated him and sent out a body of ambassadors after him to say, ‘We do not want this man to become king over us.’
When he eventually got back after having secured the kingly power, he summoned the slaves to whom he had given the money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by their business activity.
So the first one came forward and said, ‘Lord, your miʹna gained ten miʹnas.’
He said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because in a very small matter you have proved yourself faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’
Now the second came, saying, ‘Your miʹna, Lord, made five miʹnas.’
He said to this one as well, ‘You too be in charge of five cities.’
But another one came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your miʹna that I kept hidden away in a cloth.
You see, I was in fear of you, because you are a harsh man; you take what you did not deposit, and you reap what you did not sow.’
He said to him, ‘By your own words I judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that I am a harsh man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
So why did you not put my money in a bank? Then on my coming, I would have collected it with interest.’
With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the miʹna from him and give it to the one who has the ten miʹnas.’
But they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten miʹnas!’—
I say to you, to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
Moreover, bring these enemies of mine here who did not want me to become king over them and execute them in front of me.’”
After he had said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
And when he got near to Bethʹpha·ge and Bethʹa·ny at the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,
saying: “Go into the village that is within sight, and after you enter it, you will find a colt tied, on which no man has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
But if anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ you must say, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
So those who were sent went away and found it just as he had said to them.
But as they were untying the colt, its owners said to them: “Why are you untying the colt?”
They said: The Lord needs it.
And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their outer garments on the colt and seated Jesus on it.
As he moved along, they were spreading their outer garments on the road.
As soon as he got near the road down the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and to praise God with a loud voice because of all the powerful works they had seen,
saying: Blessed is the one coming as the King in Jehovah’s name! Peace in heaven, and glory in the heights above!”
However, some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
But in reply he said: “I tell you, if these remained silent, the stones would cry out.”
And when he got nearby, he viewed the city and wept over it,
saying: “If you, even you, had discerned on this day the things having to do with peace—but now they have been hidden from your eyes.
Because the days will come upon you when your enemies will build around you a fortification of pointed stakes and will encircle you and besiege you from every side.
They will dash you and your children within you to the ground, and they will not leave a stone upon a stone in you, because you did not discern the time of your being inspected.”
Then he entered the temple and started to throw out those who were selling,
saying to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be a house of prayer,’ but you have made it a cave of robbers.”
He continued teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal ones of the people were seeking to kill him;
but they did not find any way to do this, for the people one and all kept hanging on to him to hear him.
Now he was in a certain place praying, and when he stopped, one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.”
So he said to them: “Whenever you pray, say: ‘Father, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come.
Give us each day our bread according to our daily needs.
And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is in debt to us; and do not bring us into temptation.’”
Then he said to them: “Suppose one of you has a friend and you go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves,
because one of my friends has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to offer him.’
But that one replies from inside: ‘Stop bothering me. The door is already locked, and my young children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
I tell you, even if he will not get up and give him anything because of being his friend, certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him whatever he needs.
So I say to you, keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.
For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking, it will be opened.
Indeed, which father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will hand him a serpent instead of a fish?
Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”
Later he expelled a speechless demon. After the demon came out, the speechless man spoke, and the crowds were amazed.
But some of them said: “He expels the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, the ruler of the demons.”
And others, to test him, began demanding a sign out of heaven from him.
Knowing their thinking, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to ruin, and a house divided against itself falls.
In the same way, if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub.
If I expel the demons by means of Be·elʹze·bub, by whom do your sons expel them? This is why they will be your judges.
But if it is by means of God’s finger that I expel the demons, the Kingdom of God has really overtaken you.
When a strong, well-armed man guards his palace, his belongings remain secure.
But when someone stronger than he is comes against him and conquers him, that man takes away all his weapons in which he was trusting, and he divides up the things he took from him.
Whoever is not on my side is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through waterless places in search of a resting-place, and after finding none, it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I moved.’
And on arriving, it finds the house swept clean and adorned.
Then it goes and takes along seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and after getting inside, they dwell there. So the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first.”
Now as he was saying these things, a woman from the crowd called out to him: “Happy is the womb that carried you and the breasts that nursed you!”
But he said: “No, rather, happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
When the crowds were massing together, he began to say: “This generation is a wicked generation; it looks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Joʹnah.
For just as Joʹnah became a sign to the Ninʹe·vites, so will the Son of man be to this generation.
The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solʹo·mon. But look! something more than Solʹo·mon is here.
The men of Ninʹe·veh will rise in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, because they repented at what Joʹnah preached. But look! something more than Joʹnah is here.
After lighting a lamp, a person puts it, not in a hidden place nor under a basket, but on the lampstand, so that those who come in may see the light.
The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is focused, your whole body is also bright; but when it is envious, your body is also dark.
Be alert, therefore, that the light that is in you is not darkness.
Therefore, if your whole body is bright with no part of it dark, it will all be as bright as when a lamp gives you light by its rays.”
When he had said this, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him. So he went in and reclined at the table.
However, the Pharisee was surprised at seeing that he did not first wash before the dinner.
But the Lord said to him: “Now you Pharisees, you cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greediness and wickedness.
Unreasonable ones! The one who made the outside made also the inside, did he not?
But give as gifts of mercy the things that are from within, and look! everything about you will be clean.
But woe to you Pharisees, because you give the tenth of the mint and of the rue and of every other garden herb, but you disregard the justice and the love of God! These things you were under obligation to do, but not to disregard those other things.
Woe to you Pharisees, because you love the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces!
Woe to you, because you are as those graves that are not clearly visible, that men walk on and do not know it!”
In reply one of those versed in the Law said to him: “Teacher, in saying these things, you insult us also.”
Then he said: “Woe also to you who are versed in the Law, because you load men down with loads hard to carry, but you yourselves do not touch the loads with one of your fingers!
Woe to you, because you build the tombs of the prophets, but your forefathers killed them!
Certainly you are witnesses of the deeds of your forefathers, and yet you approve of them, for they killed the prophets but you are building their tombs.
That is why the wisdom of God also said: ‘I will send prophets and apostles to them, and they will kill and persecute some of them,
so that the blood of all the prophets spilled from the founding of the world may be charged against this generation,
from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zekariah, who was killed between the altar and the house.’ Yes, I tell you, it will be charged against this generation.
Woe to you who are versed in the Law, because you took away the key of knowledge. You yourselves did not go in, and you hinder those going in!”
So when he went out from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to put extreme pressure on him and to ply him with many more questions,
lying in wait for him to catch him in something he might say.
Seeing that many have undertaken to compile an account of the facts that are given full credence among us,
just as these were handed down to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and attendants of the message,
I resolved also, because I have traced all things from the start with accuracy, to write them to you in logical order, most excellent The·ophʹi·lus,
so that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.
In the days of Herod, king of Judeʹa, there was a priest named Zechariah of the division of A·biʹjah. His wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
They both were righteous before God, walking blamelessly in accord with all the commandments and legal requirements of Jehovah.
But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well along in years.
Now as he was serving as priest in the assignment of his division before God,
according to the established practice of the priesthood it became his turn to offer incense when he entered into the sanctuary of Jehovah.
And the entire multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of offering incense.
Jehovah’s angel appeared to him, standing at the right side of the incense altar.
But Zekariah became troubled at the sight, and he was overcome with fear.
However, the angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zekariah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to name him John.
You will have joy and great gladness, and many will rejoice over his birth,
for he will be great in the sight of Jehovah. But he must drink no wine or any alcoholic drink at all, and he will be filled with holy spirit even from before birth,
and he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to Jehovah their God.
Also, he will go ahead of him with E·liʹjah’s spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the disobedient ones to the practical wisdom of righteous ones, in order to get ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”
Zekariah said to the angel: “How can I be sure of this? For I am old, and my wife is well along in years.”
In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gaʹbri·el, who stands near before God, and I was sent to speak with you and to declare this good news to you.
But look! you will be silent and unable to speak until the day these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.”
Meanwhile, the people continued waiting for Zekariah, and they were surprised that he delayed so long in the sanctuary.
When he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary. He kept making signs to them but remained speechless.
When the days of his holy service were completed, he went off to his home.
Some days later Elizabeth his wife became pregnant, and she kept herself secluded for five months, saying:
This is how Jehovah has dealt with me in these days. He has turned his attention to me to take away my reproach among men.”
In her sixth month, the angel Gaʹbri·el was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazret,
to a virgin promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David’s house, and the name of the virgin was Mary.
And coming in, the angel said to her: “Greetings, you highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”
But she was deeply disturbed at his words and tried to understand what kind of greeting this might be.
So the angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
And look! you will become pregnant and give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus.
This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father,
and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom.”
But Mary said to the angel: “How is this to be, since I am not having sexual relations with a man?”
In answer the angel said to her: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. And for that reason the one who is born will be called holy, God’s Son.
And look! Elizabeth your relative has also conceived a son, in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her, the so-called barren woman;
for no declaration will be impossible for God.”
Then Mary said: “Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it happen to me according to your declaration.” At that the angel departed from her.
So Mary set out in those days and traveled with haste into the mountainous country, to a city of Judah,
and she entered the home of Zekariah and greeted Elizabeth.
Well, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant in her womb leaped, and Elizabeth was filled with holy spirit
and loudly cried out: Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruitage of your womb!
So how is it that this privilege is mine, to have the mother of my Lord come to me?
For look! as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
Happy too is she who believed, for there will be a complete fulfillment of those things spoken to her from Jehovah.”
And Mary said: My soul magnifies Jehovah,
and my spirit cannot keep from being overjoyed at God my Savior,
because he has looked upon the low position of his slave girl. For look! from now on all generations will declare me happy,
because the powerful One has done great deeds for me, and holy is his name,
and for generation after generation his mercy is upon those who fear him.
He has acted mightily with his arm; he has scattered those who are haughty in the intention of their hearts.
He has brought down powerful men from thrones and has exalted lowly ones;
he has fully satisfied hungry ones with good things and has sent away empty-handed those who had wealth.
He has come to the aid of Israel his servant, remembering his mercy,
just as he spoke to our forefathers, to Abraham and to his offspring, forever.”
Mary stayed with her about three months and then returned to her own home.
The time now came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she gave birth to a son.
And the neighbors and her relatives heard that Jehovah had magnified his mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
On the eighth day they came to circumcise the young child, and they were going to name him after his father, Zekariah.
But his mother said in reply: “No! but he will be called John.”
At this they said to her: “Not one of your relatives is called by this name.”
Then they asked his father by signs what he wanted him to be called.
So he asked for a tablet and wrote: “John is his name.” At this they were all amazed.
Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue was set free and he began to speak, praising God.
And fear fell upon all those living in their neighborhood, and all these things began to be talked about in the whole mountainous country of Ju·deʹa.
And all who heard noted it in their hearts, saying: “What will this young child turn out to be?” For the hand of Jehovah was indeed with him.
Then Zekariah his father was filled with holy spirit, and he prophesied, saying:
Let Jehovah be praised, the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention to his people and has brought them deliverance.
And he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant,
just as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
of a salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those hating us;
to show mercy in connection with our forefathers and to call to mind his holy covenant,
the oath that he swore to Abraham our forefather,
to grant us, after we have been rescued from the hands of enemies, the privilege of fearlessly rendering sacred service to him
with loyalty and righteousness before him all our days.
But as for you, young child, you will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go ahead of Jehovah to prepare his ways,
to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins,
because of the tender compassion of our God. With this compassion a daybreak will visit us from on high,
to give light to those sitting in darkness and death’s shadow and to guide our feet in the way of peace.”
And the young child grew up and became strong in spirit, and he continued in the desert until the day he showed himself openly to Israel.
When he had completed what he had to say to the people, he entered Ca·perʹna·um.
Now an army officer’s slave, who was dear to him, was seriously ill and about to pass away.
When he heard about Jesus, he sent some elders of the Jews to him to ask him to come and make his slave well.
They came up to Jesus and began to plead with him earnestly, saying: “He is worthy of your granting him this,
for he loves our nation and he himself built our synagogue.”
So Jesus went with them. But when he was not far from the house, the army officer had already sent friends to say to him: “Sir, do not bother, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof.
That is why I did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed.
For I too am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Go!’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
When Jesus heard these things, he was amazed at him, and he turned to the crowd following him and said: “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found so great a faith.”
And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the slave in good health.
Soon afterward he traveled to a city called Naʹin, and his disciples and a large crowd were traveling with him.
As he got near the gate of the city, why look! there was a dead man being carried out, the only son of his mother. Besides, she was a widow. A considerable crowd from the city was also with her.
When the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: “Stop weeping.”
With that he approached and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still. Then he said: “Young man, I say to you, get up!”
And the dead man sat up and started to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother.
Now fear seized them all, and they began to glorify God, saying: “A great prophet has been raised up among us,” and, “God has turned his attention to his people.”
And this news concerning him spread out into all Ju·deʹa and all the surrounding country.
Now John’s disciples reported to him all these things.
So John summoned two of his disciples and sent them to the Lord to ask: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
When they came to him, the men said: “John the Baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect another?’”
In that hour he cured many people of sicknesses, serious diseases, and wicked spirits, and he granted many blind people the gift of sight.
In reply he said to them: “Go and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind are now seeing, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed, the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up, and the poor are being told the good news.
Happy is the one who finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
When the messengers of John had gone away, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed being tossed by the wind?
What, then, did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft garments? Why, those wearing splendid dress and living in luxury are in royal houses.
Really, then, what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and far more than a prophet.
This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way ahead of you.’
I tell you, among those born of women there is no one greater than John, but a lesser person in the Kingdom of God is greater than he is.”
When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they declared God to be righteous, for they had been baptized with the baptism of John.
But the Pharisees and those versed in the Law disregarded the counsel of God to them, since they had not been baptized by him.)
With whom, therefore, should I compare the men of this generation, and whom are they like?
They are like young children sitting in a marketplace and calling out to one another, saying: ‘We played the flute for you, but you did not dance; we wailed, but you did not weep.’
Likewise, John the Baptist has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine, but you say: ‘He has a demon.’
The Son of man has come eating and drinking, but you say: ‘Look! A man who is a glutton and is given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by all its children.”
Now one of the Pharisees kept asking him to dine with him. So he entered the house of the Pharisee and reclined at the table.
And look! a woman who was known in the city to be a sinner learned that he was dining in the house of the Pharisee, and she brought an alabaster jar of perfumed oil.
Taking a position behind him at his feet, she wept and began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them off with the hair of her head. Also, she tenderly kissed his feet and poured the perfumed oil on them.
Seeing this, the Pharisee who had invited him said to himself: “If this man were really a prophet, he would know who and what kind of woman it is who is touching him, that she is a sinner.”
But in reply Jesus said to him: “Simon, I have something to say to you.” He said: “Teacher, say it!”
Two men were debtors to a certain lender; the one was in debt for 500 de·narʹi·i, but the other for 50.
When they did not have anything to pay him back with, he freely forgave them both. Therefore, which one of them will love him more?”
In answer Simon said: “I suppose it is the one whom he forgave more.” He said to him: “You judged correctly.”
With that he turned to the woman and said to Simon: “Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet. But this woman wet my feet with her tears and wiped them off with her hair.
You gave me no kiss, but this woman, from the hour that I came in, did not stop tenderly kissing my feet.
You did not pour oil on my head, but this woman poured perfumed oil on my feet.
Because of this, I tell you, her sins, many though they are, are forgiven, because she loved much. But the one who is forgiven little, loves little.”
Then he said to her: “Your sins are forgiven.”
Those reclining at the table with him started to say among themselves: “Who is this man who even forgives sins?”
But he said to the woman: “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
At that time some who were present reported to him about the Gal·i·leʹans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
In reply he said to them: “Do you think that those Gal·i·leʹans were worse sinners than all other Gal·i·leʹans because they have suffered these things?
No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise be destroyed.
Or those 18 on whom the tower in siloam fell, killing them—do you think that they had greater guilt than all other men who live in Jerusalem?
No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all be destroyed, as they were.”
Then he went on to tell this illustration: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it but found none.
Then he said to the vinedresser, ‘Here it is three years that I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, but have found none. Cut it down! Why should it keep the ground useless?’
In reply he said to him, ‘Master, leave it alone for one more year until I dig around it and put on manure.
If it produces fruit in the future, well and good; but if not, then cut it down.’”
Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
And look! a woman was there who had had a spirit of weakness for 18 years; and she was bent double and was unable to straighten up at all.
When he saw her, Jesus addressed her and said: “Woman, you are released from your weakness.”
And he laid his hands on her, and instantly she straightened up and began to glorify God.
But in response the presiding officer of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus did the cure on the Sabbath, said to the crowd: “There are six days on which work ought to be done; so come and be cured on those days, and not on the Sabbath day.”
However, the Lord answered him: “Hypocrites, does not each one of you on the Sabbath untie his bull or his donkey from the stall and lead it away to give it something to drink?
Should not this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham and whom Satan held bound for 18 years, be released from this bondage on the Sabbath day?”
Well, when he said these things, all his opposers began to feel shame, but the entire crowd began to rejoice at all the glorious things he did.
So he went on to say: “What is the Kingdom of God like, and with what can I compare it?
It is like a mustard grain that a man took and planted in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of heaven nested in its branches.”
And again he said: “With what can I compare the Kingdom of God?
It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed with three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.”
And he traveled from city to city and from village to village, teaching and continuing on his journey to Jerusalem.
Now a man said to him: “Lord, are those being saved few?” He said to them:
Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will seek to get in but will not be able.
When the householder gets up and locks the door, you will stand outside knocking at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us.’ But in answer he will say to you: ‘I do not know where you are from.’
Then you will start saying, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our main streets.’
But he will say to you, ‘I do not know where you are from. Get away from me, all you workers of unrighteousness!’
There is where your weeping and the gnashing of your teeth will be, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the Kingdom of God, but you yourselves thrown outside.
Furthermore, people will come from east and west and from north and south, and will recline at the table in the Kingdom of God.
And look! there are those last who will be first, and there are those first who will be last.”
In that very hour some of the Pharisees came up and told him: “Get out and go away from here, because Herod wants to kill you.”
And he said to them: “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look! I am casting out demons and healing people today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will be finished.’
Nevertheless, I must go on today, tomorrow, and the following day, because it cannot be that a prophet should be put to death outside of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together the way a hen gathers her brood of chicks under her wings! But you did not want it.
Look! Your house is abandoned to you. I tell you, you will by no means see me until you say: ‘Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name!’”
Now as he looked up, he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests.
Then he saw a needy widow drop in two small coins of very little value,
and he said: “Truly I say to you that this poor widow put in more than they all did.
For all of these put in gifts out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, put in all the means of living she had.”
Later, when some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with fine stones and dedicated things,
he said: “As for these things that you now see, the days will come when not a stone will be left upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things actually be, and what will be the sign when these things are to occur?”
He said: “Look out that you are not misled, for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The due time is near.’ Do not go after them.
Furthermore, when you hear of wars and disturbances, do not be terrified. For these things must take place first, but the end will not occur immediately.”
Then he said to them: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
There will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another food shortages and pestilences; and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs.
But before all these things happen, people will lay their hands on you and persecute you, handing you over to the synagogues and prisons. You will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
It will result in your giving a witness.
Therefore, resolve in your hearts not to rehearse beforehand how to make your defense,
for I will give you words and wisdom that all your opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.
Moreover, you will be handed over even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death,
and you will be hated by all people because of my name.
But not even a hair of your heads will perish.
By your endurance you will preserve your lives.
However, when you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
Then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains, let those in the midst of her leave, and let those in the countryside not enter into her,
because these are days for meting out justice in order that all the things written may be fulfilled.
Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! For there will be great distress on the land and wrath against this people.
And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.
Also, there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth anguish of nations not knowing the way out because of the roaring of the sea and its agitation.
People will become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
But as these things start to occur, stand up straight and lift up your heads, because your deliverance is getting near.”
With that he told them an illustration: “Notice the fig tree and all the other trees.
When they are budding, you see it for yourselves and know that now the summer is near.
Likewise also you, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all things happen.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
But pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you
as a snare. For it will come upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole earth.
Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur and in standing before the Son of man.”
So by day he would be teaching in the temple, but by night he would go out and lodge on the mountain called the Mount of Olives.
And all the people would come to him early in the morning to hear him in the temple.
In the 15th year of the reign of Ti·beʹri·us Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Ju·deʹa, Herod was district ruler of Galilee, Philip his brother was district ruler of the country of It·u·raeʹa and Trach·o·niʹtis, and Ly·saʹni·as was district ruler of Ab·i·leʹne,
in the days of chief priest Anʹnas and of Caʹia·phas, God’s declaration came to John the son of Zekariah in the wilderness.
So he went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching baptism in symbol of repentance for forgiveness of sins,
just as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one crying out in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah! Make his roads straight.
Every valley must be filled up, and every mountain and hill leveled; the crooked ways must become straight, and the rough ways smooth;
and all flesh will see the salvation of God.’”
So he began to say to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him: “You offspring of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore, produce fruits that befit repentance. Do not start saying to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I say to you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
Indeed, the ax is already lying at the root of the trees. Every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
And the crowds were asking him: “What, then, should we do?”
In reply he said to them: “Let the man who has two garments share with the man who has none, and let the one who has something to eat do the same.”
Even tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: “Teacher, what should we do?”
He said to them: “Do not demand anything more than the tax rate.”
Also, those in military service were asking him: “What should we do?” And he said to them: “Do not harass anybody or accuse anybody falsely, but be satisfied with your provisions.”
Now the people were in expectation and all of them were reasoning in their hearts about John, “May he perhaps be the Christ?”
John gave the answer, saying to all: “I, for my part, baptize you with water, but the one stronger than I am is coming, the lace of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with holy spirit and with fire.
His winnowing shovel is in his hand to clean up his threshing floor completely and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
He also gave many other exhortations and continued declaring good news to the people.
But Herod the district ruler, because of being reproved by John concerning He·roʹdi·as the wife of his brother and concerning all the wicked deeds that Herod had done,
added this also to all those deeds: He locked John up in prison.
Now when all the people were baptized, Jesus too was baptized. As he was praying, the heaven was opened up,
and the holy spirit in bodily form like a dove came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are my Son, the beloved; I have approved you.”
When Jesus began his work, he was about 30 years old, being the son, as the opinion was,of Joseph,son of Heʹli,
son of Matʹthat,son of Leʹvi,son of Melʹchi,son of Janʹna·i,son of Joseph,
son of Mat·ta·thiʹas,son of Aʹmos,son of Naʹhum,son of Esʹli,son of Nagʹga·i,
son of Maʹath,son of Mat·ta·thiʹas,son of Semʹe·in,son of Joʹsech,son of Joʹda,
son of Jo·anʹan,son of Rheʹsa,son of Ze·rubʹba·bel,son of She·alʹti·el,son of Neʹri,
son of Melʹchi,son of Adʹdi,son of Coʹsam,son of El·maʹdam,son of Er,
son of Jesus,son of E·li·eʹzer,son of Joʹrim,son of Matʹthat,son of Leʹvi,
son of Symʹe·on,son of Judas,son of Joseph,son of Joʹnam,son of E·liʹa·kim,
son of Meʹle·a,son of Menʹna,son of Matʹta·tha,son of Nathan,son of David,
son of Jesʹse,son of Oʹbed,son of Boʹaz,son of Salʹmon,son of Nahʹshon,
son of Am·minʹa·dab,son of Arʹni,son of Hezʹron,son of Peʹrez,son of Judah,
son of Jacob,son of Isaac,son of Abraham,son of Teʹrah,son of Naʹhor,
son of Seʹrug,son of Reʹu,son of Peʹleg,son of Eʹber,son of Sheʹlah,
son of Ca·iʹnan,son of Ar·pachʹshad,son of Shem,son of Noah,son of Laʹmech,
son of Me·thuʹse·lah,son of Eʹnoch,son of Jaʹred,son of Ma·haʹla·le·el,son of Ca·iʹnan,
son of Eʹnosh,son of Seth,son of Adam,son of God.
Then he called the Twelve together and gave them power and authority over all the demons and to cure diseases.
And he sent them out to preach the Kingdom of God and to heal,
and he said to them: “Carry nothing for the trip, neither staff nor food pouch nor bread nor money; neither have two garments.
But wherever you enter into a home, stay there and leave from there.
And wherever people do not receive you, on going out of that city, shake the dust off your feet for a witness against them.”
Then starting out, they went through the territory from village to village, declaring the good news and performing cures everywhere.
Now Herod the district ruler heard about everything that was happening, and he was greatly perplexed because some were saying that John had been raised up from the dead,
but others were saying that E·liʹjah had appeared, and still others that one of the ancient prophets had risen.
Herod said: “John I beheaded. Who, then, is this about whom I am hearing such things?” So he was trying to see him.
When the apostles returned, they reported to Jesus all they had done. With that he took them along and withdrew privately into a city called Bethsaida.
But the crowds, getting to know it, followed him. And he received them kindly and began to speak to them about the Kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.
Then the day was coming to a close. The Twelve now came up and said to him: “Send the crowd away, so that they may go into the surrounding villages and countryside to find lodging and provisions, because out here we are in an isolated place.”
But he said to them: “You give them something to eat.” They said: “We have nothing more than five loaves and two fish, unless perhaps we ourselves go and buy food for all these people.”
There were, in fact, about 5,000 men. But he said to his disciples: “Have them sit down in groups of about 50 each.”
And they did so and had them all sit down.
Taking now the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and blessed them. Then he broke them up and began giving them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
So they all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the leftovers, 12 baskets of fragments.
Later, while he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who are the crowds saying that I am?”
In reply they said: “John the Baptist, but others say E·liʹjah, and still others say that one of the ancient prophets has risen.”
Then he said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” Peter answered: “The Christ of God.”
Then in a stern talk to them, he instructed them not to tell this to anybody,
but he said: “The Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.”
Then he went on to say to all: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake day after day and keep following me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake is the one who will save it.
Really, what good will it do a man if he gains the whole world but loses his own self or suffers ruin?
For whoever becomes ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of that person when he comes in his glory and that of the Father and of the holy angels.
But I tell you truly, there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Kingdom of God.”
In fact, about eight days after saying these words, he took Peter, John, and James along and climbed up the mountain to pray.
And as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed and his clothing became glitteringly white.
And look! two men were conversing with him; they were Moses and E·liʹjah.
These appeared with glory and began talking about his departure, which he was about to fulfill at Jerusalem.
Now Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
And as these were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.” He did not realize what he was saying.
But as he was saying these things, a cloud formed and began to overshadow them. As they entered into the cloud, they became afraid.
Then a voice came out of the cloud, saying: “This is my Son, the one who has been chosen. Listen to him.”
As the voice spoke, Jesus was found alone. But they kept quiet and did not report to anyone in those days any of the things they saw.
The following day when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
And look! a man called out from the crowd, saying: “Teacher, I beg you to take a look at my son, because he is my only one.
And look! a spirit seizes him, and suddenly he cries out, and it throws him into convulsions with foaming at the mouth, and only with difficulty does it leave him after bruising him.
I begged your disciples to expel it, but they could not.”
In response Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with you and put up with you? Bring your son over here.”
But even as he was approaching, the demon hurled him to the ground and violently threw him into a convulsion. However, Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and gave him back to his father.
And they were all astounded at the majestic power of God. While they were all astonished at all the things he was doing, he said to his disciples:
Listen carefully and remember these words, for the Son of man is going to be betrayed into men’s hands.”
But they did not understand what he was saying. In fact, it was concealed from them so that they might not grasp it, and they were afraid to question him about this saying.
Then a dispute arose among them about which one of them was the greatest.
Jesus, knowing the reasoning of their hearts, took a young child, stood him beside him,
and said to them: “Whoever receives this young child on the basis of my name receives me also; and whoever receives me also receives the One who sent me. For the one who conducts himself as a lesser one among all of you is the one who is great.”
In response John said: “Instructor, we saw someone expelling demons by using your name, and we tried to prevent him, because he is not following with us.”
But Jesus said to him: “Do not try to prevent him, for whoever is not against you is for you.”
As the days were drawing near for him to be taken up, he resolutely set his face to go to Jerusalem.
So he sent messengers ahead of him. And they went and entered a village of Sa·marʹi·tans to make preparations for him.
But they did not receive him, because he was determined to go to Jerusalem.
When the disciples James and John saw this, they said: “Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven and annihilate them?”
But he turned and rebuked them.
So they went to a different village.
Now as they were going along the road, someone said to him: “I will follow you wherever you go.”
But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
Then he said to another: “Be my follower.” The man said: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.”
But he said to him: “Let the dead bury their dead, but you go and declare abroad the Kingdom of God.”
And still another said: “I will follow you, Lord, but first permit me to say good-bye to those in my household.”
Jesus said to him: “No man who has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well-suited for the Kingdom of God.”
But on the first day of the week, they came very early to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
While they were perplexed about this, look! two men in shining garments stood by them.
The women became frightened and kept their faces turned toward the ground, so the men said to them: “Why are you looking for the living one among the dead?
He is not here, but has been raised up. Recall how he spoke to you while he was yet in Galilee,
saying that the Son of man must be handed over to sinful men and be executed on the stake and on the third day rise.”
Then they remembered his words,
and they returned from the tomb and reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the rest.
They were Mary Magʹda·lene, Jo·anʹna, and Mary the mother of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling these things to the apostles.
However, these sayings seemed like nonsense to them, and they would not believe the women.
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb, and stooping forward, he saw only the linen cloths. So he went off, wondering to himself what had occurred.
But look! on that very day, two of them were traveling to a village named Em·maʹus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
and they were conversing with each other about all these things that had happened.
Now as they were conversing and discussing these things, Jesus himself approached and began walking with them,
but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
He said to them: “What are these matters that you are debating between yourselves as you walk along?” And they stood still, looking sad.
In answer the one named Cleʹo·pas said to him: “Are you a stranger dwelling alone in Jerusalem and do not know the things that have occurred there during these days?”
He asked them: “What things?” They said to him: “The things concerning Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, who proved to be a prophet powerful in deed and word before God and all the people;
and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they nailed him to the stake.
But we were hoping that this man was the one who was going to deliver Israel. Yes, and besides all these things, this is the third day since these things occurred.
Moreover, some women from among us also astonished us, for they went early to the tomb
and when they did not find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a supernatural sight of angels, who said he is alive.
Then some of those who were with us went off to the tomb, and they found it just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
So he said to them: “O senseless ones and slow of heart to believe all the things the prophets have spoken!
Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?”
And starting with Moses and all the Prophets, he interpreted to them things pertaining to himself in all the Scriptures.
Finally they got close to the village to which they were traveling, and he made as if to travel on farther.
But they urged him to remain, saying: “Stay with us, because it is almost evening and the day is nearly over.” With that he went in to stay with them.
And as he was dining with them, he took the bread, blessed it, broke it, and began handing it to them.
At that their eyes were fully opened and they recognized him; but he disappeared from them.
And they said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning within us as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
And they got up in that very hour and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the Eleven and those assembled together with them,
who said: “For a fact the Lord was raised up, and he appeared to Simon!”
Then they related the events on the road and how he became known to them by the breaking of the bread.
While they were speaking of these things, he himself stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
But because they were terrified and frightened, they imagined that they were seeing a spirit.
So he said to them: “Why are you troubled, and why have doubts come up in your hearts?
See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; touch me and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones just as you see that I have.”
And as he said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
But while they were still not believing for sheer joy and amazement, he said to them: “Do you have something there to eat?”
So they handed him a piece of broiled fish,
and he took it and ate it before their eyes.
He then said to them: “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all the things written about me in the Law of Moses and in the Prophets and Psalms must be fulfilled.”
Then he opened up their minds fully to grasp the meaning of the Scriptures,
and he said to them, “This is what is written: that the Christ would suffer and rise from among the dead on the third day,
and on the basis of his name, repentance for forgiveness of sins would be preached in all the nations—starting out from Jerusalem.
You are to be witnesses of these things.
And look! I am sending upon you what my Father promised. You, though, stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.”
Then he led them out as far as Bethʹa·ny, and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
As he was blessing them, he was parted from them and taken up to heaven.
And they did obeisance to him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
And they were continually in the temple, praising God.
Now in those days a decree went out from Caesar Au·gusʹtus for all the inhabited earth to be registered.
This first registration took place when Qui·rinʹi·us was governor of Syria.)
And all the people went to be registered, each one to his own city.
Of course, Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the city of Nazret, into Ju·deʹa, to David’s city, which is called Bethʹle·hem, because of his being a member of the house and family of David.
He went to get registered with Mary, who had been given him in marriage as promised and who was soon to give birth.
While they were there, the time came for her to give birth.
And she gave birth to her son, the firstborn, and she wrapped him in strips of cloth and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodging place.
There were also in the same region shepherds living out of doors and keeping watch in the night over their flocks.
Suddenly Jehovah’s angel stood before them, and Jehovah’s glory gleamed around them, and they became very fearful.
But the angel said to them: “Do not be afraid, for look! I am declaring to you good news of a great joy that all the people will have.
For today there was born to you in David’s city a savior, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is a sign for you: You will find an infant wrapped in strips of cloth and lying in a manger.”
Suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying:
Glory in the heights above to God, and on earth peace among men of goodwill.”
So when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds began saying to one another: “Let us by all means go over to Bethʹle·hem and see what has taken place, which Jehovah has made known to us.”
And they went quickly and found Mary as well as Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger.
When they saw this, they made known the message that they had been told concerning this young child.
And all who heard were astonished at what the shepherds told them,
but Mary began to preserve all these sayings, drawing conclusions in her heart.
Then the shepherds went back, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told to them.
After eight days, when it was time to circumcise him, he was named Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived.
Also, when the time came for purifying them according to the Law of Moses, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to Jehovah,
just as it is written in Jehovah’s Law: “Every firstborn male must be called holy to Jehovah.”
And they offered a sacrifice according to what is said in the Law of Jehovah: “a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
And look! there was a man in Jerusalem named Simʹe·on, and this man was righteous and devout, waiting for Israel’s consolation, and holy spirit was upon him.
Furthermore, it had been divinely revealed to him by the holy spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Christ of Jehovah.
Under the power of the spirit, he now came into the temple, and as the parents brought the young child Jesus in to do for him according to the customary practice of the Law,
he took the child into his arms and praised God and said:
Now, Sovereign Lord, you are letting your slave go in peace according to your declaration,
because my eyes have seen your means of salvation
that you have prepared in the sight of all the peoples,
a light for removing the veil from the nations and a glory of your people Israel.”
And the child’s father and mother continued wondering at the things being spoken about him.
Also, Simʹe·on blessed them and said to Mary, the child’s mother: “Look! This child is appointed for the falling and the rising again of many in Israel and for a sign to be spoken against
yes, a long sword will be run through you), in order that the reasonings of many hearts may be revealed.”
Now there was a prophetess, Anna the daughter of Phanʹu·el, of Ashʹer’s tribe. This woman was well along in years and had lived with her husband for seven years after they were married,
and she was a widow now 84 years old. She was never missing from the temple, rendering sacred service night and day with fasting and supplications.
In that very hour she came near and began giving thanks to God and speaking about the child to all who were waiting for Jerusalem’s deliverance.
So when they had carried out all the things according to the Law of Jehovah, they went back into Galilee to their own city, Nazret.
And the young child continued growing and getting strong, being filled with wisdom, and God’s favor continued upon him.
Now his parents were accustomed to go from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the Passover.
And when he was 12 years old, they went up according to the custom of the festival.
When the days of the festival were over and they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it.
Assuming that he was in the group traveling together, they went a day’s journey and then began to search for him among the relatives and acquaintances.
But not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem and made a diligent search for him.
Well, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and asking them questions.
But all those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers.
Now when his parents saw him, they were astounded, and his mother said to him: “Child, why did you treat us this way? Here your father and I have been frantically looking for you.”
But he said to them: “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in the house of my Father?”
However, they did not understand what he was saying to them.
Then he went down with them and returned to Nazret, and he continued subject to them. Also, his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.
After these things the Lord designated 70 others and sent them out by twos ahead of him into every city and place where he himself was to go.
Then he said to them: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
Go! Look! I am sending you out as lambs in among wolves.
Do not carry a money bag or a food pouch or sandals, and do not greet anyone along the road.
Wherever you enter into a house, say first: ‘May this house have peace.’
And if a friend of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will return to you.
So stay in that house, eating and drinking the things they provide, for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not keep transferring from house to house.
Also, wherever you enter into a city and they receive you, eat what is set before you
and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’
But wherever you enter into a city and they do not receive you, go out into its main streets and say:
We wipe off against you even the dust that sticks to our feet from your city. Nevertheless, know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near.’
I tell you that it will be more endurable for Sodʹom in that day than for that city.
Woe to you, Cho·raʹzin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the powerful works that have taken place in you had taken place in Tyre and Siʹdon, they would long ago have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Consequently, it will be more endurable for Tyre and Siʹdon in the judgment than for you.
And you, Ca·perʹna·um, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to the Grave you will come!
Whoever listens to you listens to me. And whoever disregards you disregards me also. Moreover, whoever disregards me disregards also Him who sent me.”
Then the 70 returned with joy, saying: “Lord, even the demons are made subject to us by the use of your name.”
At that he said to them: “I see Satan already fallen like lightning from heaven.
Look! I have given you the authority to trample underfoot serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing at all will harm you.
Nevertheless, do not rejoice because the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because your names have been written in the heavens.”
In that very hour he became overjoyed in the holy spirit and said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have carefully hidden these things from wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to young children. Yes, O Father, because this is the way you approved.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”
With that he turned to the disciples and told them privately: “Happy are the eyes that see the things you are seeing.
For I say to you, many prophets and kings desired to see the things you are observing but did not see them, and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them.”
Now look! a man versed in the Law stood up to test him and said: “Teacher, what do I need to do to inherit everlasting life?”
He said to him: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?”
In answer he said: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole strength and with your whole mind’ and ‘your neighbor as yourself.’”
He said to him: “You answered correctly; keep doing this and you will get life.”
But wanting to prove himself righteous, the man said to Jesus: “Who really is my neighbor?”
In reply Jesus said: “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jerʹi·cho and fell victim to robbers, who stripped him, beat him, and went off, leaving him half-dead.
Now by coincidence a priest was going down on that road, but when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side.
Likewise, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the opposite side.
But a certain Sa·marʹi·tan traveling the road came upon him, and at seeing him, he was moved with pity.
So he approached him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he mounted him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
The next day he took out two de·narʹi·i, gave them to the innkeeper, and said: ‘Take care of him, and whatever you spend besides this, I will repay you when I return.’
Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor to the man who fell victim to the robbers?”
He said: “The one who acted mercifully toward him.” Jesus then said to him: “Go and do the same yourself.”
Now as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village. Here a woman named Martha received him as a guest in her house.
She also had a sister called Mary, who sat down at the feet of the Lord and kept listening to what he was saying.
Martha, on the other hand, was distracted with attending to many duties. So she came to him and said: “Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her to come and help me.”
In answer the Lord said to her: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things.
A few things, though, are needed, or just one. For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.”
Then he also said to the disciples: “A rich man had a steward who was accused of handling his goods wastefully.
So he called him and said, ‘What is this I hear about you? Hand in the account of your stewardship, for you can no longer manage the house.’
Then the steward said to himself, ‘What am I to do, seeing that my master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, and I am ashamed to beg.
Ah! I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the stewardship, people will welcome me into their homes.’
And calling to him each one of his master’s debtors, he said to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
He replied, ‘A hundred measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and sit down and quickly write 50.’
Next, he said to another one, ‘Now you, how much do you owe?’ He said, ‘A hundred large measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take back your written agreement and write 80.’
And his master commended the steward, though unrighteous, because he acted with practical wisdom; for the sons of this system of things are wiser in a practical way toward their own generation than the sons of the light are.
Also, I say to you: Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.
The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.
Therefore, if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous riches, who will entrust you with what is true?
And if you have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with what belongs to another, who will give you something for yourselves?
No servant can be a slave to two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot be slaves to God and to Riches.”
Now the Pharisees, who were money lovers, were listening to all these things, and they began to sneer at him.
So he said to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is considered exalted by men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.
The Law and the Prophets were until John. From then on, the Kingdom of God is being declared as good news, and every sort of person is pressing forward toward it.
Indeed, it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of a letter of the Law to go unfulfilled.
Everyone who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and whoever marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.
There was a rich man who used to dress in purple and linen, enjoying himself day after day with magnificence.
But a beggar named Lazʹa·rus used to be put at his gate, covered with ulcers
and desiring to be filled with the things dropping from the table of the rich man. Yes, even the dogs would come and lick his ulcers.
Now in the course of time, the beggar died and was carried off by the angels to Abraham’s side. “Also, the rich man died and was buried.
And in the Grave he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and he saw Abraham from afar and Lazʹa·rus by his side.
So he called and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazʹa·rus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this blazing fire.’
But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you had your fill of good things in your lifetime, but Lazʹa·rus for his part received bad things. Now, however, he is being comforted here, but you are in anguish.
And besides all these things, a great chasm has been fixed between us and you, so that those who want to go over from here to you cannot, neither may people cross over from there to us.’
Then he said, ‘That being so, I ask you, father, to send him to the house of my father,
for I have five brothers, in order that he may give them a thorough witness so that they will not also come into this place of torment.’
But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to these.’
Then he said, ‘No, indeed, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
But he said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if someone rises from the dead.’”
On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.
And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets.
Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat.
When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.”
But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.”
Well, when they did this, they caught a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart.
So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink.
Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.”
For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,
and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.”
So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.
On another occasion while he was in one of the cities, look! there was a man full of leprosy! When he caught sight of Jesus, he fell facedown and begged him: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
So stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to! Be made clean.” Immediately the leprosy vanished from him.
Then he gave the man orders to tell no one: “But go and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering for your cleansing, just as Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
But the news about him just kept spreading, and large crowds would gather together to listen and to be cured of their sicknesses.
However, he often went into the desolate areas to pray.
On one of those days while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the Law who had come out of every village of Galilee and Ju·deʹa and from Jerusalem were sitting there; and Jehovah’s power was with him to do healing.
And look! men were carrying a paralyzed man on a stretcher, and they were trying to bring him in and place him before Jesus.
So not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and they lowered him on the stretcher through the tiling, right among those in front of Jesus.
When he saw their faith, he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven.”
Then the scribes and the Pharisees started to reason, saying: “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins except God alone?”
But Jesus, discerning their reasoning, said in answer to them: “What are you reasoning in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
But in order for you to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” he said to the paralyzed man: “I say to you, Get up, pick up your stretcher, and go to your home.”
At that he stood up before them, picked up what he had been lying on, and went to his home, glorifying God.
Then one and all were seized with amazement, and they began to glorify God, and they became filled with awe, saying: “We have seen wonderful things today!”
Now after this, he went out and saw a tax collector named Leʹvi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.”
And leaving everything behind, he rose up and began to follow him.
Then Leʹvi spread a big reception feast for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were dining with them.
At this the Pharisees and their scribes began murmuring to his disciples, saying: “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
In reply Jesus said to them: “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
I have come to call, not righteous people, but sinners to repentance.”
They said to him: “John’s disciples fast frequently and offer supplications, and so do those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink.”
Jesus said to them: “You cannot make the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them, can you?
But days will come when the bridegroom will indeed be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.”
He also gave an illustration to them: “Nobody cuts a patch from a new outer garment and sews it on an old garment. If he does, then the new patch tears away and the patch from the new garment does not match the old.
Also, no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the wineskins and it will be spilled out and the wineskins will be ruined.
But new wine must be put into new wineskins.
No one after drinking old wine wants new, for he says, ‘The old is nice.’”
On another occasion he went to eat a meal in the house of one of the leaders of the Pharisees on the Sabbath, and they were closely watching him.
And look! a man who had dropsy was in front of him.
So in response Jesus asked those versed in the Law and the Pharisees: “Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath or not?”
But they kept silent. With that he took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him away.
Then he said to them: “Who of you, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath day?”
And they were not able to reply to this.
He then told the invited men an illustration when he noticed how they were choosing the most prominent places for themselves. He said to them:
When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast, do not recline in the most prominent place. Perhaps someone more distinguished than you may also have been invited.
Then the one who invited you both will come and say to you, ‘Let this man have your place.’ Then you will proceed with shame to take the lowest place.
But when you are invited, go and recline in the lowest place, so that when the man who invited you comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will have honor in front of all your fellow guests.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
Next he said also to the man who had invited him: “When you spread a dinner or an evening meal, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or your rich neighbors. Otherwise, they might also invite you in return, and it would become a repayment to you.
But when you spread a feast, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
On hearing these things, one of the fellow guests said to him: “Happy is the one who dines in the Kingdom of God.”
Jesus said to him: “A man was spreading a grand evening meal, and he invited many.
He sent his slave out at the hour of the evening meal to say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because everything is now ready.’
But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I bought a field and need to go out and see it; I ask you, have me excused.’
And another said, ‘I bought five yoke of cattle and am going to examine them; I ask you, have me excused.’
Still another said, ‘I just got married, and for this reason I cannot come.’
So the slave came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house became angry and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly to the main streets and the alleys of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
In time the slave said, ‘Master, what you ordered has been done, and still there is room.’
So the master said to the slave, ‘Go out to the roads and the lanes and compel them to come in, so that my house may be filled.
For I say to you, none of those men who were invited will taste my evening meal.’”
Now large crowds were traveling with him, and he turned and said to them:
If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
Whoever does not carry his torture stake and come after me cannot be my disciple.
For example, who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it?
Otherwise, he might lay its foundation but not be able to finish it, and all the onlookers would start to ridicule him,
saying: ‘This man started to build but was not able to finish.’
Or what king marching out against another king in war does not first sit down and take counsel whether he is able with 10,000 troops to stand up to the one who comes against him with 20,000?
If, in fact, he cannot do so, then while that one is yet far away, he sends out a body of ambassadors and sues for peace.
In the same way, you may be sure that not one of you who does not say good-bye to all his belongings can be my disciple.
Salt, to be sure, is fine. But if the salt loses its strength, with what will it be seasoned?
It is not suitable for soil or for manure. People throw it away. Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
Now the Festival of the Unleavened Bread, which is called Passover, was getting near.
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for an effective way to get rid of him, because they were afraid of the people.
Then Satan entered into Judas, the one called Is·carʹi·ot, who was numbered among the Twelve,
and he went off and talked with the chief priests and temple captains about how to betray him to them.
They were delighted at this and agreed to give him silver money.
So he consented and began looking for a good opportunity to betray him to them without a crowd around.
The day of the Unleavened Bread now arrived, on which the Passover sacrifice must be offered;
so Jesus sent Peter and John, saying: “Go and get the Passover ready for us to eat.”
They said to him: “Where do you want us to get it ready?”
He said to them: “Look! When you enter into the city, a man carrying an earthenware water jar will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters.
And say to the landlord of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you: “Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’
And that man will show you a large, furnished upper room. Get it ready there.”
So they left and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared for the Passover.
So when the hour came, he reclined at the table along with the apostles.
And he said to them: “I have greatly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer;
for I tell you, I will not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.”
And accepting a cup, he gave thanks and said: “Take this and pass it from one to the other among yourselves,
for I tell you, from now on, I will not drink again from the product of the vine until the Kingdom of God comes.”
Also, he took a loaf, gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to them, saying: “This means my body, which is to be given in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
Also, he did the same with the cup after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be poured out in your behalf.
But look! the hand of my betrayer is with me at the table.
For, indeed, the Son of man is going his way according to what has been determined; all the same, woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!”
So they began to discuss among themselves which one of them could really be about to do this.
However, there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them was considered to be the greatest.
But he said to them: “The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those having authority over them are called Benefactors.
You, though, are not to be that way. But let the one who is the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the one taking the lead as the one ministering.
For which one is greater, the one dining or the one serving? Is it not the one dining? But I am among you as the one serving.
However, you are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials;
and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom,
so that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones to judge the 12 tribes of Israel.
Simon, Simon, look! Satan has demanded to have all of you to sift you as wheat.
But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”
Then he said to him: “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death.”
But he said: “I tell you, Peter, a rooster will not crow today until you have denied knowing me three times.”
He also said to them: “When I sent you out without a money bag and a food pouch and sandals, you did not lack anything, did you?” They said: “No!”
Then he said to them: “But now let the one who has a money bag take it, likewise a food pouch, and let the one who has no sword sell his outer garment and buy one.
For I tell you that what is written must be accomplished in me, namely, ‘He was counted with lawless ones.’ For this is being fulfilled concerning me.”
Then they said: “Lord, look! here are two swords.” He said to them: “It is enough.”
On leaving, he went as was his custom to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples also followed him.
On arriving at the place, he said to them: “Carry on prayer so that you do not enter into temptation.”
And he withdrew from them about a stone’s throw away, and he bent his knees and began to pray,
saying: “Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.”
Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly; and his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground.
When he rose from prayer and went to the disciples, he found them slumbering, exhausted from grief.
He said to them: “Why are you sleeping? Get up and keep praying, so that you do not enter into temptation.”
While he was still speaking, look! a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them, and he approached Jesus to kiss him.
But Jesus said to him: “Judas, are you betraying the Son of man with a kiss?”
When those around him saw what was going to happen, they said: “Lord, should we strike with the sword?”
One of them even struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his right ear.
But in reply Jesus said: “That is enough.” And he touched the ear and healed him.
Jesus then said to the chief priests and captains of the temple and elders who had come there for him: “Did you come out with swords and clubs as against a robber?
While I was with you in the temple day after day, you did not lay your hands on me. But this is your hour and the authority of darkness.”
Then they arrested him and led him off, and they brought him into the house of the high priest; but Peter was following at a distance.
When they lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter was sitting among them.
But a servant girl, seeing him sitting in the light of the fire, looked closely at him and said: “This man was also with him.”
But he denied it, saying: “I do not know him, woman.”
After a short time another person saw him and said: “You too are one of them.” But Peter said: “Man, I am not.”
And after about an hour had passed, another man began insisting strongly: “Certainly this man was also with him, for he is, in fact, a Gal·i·leʹan!”
But Peter said: “Man, I do not know what you are saying.” And instantly, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
At this the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter, and Peter recalled the statement of the Lord when he had said to him: “Before a rooster crows today, you will disown me three times.”
And he went outside and wept bitterly.
Now the men who held Jesus in custody began to mock him, hitting him;
and after covering his face, they kept asking: “Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?”
And they said many other blasphemous things against him.
And when it became day, the assembly of elders of the people, both chief priests and scribes, gathered together, and they led him into their Sanʹhe·drin hall and said:
If you are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them: “Even if I told you, you would not believe it at all.
Moreover, if I questioned you, you would not answer.
However, from now on the Son of man will be seated at the powerful right hand of God.”
At this they all said: “Are you, therefore, the Son of God?” He said to them: “You yourselves are saying that I am.”
They said: “Why do we need further testimony? For we ourselves have heard it out of his own mouth.”
Now all the tax collectors and the sinners kept gathering around him to hear him.
And both the Pharisees and the scribes kept muttering: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
Then he told them this illustration, saying:
What man among you with 100 sheep, on losing one of them, will not leave the 99 behind in the wilderness and go after the lost one until he finds it?
And when he has found it, he puts it on his shoulders and rejoices.
And when he gets home, he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.’
I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over 99 righteous ones who have no need of repentance.
Or what woman who has ten drachma coins, if she loses one of the drachmas, does not light a lamp and sweep her house and search carefully until she finds it?
And when she has found it, she calls her friends and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma coin that I had lost.’
In the same way, I tell you, joy arises among the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
Then he said: “A man had two sons.
And the younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the property that should come to me.’ So he divided his belongings between them.
A few days later, the younger son gathered all his things together and traveled to a distant country and there squandered his property by living a debauched life.
When he had spent everything, a severe famine occurred throughout that country, and he fell into need.
He even went and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to herd swine.
And he longed to be filled with the carob pods that the swine were eating, but no one would give him anything.
When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired men have more than enough bread, while I am dying here from hunger!
I will get up and travel to my father and say to him: “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.”’
So he got up and went to his father. While he was still a long way off, his father caught sight of him and was moved with pity, and he ran and embraced him and tenderly kissed him.
Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son.’
But the father said to his slaves, ‘Quick! bring out a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
Also bring the fattened calf, slaughter it, and let us eat and celebrate,
for this son of mine was dead but has come to life again; he was lost and has been found.’ And they started to enjoy themselves.
Now his older son was in the field, and as he returned and got near the house, he heard music and dancing.
So he called one of the servants to him and asked what was happening.
He said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father slaughtered the fattened calf because he got him back in good health.’
But he became angry and refused to go in. Then his father came out and began to plead with him.
In reply he said to his father, ‘Look! These many years I have slaved for you and never once did I disobey your orders, and yet you never once gave me a young goat to enjoy with my friends.
But as soon as this son of yours arrived who squandered your belongings with prostitutes, you slaughtered the fattened calf for him.’
Then he said to him, ‘My son, you have always been with me, and all the things that are mine are yours.
But we just had to celebrate and rejoice, for your brother was dead but has come to life; he was lost and has been found.’”
Then Jesus, full of holy spirit, turned away from the Jordan, and he was led about by the spirit in the wilderness
for 40 days, being tempted by the Devil. And he ate nothing in those days, so when they had ended, he felt hungry.
At this the Devil said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.”
But Jesus answered him: “It is written, ‘Man must not live on bread alone.’”
So he brought him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in an instant of time.
Then the Devil said to him: “I will give you all this authority and their glory, because it has been handed over to me, and I give it to whomever I wish.
If you, therefore, do an act of worship before me, it will all be yours.”
In reply Jesus said to him: “It is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
He then led him into Jerusalem and stationed him on the battlement of the temple and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down from here,
for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a command concerning you, to preserve you,’
and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, so that you may not strike your foot against a stone.’”
In answer Jesus said to him: “It is said, ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
So the Devil, having finished all the temptation, departed from him until another convenient time.
Now Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galilee. And good reports about him spread throughout all the surrounding country.
Also, he began to teach in their synagogues, and he was held in honor by all.
He then went to Nazret, where he had been brought up, and according to his custom on the Sabbath day, he entered the synagogue and stood up to read.
So the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him, and he opened the scroll and found the place where it was written:
Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor. He sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the crushed ones away free,
to preach Jehovah’s acceptable year.”
With that he rolled up the scroll, handed it back to the attendant, and sat down; and the eyes of all in the synagogue were intently fixed on him.
Then he began to say to them: “Today this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled.”
And they all began to give favorable witness about him and to be amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth, and they were saying: “This is a son of Joseph, is it not?”
At this he said to them: “No doubt you will apply this saying to me, ‘Physician, cure yourself. Do also here in your home territory the things we have heard were done in Ca·perʹna·um.’”
So he said: “Truly I tell you that no prophet is accepted in his home territory.
For instance, I tell you in truth: There were many widows in Israel in the days of E·liʹjah when heaven was shut up for three years and six months, and a great famine came on all the land.
Yet E·liʹjah was sent to none of those women, but only to a widow in Zarʹe·phath in the land of Siʹdon.
Also, there were many lepers in Israel in the time of E·liʹsha the prophet; yet not one of them was cleansed, only Naʹa·man the Syrian.”
Now all those hearing these things in the synagogue became filled with anger,
and they rose up and rushed him outside the city, and they led him to the brow of the mountain on which their city had been built, in order to throw him down headlong.
But he went right through their midst and continued on his way.
He then went down to Ca·perʹna·um, a city of Galilee. And he was teaching them on the Sabbath,
and they were astounded at his way of teaching, because he spoke with authority.
Now in the synagogue there was a man with a spirit, an unclean demon, and he shouted with a loud voice:
Ah! What have we to do with you, Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God.”
But Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent, and come out of him.” So after throwing the man down in their midst, the demon came out of him without hurting him.
At this they were all astonished and began to say to one another: “What kind of speech is this? For with authority and power he orders the unclean spirits, and out they come!”
So the news about him kept spreading into every corner of the surrounding country.
After leaving the synagogue, he entered into Simon’s home. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering with a high fever, and they asked him to help her.
So he stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. Instantly she got up and began ministering to them.
But when the sun was setting, all those who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him. By laying his hands on each one of them, he cured them.
Demons also came out of many, crying out and saying: “You are the Son of God.” But rebuking them, he would not permit them to speak, for they knew him to be the Christ.
However, at daybreak he departed and went to an isolated place. But the crowds began searching for him and came to where he was, and they tried to keep him from going away from them.
But he said to them: “I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.”
So he went on preaching in the synagogues of Ju·deʹa.
On one of the days while he was teaching the people in the temple and declaring the good news, the chief priests and the scribes with the elders came
and said to him: “Tell us, by what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority?”
He replied to them: “I will also ask you a question, and you tell me:
Was the baptism of John from heaven or from men?”
Then they drew conclusions among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
But if we say, ‘From men,’ the people one and all will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
So they replied that they did not know its source.
Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling you by what authority I do these things.”
Then he began to tell the people this illustration: “A man planted a vineyard and leased it to cultivators, and he traveled abroad for a considerable time.
In due season he sent a slave to the cultivators so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. The cultivators, however, sent him away empty-handed, after beating him.
But again he sent another slave. That one also they beat and humiliated and sent away empty-handed.
Yet again he sent a third; this one also they wounded and threw out.
At this the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What should I do? I will send my son, the beloved. They will likely respect this one.’
When the cultivators caught sight of him, they reasoned with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him so that the inheritance may become ours.’
So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What, then, will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and kill these cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.” On hearing this, they said: “Never may that happen!”
But he looked straight at them and said: “What, then, does this mean where it is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?
Everyone falling on that stone will be shattered. As for anyone on whom it falls, it will crush him.”
The scribes and the chief priests then sought to get their hands on him in that very hour, but they feared the people, for they realized that he told this illustration with them in mind.
And after observing him closely, they sent men whom they had secretly hired to pretend that they were righteous in order to catch him in his speech, so as to turn him over to the government and to the authority of the governor.
And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know you speak and teach correctly and show no partiality, but you teach the way of God in line with truth:
Is it lawful for us to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
But he detected their cunning and said to them:
Show me a de·narʹi·us. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said: “Caesar’s.”
He said to them: “By all means, then, pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar but God’s things to God.”
Well, they were not able to trap him in his speech before the people, but amazed at his answer, they became silent.
However, some of the Sadducees, those who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:
Teacher, Moses wrote us, ‘If a man’s brother dies, leaving a wife, but he was childless, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’
Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife but died childless.
So the second
and the third married her. Likewise even all seven; they died and left no children.
Finally the woman also died.
Consequently, in the resurrection, whose wife will she become? For the seven had her as a wife.”
Jesus said to them: “The children of this system of things marry and are given in marriage,
but those who have been counted worthy of gaining that system of things and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.
In fact, neither can they die anymore, for they are like the angels, and they are God’s children by being children of the resurrection.
But that the dead are raised up, even Moses made known in the account about the thornbush, when he calls Jehovah ‘the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob.’
He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living, for they are all living to him.”
In response some of the scribes said: “Teacher, you spoke well.”
For they no longer had the courage to ask him a single question.
In turn he asked them: “How is it they say that the Christ is David’s son?
For David himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
David, therefore, calls him Lord; so how is he his son?”
Then, while all the people were listening, he said to his disciples:
Beware of the scribes who like to walk around in robes and who love greetings in the marketplaces and front seats in the synagogues and the most prominent places at evening meals,
and who devour the houses of the widows and for show make long prayers. These will receive a more severe judgment.”
In the meantime, when a crowd of so many thousands had gathered together that they were stepping on one another, he started by saying first to his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
But there is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not become known.
Therefore, whatever you say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
Moreover, I say to you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more.
But I will show you whom to fear: Fear the One who after killing has authority to throw into Ge·henʹna. Yes, I tell you, fear this One.
Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.
I say to you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of man will also acknowledge him before the angels of God.
But whoever disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of God.
And everyone who says a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
When they bring you in before public assemblies, government officials, and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what you will speak in defense or what you will say,
for the holy spirit will teach you in that very hour the things you should say.”
Then someone in the crowd said to him: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
He said to him: “Man, who appointed me judge or arbitrator between you two?”
Then he said to them: “Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of greed, because even when a person has an abundance, his life does not result from the things he possesses.”
With that he told them an illustration, saying: “The land of a rich man produced well.
So he began reasoning within himself, ‘What should I do now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’
Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my goods,
and I will say to myself: “You have many good things stored up for many years; take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your life from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’
So it goes with the man who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
Then he said to his disciples: “That is why I say to you, stop being anxious about your lives as to what you will eat or about your bodies as to what you will wear.
For the life is worth more than food and the body more than clothing.
Consider the ravens: They neither sow seed nor reap; they have neither barn nor storehouse; yet God feeds them. Are you not worth much more than birds?
Who of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his life span?
If, therefore, you cannot do such a small thing, why be anxious about the remaining things?
Consider how the lilies grow: They neither toil nor spin; but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation in the field that today exists and tomorrow is cast into an oven, how much more will he clothe you, you with little faith!
So stop seeking what you will eat and what you will drink, and stop being in anxious suspense;
for all these are the things the nations of the world are eagerly pursuing, but your Father knows you need these things.
Instead, keep seeking his Kingdom, and these things will be added to you.
Have no fear, little flock, for your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.
Sell your belongings and give gifts of mercy. Make money pouches that do not wear out, a never-failing treasure in the heavens, where no thief gets near and no moth consumes.
For where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.
Be dressed and ready and have your lamps burning,
and you should be like men waiting for their master to return from the marriage, so when he comes and knocks, they may at once open to him.
Happy are those slaves whom the master on coming finds watching! Truly I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at the table and will come alongside and minister to them.
And if he comes in the second watch, even if in the third, and finds them ready, happy are they!
But know this, if the householder had known at what hour the thief would come, he would not have let his house be broken into.
You also, keep ready, because at an hour that you do not think likely, the Son of man is coming.”
Then Peter said: “Lord, are you telling this illustration just to us or also to everyone?”
And the Lord said: “Who really is the faithful steward, the discreet one, whom his master will appoint over his body of attendants to keep giving them their measure of food supplies at the proper time?
Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so!
I tell you truthfully, he will appoint him over all his belongings.
But if ever that slave should say in his heart, ‘My master delays coming,’ and starts to beat the male and female servants and to eat and drink and get drunk,
the master of that slave will come on a day that he is not expecting him and at an hour that he does not know, and he will punish him with the greatest severity and assign him a part with the unfaithful ones.
Then that slave who understood the will of his master but did not get ready or do what he asked will be beaten with many strokes.
But the one who did not understand and yet did things deserving of strokes will be beaten with few. Indeed, everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him, and the one who was put in charge of much will have more than usual demanded of him.
I came to start a fire on the earth, and what more is there for me to wish if it has already been lit?
Indeed, I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and how I am distressed until it is finished!
Do you think I came to give peace on the earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.
For from now on there will be five in one house divided, three against two and two against three.
They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
Then he also said to the crowds: “When you see a cloud rising in the west, at once you say, ‘A storm is coming,’ and it happens.
And when you see that a south wind is blowing, you say, ‘There will be a heat wave,’ and it occurs.
Hypocrites, you know how to examine the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to examine this particular time?
Why do you not judge also for yourselves what is righteous?
For example, when you are going with your legal opponent to a ruler, while on the way, get to work to settle the dispute with him so that he may not summon you before the judge, and the judge deliver you to the court officer, and the court officer throw you into prison.
I tell you, you will certainly not get out of there until you pay over your last small coin.”
Then he went on to tell them an illustration about the need for them always to pray and not to give up,
saying: “In a certain city there was a judge who had no fear of God and no respect for man.
There was also a widow in that city who kept going to him and saying, ‘See that I get justice from my legal opponent.’
Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although I do not fear God or respect any man,
because this widow keeps making me trouble, I will see that she gets justice so that she will not keep coming and wearing me out with her demand.’”
Then the Lord said: “Hear what the judge, although unrighteous, said!
Certainly, then, will not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, while he is patient toward them?
I tell you, he will cause justice to be done to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man arrives, will he really find this faith on the earth?”
He also told this illustration to some who trusted in their own righteousness and who considered others as nothing:
“Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
The Pharisee stood and began to pray these things to himself, ‘O God, I thank you that I am not like everyone else—extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice a week; I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’
But the tax collector, standing at a distance, was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward but kept beating his chest, saying, ‘O God, be gracious to me, a sinner.’
I tell you, this man went down to his home and was proved more righteous than that Pharisee. Because everyone who exalts himself will be humiliated, but whoever humbles himself will be exalted.”
Now people were also bringing him their infants for him to touch them, but on seeing this, the disciples began to reprimand them.
However, Jesus called the infants to him, saying: “Let the young children come to me, and do not try to stop them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such ones.
Truly I say to you, whoever does not receive the Kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
And one of the rulers questioned him, saying: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.
You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor your father and your mother.’”
Then he said: “All of these I have kept from youth on.”
After hearing that, Jesus said to him, “There is still one thing lacking about you: Sell all the things you have and distribute the proceeds to the poor, and you will have treasure in the heavens; and come be my follower.”
When he heard this, he became deeply grieved, for he was very rich.
Jesus looked at him and said: “How difficult it will be for those having money to make their way into the Kingdom of God!
It is easier, in fact, for a camel to get through the eye of a sewing needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God.”
Those who heard this said: “Who possibly can be saved?”
He said: “The things impossible with men are possible with God.”
But Peter said: “Look! We have left what was ours and followed you.”
He said to them: “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God
who will not get many times more in this period of time, and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.”
Then he took the Twelve aside and said to them: “Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by means of the prophets about the Son of man will be accomplished.
For instance, he will be handed over to men of the nations and will be mocked and treated insolently and spat on.
And after scourging him, they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.”
However, they did not get the meaning of any of these things, for these words were hidden from them, and they did not understand the things said.
Now as Jesus was getting near to Jerʹi·cho, a blind man was sitting beside the road begging.
Because he heard a crowd passing by, he began to inquire what was going on.
They reported to him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ is passing by!”
At that he cried out: “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
And those who were in front began rebuking him, telling him to keep quiet, but all the more he kept shouting: “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
Then Jesus stopped and commanded that the man be brought to him. After he came near, Jesus asked him:
What do you want me to do for you?” He said: “Lord, let me recover my sight.”
So Jesus said to him: “Recover your sight; your faith has made you well.”
And instantly he recovered his sight, and he began to follow him, glorifying God. Also, at seeing it, all the people gave praise to God.
So the multitude got up, one and all, and led him to Pilate.
Then they began to accuse him, saying: “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar, and saying he himself is Christ a king.”
Now Pilate asked him the question: “Are you the King of the Jews?” In answer he said: “You yourself are saying it.”
Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds: “I find no crime in this man.”
But they insisted, saying: “He stirs up the people by teaching throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galilee even to here.”
On hearing that, Pilate asked whether the man was a Gal·i·leʹan.
After ascertaining that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him on to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem in those days.
When Herod saw Jesus, he rejoiced greatly. For a considerable time he had been wanting to see Jesus because he had heard much about him, and he was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
So he began to question him at length, but he gave him no answer.
However, the chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing him.
Then Herod together with his soldiers treated him with contempt, and he mocked him by clothing him with a splendid garment and then sent him back to Pilate.
Herod and Pilate became friends with each other on that very day, for before that they had been at enmity with each other.
Pilate then called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people
and said to them: “You brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt. Now look! I examined him in front of you but found in this man no grounds for the charges you are bringing against him.
In fact, neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us, and look! he has done nothing deserving of death.
I will therefore punish him and release him.”
But the whole crowd shouted out: “Do away with this man, and release Bar·abʹbas to us!”
This man had been thrown into prison for sedition that had occurred in the city and for murder.)
Again Pilate called out to them, because he wanted to release Jesus.
Then they began to yell, saying: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!”
The third time he said to them: “Why? What bad thing did this man do? I found in him nothing deserving of death; I will therefore punish him and release him.”
At this they became insistent, demanding with loud voices that he be executed, and their voices prevailed.
So Pilate made the decision that their demand be met.
He released the man whom they were demanding, who had been thrown into prison for sedition and murder, but he surrendered Jesus to their will.
Now as they led him away, they seized a certain Simon of Cy·reʹne, who was coming from the countryside, and they placed the torture stake on him to carry it behind Jesus.
A large number of people were following him, including women who kept beating themselves in grief and wailing for him.
Jesus turned to the women and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, stop weeping for me. Weep instead for yourselves and for your children;
for look! days are coming when people will say, ‘Happy are the barren women, the wombs that did not give birth and the breasts that did not nurse!’
Then they will start saying to the mountains, ‘Fall over us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us over!’
If they do these things when the tree is moist, what will occur when it is withered?”
Two other men, criminals, were also being led off to be executed with him.
And when they got to the place called Skull, they nailed him to the stake there alongside the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
But Jesus was saying: “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” Furthermore, they cast lots to distribute his garments.
And the people stood looking on. But the rulers were sneering and saying: “Others he saved; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
Even the soldiers mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine
and saying: “If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself.”
There was also an inscription over him: “This is the King of the Jews.”
Then one of the criminals hanging there began to speak abusively to him, saying: “You are the Christ, are you not? Save yourself and us too!”
In response the other rebuked him, saying: “Do you not fear God at all, now that you have received the same judgment?
And we rightly so, for we are getting back what we deserve for the things we did; but this man did nothing wrong.”
Then he said: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your Kingdom.”
And he said to him: “Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.”
Well, by now it was about the sixth hour, and yet a darkness fell over all the land until the ninth hour,
because the sunlight failed; then the curtain of the sanctuary was torn down the middle.
And Jesus called out with a loud voice and said: “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.” After he said this, he expired.
Because of seeing what occurred, the army officer began to glorify God, saying: “Truly, this man was righteous.”
And when all the crowds that were gathered together there for this spectacle saw the things that occurred, they returned home, beating their chests.
And all those acquainted with him were standing at a distance. Also, women who had accompanied him from Galilee were there and saw these things.
And look! there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, who was a good and righteous man.
(This man had not voted in support of their scheme and action.) He was from Ar·i·ma·theʹa, a city of the Ju·deʹans, and was waiting for the Kingdom of God.
This man went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
And he took it down and wrapped it up in fine linen, and he laid it in a tomb carved in the rock, where no man had yet lain.
Now it was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was about to begin.
But the women who had come with him from Galilee followed along and took a look at the tomb and saw how his body was laid,
and they went back to prepare spices and perfumed oils. But, of course, they rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment.
Now on a sabbath he was passing through grainfields, and his disciples were plucking and eating the heads of grain, rubbing them with their hands.
At this some of the Pharisees said: “Why are you doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
But in reply Jesus said to them: “Have you never read what David did when he and the men with him were hungry?
How he entered into the house of God and received the loaves of presentation and ate and gave some to the men with him, which it is not lawful for anyone to eat but for the priests only?”
Then he said to them: “The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
On another sabbath he entered the synagogue and began teaching. And a man was there whose right hand was withered.
The scribes and the Pharisees were now watching Jesus closely to see whether he would cure on the Sabbath, in order to find some way to accuse him.
He, however, knew their reasoning, so he said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and stand in the center.” And he rose and stood there.
Then Jesus said to them: “I ask you men, Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to destroy it?”
After looking around at them all, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was restored.
But they flew into a senseless rage, and they began to talk over with one another what they might do to Jesus.
On one of those days he went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer to God.
And when it became day, he called his disciples to him and chose from among them 12, whom he also named apostles:
Simon, whom he also named Peter, Andrew his brother, James, John, Philip, Bar·tholʹo·mew,
Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, Simon who is called “the zealous one,”
Judas the son of James, and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who turned traitor.
And he came down with them and stood on a level place, and there was a large crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all Ju·deʹa and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Siʹdon, who came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
Even those troubled with unclean spirits were cured.
And all the crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and healing them all.
And he looked up at his disciples and began to say: “Happy are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.
Happy are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. “Happy are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
Happy are you whenever men hate you, and when they exclude you and reproach you and denounce your name as wicked for the sake of the Son of man.
Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for look! your reward is great in heaven, for those are the same things their forefathers used to do to the prophets.
But woe to you who are rich, for you are having your consolation in full.
Woe to you who are filled up now, for you will go hungry. “Woe, you who are laughing now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe whenever all men speak well of you, for this is what their forefathers did to the false prophets.
But I say to you who are listening: Continue to love your enemies, to do good to those hating you,
to bless those cursing you, to pray for those who are insulting you.
To him who strikes you on the one cheek, offer the other also; and from him who takes away your outer garment, do not withhold the inner garment either.
Give to everyone asking you, and from the one taking your things away, do not ask them back.
Also, just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them.
If you love those loving you, of what credit is it to you? For even the sinners love those loving them.
And if you do good to those doing good to you, of what credit is it to you? Even the sinners do the same.
Also, if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, of what credit is it to you? Even sinners lend to sinners so that they may get back as much.
On the contrary, continue to love your enemies and to do good and to lend without hoping for anything back; and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind toward the unthankful and wicked.
Continue being merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
Moreover, stop judging, and you will by no means be judged; and stop condemning, and you will by no means be condemned. Keep on forgiving, and you will be forgiven.
Practice giving, and people will give to you. They will pour into your laps a fine measure, pressed down, shaken together, and overflowing. For with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you in return.”
Then he also told them an illustration: “A blind man cannot guide a blind man, can he? Both will fall into a pit, will they not?
A student is not above his teacher, but everyone who is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.
Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye but do not notice the rafter in your own eye?
How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, allow me to remove the straw that is in your eye,’ while you yourself do not see the rafter in your own eye? Hypocrite! First remove the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to remove the straw that is in your brother’s eye.
For no fine tree produces rotten fruit, and no rotten tree produces fine fruit.
For each tree is known by its own fruit. For example, people do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they cut grapes off a thornbush.
A good man brings good out of the good treasure of his heart, but a wicked man brings what is wicked out of his wicked treasure; for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.
Why, then, do you call me ‘Lord! Lord!’ but do not do the things I say?
Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will show you whom he is like:
He is like a man who in building a house dug and went down deep and laid a foundation on the rock. Consequently, when a flood came, the river dashed against that house but was not strong enough to shake it, for it was well-built.
On the other hand, whoever hears and does nothing is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. The river dashed against it, and immediately it collapsed, and the ruin of that house was great.”
Shortly afterward he traveled from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with him,
as were certain women who had been cured of wicked spirits and sicknesses: Mary who was called Magʹda·lene, from whom seven demons had come out;
Jo·anʹna the wife of Chuʹza, Herod’s man in charge; Su·sanʹna; and many other women, who were ministering to them from their belongings.
Now when a large crowd had gathered together with those who went to him from city to city, he spoke by means of an illustration:
A sower went out to sow his seed. As he was sowing, some of them fell alongside the road and were trampled on, and the birds of heaven ate them up.
Some landed on the rock, and after sprouting, they dried up because they had no moisture.
Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with them choked them.
But others fell on the good soil, and after sprouting, they produced 100 times more fruit.” As he said these things, he called out: “Let the one who has ears to listen, listen.”
But his disciples asked him what this illustration meant.
He said: “To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the Kingdom of God, but for the rest it is in illustrations so that, though looking, they may look in vain, and though hearing, they may not get the sense.
Now the illustration means this: The seed is the word of God.
Those alongside the road are the ones who have heard, and then the Devil comes and takes the word away from their hearts so that they may not believe and be saved.
Those on the rock are the ones who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy, but these have no root. They believe for a while, but in a season of testing, they fall away.
As for that which fell among the thorns, these are the ones who have heard, but by being carried away by anxieties, riches, and pleasures of this life, they are completely choked and bring nothing to maturity.
As for that on the fine soil, these are the ones who, after hearing the word with a fine and good heart, retain it and bear fruit with endurance.
No one after lighting a lamp covers it with a vessel or puts it underneath a bed, but he puts it on a lampstand so that those who come in may see the light.
For there is nothing hidden that will not become manifest, nor anything carefully concealed that will never become known and not come out in the open.
Therefore, pay attention to how you listen, for whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him.”
Now his mother and brothers came to him, but they were unable to get near him because of the crowd.
So it was reported to him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
In reply he said to them: “My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.”
One day he and his disciples got into a boat, and he said to them: “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So they set sail.
But as they were sailing along, he fell asleep. And a violent windstorm descended on the lake, and their boat began to fill up with water and to be in danger.
So they went and woke him up, saying: “Instructor, Instructor, we are about to perish!” With that he got up and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they subsided, and a calm set in.
Then he said to them: “Where is your faith?” But they were filled with fear and were astounded, saying to one another: “Who really is this? For he orders even the winds and the water, and they obey him.”
And they put in to shore in the region of the Gerʹa·senes, which is on the side opposite Galilee.
As Jesus got out onto land, a demon-possessed man from the city met him. For a considerable time he had not worn clothing, and he was staying, not in a house, but among the tombs.
At the sight of Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him, and with a loud voice, he said: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.”
For Jesus had been ordering the unclean spirit to come out of the man. It had seized him on many occasions, and he was repeatedly bound with chains and fetters and kept under guard, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the isolated places.)
Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” He said: “Legion,” for many demons had entered into him.
And they kept pleading with him not to order them to go away into the abyss.
Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the mountain, so they pleaded with him to permit them to enter into the swine, and he gave them permission.
With that the demons came out of the man and went into the swine, and the herd rushed over the precipice into the lake and drowned.
But when the herders saw what had happened, they fled and reported it in the city and in the countryside.
Then people went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had come out, clothed and in his right mind, sitting at the feet of Jesus, and they grew fearful.
Those who had seen it reported to them how the demon-possessed man had been made well.
Then a great number from the surrounding region of the Gerʹa·senes asked Jesus to go away from them, because they were gripped by great fear. Then he went aboard the boat to depart.
However, the man from whom the demons had gone out kept begging to continue with him, but he sent the man away, saying:
Go back home, and keep on relating what God did for you.” So he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole city what Jesus had done for him.
When Jesus returned, the crowd received him kindly, for they were all expecting him.
But look! a man named Jaʹi·rus came; this man was a presiding officer of the synagogue. And he fell at the feet of Jesus and began to plead with him to come to his house,
because his only daughter, who was about 12 years old, was dying. As Jesus was going, the crowds pressed in on him.
Now there was a woman who had a flow of blood for 12 years, and she had not been able to get a cure from anyone.
She approached from behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment, and immediately her flow of blood stopped.
So Jesus said: “Who touched me?” When they were all denying it, Peter said: “Instructor, the crowds are hemming you in and pressing against you.”
But Jesus said: “Someone touched me, for I know that power went out of me.”
Seeing that she had not escaped notice, the woman came trembling and fell down before him and declared before all the people why she touched him and how she was healed immediately.
But he said to her: “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace.”
While he was yet speaking, a representative of the presiding officer of the synagogue came, saying: “Your daughter has died; do not bother the Teacher any longer.”
On hearing this, Jesus answered him: “Have no fear, only have faith, and she will be saved.”
When he reached the house, he did not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John, James, and the girl’s father and mother.
But people were all weeping and beating themselves in grief for her. So he said: “Stop weeping, for she did not die but is sleeping.”
At this they began to laugh at him scornfully, because they knew she had died.
But he took her by the hand and called to her: “Child, get up!”
And her spirit returned, and she rose immediately, and he ordered that something be given her to eat.
Well, her parents were beside themselves, but he instructed them to tell no one what had happened.
Jesus spoke these things, and raising his eyes to heaven, he said: “Father, the hour has come. Glorify your son so that your son may glorify you,
just as you have given him authority over all flesh, so that he may give everlasting life to all those whom you have given to him.
This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do.
So now, Father, glorify me at your side with the glory that I had alongside you before the world was.
I have made your name manifest to the men whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have observed your word.
Now they have come to know that all the things you gave me are from you;
because I have given them the sayings that you gave me, and they have accepted them and have certainly come to know that I came as your representative, and they have believed that you sent me.
I make request concerning them; I make request, not concerning the world, but concerning those whom you have given me, because they are yours;
and all my things are yours and yours are mine, and I have been glorified among them.
I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me, so that they may be one just as we are one.
When I was with them, I used to watch over them on account of your own name, which you have given me; and I have protected them, and not one of them is destroyed except the son of destruction, so that the scripture might be fulfilled.
But now I am coming to you, and I am saying these things in the world, so that they may have my joy made complete in themselves.
I have given your word to them, but the world has hated them, because they are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
I do not request that you take them out of the world, but that you watch over them because of the wicked one.
They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
Sanctify them by means of the truth; your word is truth.
Just as you sent me into the world, I also sent them into the world.
And I am sanctifying myself in their behalf, so that they also may be sanctified by means of truth.
I make request, not concerning these only, but also concerning those putting faith in me through their word,
so that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, so that the world may believe that you sent me.
I have given them the glory that you have given me, in order that they may be one just as we are one.
I in union with them and you in union with me, in order that they may be perfected into one, so that the world may know that you sent me and that you loved them just as you loved me.
Father, I want those whom you have given me to be with me where I am, in order that they may look upon my glory that you have given me, because you loved me before the founding of the world.
Righteous Father, the world has, indeed, not come to know you, but I know you, and these have come to know that you sent me.
I have made your name known to them and will make it known, so that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in union with them.”
Pilate then took Jesus and scourged him.
And the soldiers braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head and clothed him with a purple robe,
and they kept coming up to him and saying: “Greetings, you King of the Jews!” They also kept slapping him in the face.
Pilate went outside again and said to them: “See! I bring him outside to you in order for you to know that I find no fault in him.”
So Jesus came outside, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them: “Look! The man!”
However, when the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted: “To the stake with him! To the stake with him!” Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and execute him, for I do not find any fault in him.”
The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he made himself God’s son.”
When Pilate heard what they were saying, he became even more fearful,
and he entered the governor’s residence again and said to Jesus: “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer.
So Pilate said to him: “Are you refusing to speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and I have authority to execute you?”
Jesus answered him: “You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been granted to you from above. This is why the man who handed me over to you has greater sin.”
For this reason Pilate kept trying to find a way to release him, but the Jews shouted: “If you release this man, you are not a friend of Caesar. Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar.”
Then Pilate, after hearing these words, brought Jesus outside, and he sat down on a judgment seat in a place called the Stone Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabʹba·tha.
Now it was the day of Preparation of the Passover; it was about the sixth hour. And he said to the Jews: “See! Your king!”
However, they shouted: “Take him away! Take him away! To the stake with him!” Pilate said to them: “Shall I execute your king?” The chief priests answered: “We have no king but Caesar.”
Then he handed him over to them to be executed on the stake. So they took charge of Jesus.
Bearing the torture stake for himself, he went out to the so-called Skull Place, which is called Golʹgo·tha in Hebrew.
There they nailed him to the stake alongside two other men, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
Pilate also wrote a title and put it on the torture stake. It was written: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ the King of the Jews.”
Many of the Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was nailed to the stake was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
However, the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate: “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am King of the Jews.’”
Pilate answered: “What I have written, I have written.”
Now when the soldiers had nailed Jesus to the stake, they took his outer garments and divided them into four parts, one for each soldier, and they also took the inner garment. But the inner garment was without a seam, being woven from top to bottom.
So they said to one another: “Let us not tear it, but let us cast lots over it to decide whose it will be.” This was to fulfill the scripture: “They divided my garments among themselves, and they cast lots for my clothing.” So the soldiers actually did these things.
By the torture stake of Jesus, however, there were standing his mother and his mother’s sister; Mary the wife of Cloʹpas and Mary Magʹda·lene.
So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother: “Woman, see! Your son!”
Next he said to the disciple: “See! Your mother!” And from that hour on, the disciple took her into his own home.
After this, when Jesus knew that by now all things had been accomplished, in order to fulfill the scripture he said: “I am thirsty.”
A jar was sitting there full of sour wine. So they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop stalk and held it up to his mouth.
When he had received the sour wine, Jesus said: “It has been accomplished!” and bowing his head, he gave up his spirit.
Since it was the day of Preparation, so that the bodies would not remain on the torture stakes on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath day was a great one), the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies taken away.
So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man and those of the other man who was on a stake alongside him.
But on coming to Jesus, they saw that he was already dead, so they did not break his legs.
But one of the soldiers jabbed his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
And the one who has seen it has given this witness, and his witness is true, and he knows that what he says is true, so that you also may believe.
In fact, these things took place for the scripture to be fulfilled: “Not a bone of his will be broken.”
And again, a different scripture says: “They will look to the one whom they pierced.”
Now after these things, Joseph of Ar·i·ma·theʹa, who was a disciple of Jesus but a secret one because of his fear of the Jews, asked Pilate if he could take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him permission. So he came and took the body away.
Nic·o·deʹmus, the man who had come to him in the night the first time, also came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes weighing about a hundred pounds.
So they took the body of Jesus and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, according to the burial custom of the Jews.
Incidentally, there was a garden at the place where he was executed, and in the garden was a new tomb in which no one had ever yet been laid.
Because it was the day of Preparation of the Jews and the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.
Now a man named Lazʹa·rus was sick; he was from Bethʹa·ny, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
This was the Mary who poured perfumed oil on the Lord and wiped his feet dry with her hair; it was her brother Lazʹa·rus who was sick.
So his sisters sent a message to him, saying: “Lord, see! the one you have affection for is sick.”
But when Jesus heard it, he said: “This sickness is not meant to end in death, but is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazʹa·rus.
However, when he heard that Lazʹa·rus was sick, he actually remained in the place where he was for two more days.
Then after this he said to the disciples: “Let us go into Ju·deʹa again.”
The disciples said to him: “Rabbi, just lately the Ju·deʹans were seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?”
Jesus answered: “There are 12 hours of daylight, are there not? If anyone walks in daylight, he does not stumble into anything, because he sees the light of this world.
But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.”
After he said these things, he added: “Lazʹa·rus our friend has fallen asleep, but I am traveling there to awaken him.”
The disciples then said to him: “Lord, if he is sleeping, he will get well.”
Jesus, however, had spoken about his death. But they imagined he was speaking about taking rest in sleep.
Then Jesus said to them plainly: “Lazʹa·rus has died,
and I rejoice for your sake that I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
So Thomas, who was called the Twin, said to his fellow disciples: “Let us also go, so that we may die with him.”
When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazʹa·rus had already been in the tomb for four days.
Now Bethʹa·ny was near Jerusalem, about two miles away.
And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them concerning their brother.
When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary kept sitting at home.
Martha then said to Jesus: Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
Yet even now I know that whatever you ask God for, God will give you.”
Jesus said to her: Your brother will rise.”
Martha said to him: I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.”
Jesus said to her: I am the resurrection and the life. The one who exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life;
and everyone who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all. Do you believe this?”
She said to him: Yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.”
When she had said this, she went off and called Mary her sister, saying privately: “The Teacher is here and is calling you.”
On hearing this, she got up quickly and went to him.
Jesus had not yet come into the village, but he was still in the place where Martha had met him.
When the Jews who were with Mary in the house consoling her saw her get up quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
When Mary arrived where Jesus was and caught sight of him, she fell at his feet and said to him: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.”
When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come with her weeping, he groaned within himself and became troubled.
He said: “Where have you laid him?” They said to him: “Lord, come and see.”
Jesus gave way to tears.
At that the Jews began to say: “See, what affection he had for him!”
But some of them said: “Could not this man who opened the eyes of the blind man prevent this one from dying?”
Then Jesus, after groaning again within himself, came to the tomb. It was, in fact, a cave, and a stone was lying against it.
Jesus said: “Take the stone away.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to him: “Lord, by now he must smell, for it has been four days.”
Jesus said to her: “Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?”
So they took the stone away. Then Jesus raised his eyes heavenward and said: “Father, I thank you that you have heard me.
True, I knew that you always hear me; but I spoke on account of the crowd standing around, so that they may believe that you sent me.”
When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice: “Lazʹa·rus, come out!”
The man who had been dead came out with his feet and hands bound with wrappings, and his face was wrapped with a cloth. Jesus said to them: “Free him and let him go.”
Therefore, many of the Jews who had come to Mary and who saw what he did put faith in him,
but some of them went off to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
So the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered the Sanʹhe·drin together and said: “What are we to do, for this man performs many signs?
If we let him go on this way, they will all put faith in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.”
But one of them, Caʹia·phas, who was high priest that year, said to them: “You do not know anything at all,
and you have not reasoned that it is to your benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people rather than for the whole nation to be destroyed.”
He did not say this, however, of his own originality, but because he was high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was to die for the nation,
and not only for the nation but also to gather together into one the children of God who were scattered about.
So from that day on they conspired to kill him.
Therefore, Jesus no longer walked about publicly among the Jews, but he departed from there to the region near the wilderness, to a city called Eʹphra·im, and he stayed there with the disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many people from the countryside went up to Jerusalem before the Passover to cleanse themselves ceremonially.
They were looking for Jesus, and they were saying to one another as they stood around in the temple: “What is your opinion? That he will not come to the festival at all?”
But the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone got to know where Jesus was, he should report it, so that they could seize him.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god.
This one was in the beginning with God.
All things came into existence through him, and apart from him not even one thing came into existence. What has come into existence
by means of him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light is shining in the darkness, but the darkness has not overpowered it.
There came a man who was sent as a representative of God; his name was John.
This man came as a witness, in order to bear witness about the light, so that people of all sorts might believe through him.
He was not that light, but he was meant to bear witness about that light.
The true light that gives light to every sort of man was about to come into the world.
He was in the world, and the world came into existence through him, but the world did not know him.
He came to his own home, but his own people did not accept him.
However, to all who did receive him, he gave authority to become God’s children, because they were exercising faith in his name.
And they were born, not from blood or from a fleshly will or from man’s will, but from God.
So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor and truth.
John bore witness about him, yes, he cried out: “This was the one of whom I said, ‘The one coming behind me has advanced in front of me, for he existed before me.’”)
For we all received from his fullness, even undeserved kindness upon undeserved kindness.
Because the Law was given through Moses, the undeserved kindness and the truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
No man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten god who is at the Father’s side is the one who has explained Him.
This is the witness John gave when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him: “Who are you?”
And he admitted it and did not deny it, saying: “I am not the Christ.”
And they asked him: “What, then? Are you E·liʹjah?” He replied: “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered: “No!”
So they said to him: “Who are you? Tell us so that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
He said: “I am a voice of someone crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make the way of Jehovah straight,’ just as Isaiah the prophet said.”
Now those sent were from the Pharisees.
So they questioned him and said to him: “Why, then, do you baptize if you are not the Christ or E·liʹjah or the Prophet?”
John answered them: “I baptize in water. One is standing among you whom you do not know,
the one coming behind me, the lace of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.”
These things took place in Bethʹa·ny across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day he saw Jesus coming toward him, and he said: “See, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
This is the one about whom I said: ‘Behind me there comes a man who has advanced in front of me, for he existed before me.’
Even I did not know him, but the reason why I came baptizing in water was so that he might be made manifest to Israel.”
John also bore witness, saying: “I viewed the spirit coming down as a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon him.
Even I did not know him, but the very One who sent me to baptize in water said to me: ‘Whoever it is upon whom you see the spirit coming down and remaining, this is the one who baptizes in holy spirit.’
And I have seen it, and I have given witness that this one is the Son of God.”
Again the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples,
and as he looked at Jesus walking, he said: “See, the Lamb of God!”
When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
Then Jesus turned, and seeing them following, he said to them: “What are you looking for?” They said to him: “Rabbi (which means, when translated, “Teacher”), where are you staying?”
He said to them: “Come, and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day; it was about the tenth hour.
Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard what John said and followed Jesus.
He first found his own brother Simon and said to him: “We have found the Mes·siʹah” (which means, when translated, “Christ”),
and he led him to Jesus. When Jesus looked at him, he said: “You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Ceʹphas” (which is translated “Peter”).
The next day he wanted to leave for Galilee. Jesus then found Philip and said to him: “Be my follower.”
Now Philip was from Bethsaida, from the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip found Nathanael and said to him: “We have found the one of whom Moses, in the Law, and the Prophets wrote: Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazret.”
But Nathanael said to him: “Can anything good come out of Nazret?” Philip said to him: “Come and see.”
Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said about him: “See, truly an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.”
Nathanael said to him: “How do you know me?” Jesus answered him: “Before Philip called you, while you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
Nathanael responded: “Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel.”
Jesus answered him: “Do you believe because I told you I saw you under the fig tree? You will see things greater than these.”
He then said to him: “Most truly I say to you men, you will see heaven opened up and the angels of God ascending and descending to the Son of man.”
After this Jesus continued traveling about in Galilee, for he did not want to do so in Ju·deʹa because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
However, the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near.
So his brothers said to him: “Leave here and go into Ju·deʹa, so that your disciples may also see the works you are doing.
For no one does anything in secret when he seeks to be known publicly. If you are doing these things, show yourself to the world.”
His brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him.
So Jesus said to them: “My time has not yet arrived, but your time is always at hand.
The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness about it that its works are wicked.
You go up to the festival; I am not yet going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come.”
So after he told them these things, he remained in Galilee.
But when his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up, not openly but in secret.
So the Jews began looking for him at the festival and saying: “Where is that man?”
And there was a lot of subdued talk about him among the crowds. Some would say: “He is a good man.” Others would say: “He is not. He misleads the crowd.”
Of course, no one would speak about him publicly because of fear of the Jews.
When the festival was half over, Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.
And the Jews were astonished, saying: “How does this man have such a knowledge of the Scriptures when he has not studied at the schools?”
Jesus, in turn, answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him who sent me.
If anyone desires to do His will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or I speak of my own originality.
Whoever speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory; but whoever seeks the glory of the one who sent him, this one is true and there is no unrighteousness in him.
Moses gave you the Law, did he not? But not one of you obeys the Law. Why are you seeking to kill me?”
The crowd answered: “You have a demon. Who is seeking to kill you?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “One deed I performed, and you are all surprised.
For this reason Moses has given you circumcision—not that it is from Moses, but it is from the forefathers—and you circumcise a man on a sabbath.
If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath so that the Law of Moses may not be broken, are you violently angry at me because I made a man completely well on a sabbath?
Stop judging by the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.”
Then some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem began to say: “This is the man they are seeking to kill, is it not?
And yet see! he is speaking in public, and they say nothing to him. Have the rulers come to know for certain that this is the Christ?
On the contrary, we know where this man is from; yet when the Christ comes, no one is to know where he is from.”
Then as he was teaching in the temple, Jesus called out: “You know me and you know where I am from. And I have not come of my own initiative, but the One who sent me is real, and you do not know him.
I know him, because I am a representative from him, and that One sent me.”
So they began seeking to get hold of him, but no one laid a hand on him, for his hour had not yet come.
Still, many of the crowd put faith in him, and they were saying: “When the Christ comes, he will not perform more signs than this man has done, will he?”
The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to seize him.
Jesus then said: “I will be with you a little while longer before I go to the One who sent me.
You will look for me, but you will not find me, and where I am you cannot come.”
Therefore, the Jews said among themselves: “Where does this man intend to go, so that we will not find him? He does not intend to go to the Jews dispersed among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, does he?
What does he mean when he says, ‘You will look for me, but you will not find me, and where I am you cannot come’?”
On the last day, the great day of the festival, Jesus stood up and he called out: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
Whoever puts faith in me, just as the scripture has said: ‘From deep within him streams of living water will flow.’”
However, he said this concerning the spirit, which those who put faith in him were about to receive; for as yet there was no spirit, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
Some in the crowd who heard these words began saying: “This really is the Prophet.”
Others were saying: “This is the Christ.” But some were saying: “The Christ is not coming out of Galilee, is he?
Does the scripture not say that the Christ is coming from the offspring of David and from Bethʹle·hem, the village where David was?”
So a division over him arose among the crowd.
Some of them, though, wanted to seize him, but no one laid his hands on him.
Then the officers went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, and the latter said to them: “Why did you not bring him in?”
The officers replied: “Never has any man spoken like this.”
In turn the Pharisees answered: “You have not been misled also, have you?
Not one of the rulers or of the Pharisees has put faith in him, has he?
But this crowd who do not know the Law are accursed people.”
Nic·o·deʹmus, who had come to him previously and who was one of them, said to them:
“Our Law does not judge a man unless it first hears from him and learns what he is doing, does it?”
In answer they said to him: “You are not also out of Galilee, are you? Search and see that no prophet is to be raised up out of Galilee.”
Now because he knew before the festival of the Passover that his hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father, Jesus, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end.
The evening meal was going on, and the Devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Is·carʹi·ot, the son of Simon, to betray him.
So Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he came from God and was going to God,
got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments. And taking a towel, he wrapped it around his waist.
After that he put water into a basin and started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them off with the towel that was wrapped around him.
Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?”
Jesus answered him: “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand after these things.”
Peter said to him: “You will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him: “Unless I wash you, you have no share with me.”
Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head.”
Jesus said to him: “Whoever has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is completely clean. And you men are clean, but not all of you.”
For he knew the man who was betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of you are clean.”
When, now, he had washed their feet and had put his outer garments on, he again reclined at the table and said to them: “Do you understand what I have done to you?
You address me as ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you are correct, for I am such.
Therefore, if I, the Lord and Teacher, washed your feet, you also should wash the feet of one another.
For I set the pattern for you, that just as I did to you, you should also do.
Most truly I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master, nor is one who is sent greater than the one who sent him.
If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.
I am not talking about all of you; I know the ones I have chosen. But this was so that the scripture might be fulfilled: ‘The one who was eating my bread has lifted his heel against me.’
From this moment on, I am telling you before it occurs, so that when it does occur you may believe that I am he.
Most truly I say to you, whoever receives anyone I send receives me also, and whoever receives me receives also the One who sent me.”
After saying these things, Jesus became troubled in spirit, and he bore witness, saying: “Most truly I say to you, one of you will betray me.”
The disciples began to look at one another, being at a loss as to which one he was talking about.
One of the disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining close to Jesus.
Therefore, Simon Peter nodded to this one and said to him: “Tell us whom he is talking about.”
So the latter leaned back on the chest of Jesus and said to him: “Lord, who is it?”
Jesus answered: “It is the one to whom I will give the piece of bread that I dip.” So after dipping the bread, he took it and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Is·carʹi·ot.
After Judas took the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. So Jesus said to him: “What you are doing, do it more quickly.”
However, none of those reclining at the table knew why he said this to him.
Some, in fact, were thinking that since Judas was holding the money box, Jesus was telling him, “Buy what we need for the festival,” or that he should give something to the poor.
So after he received the piece of bread, he went out immediately. And it was night.
When, therefore, he had gone out, Jesus said: “Now the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in connection with him.
God himself will glorify him, and he will glorify him immediately.
Little children, I am with you a little longer. You will look for me; and just as I said to the Jews, ‘Where I go you cannot come,’ I now say it also to you.
I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another.
By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.”
Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered: “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.”
Peter said to him: “Lord, why is it I cannot follow you now? I will surrender my life in your behalf.”
Jesus answered: “Will you surrender your life in my behalf? Most truly I say to you, a rooster will by no means crow until you have disowned me three times.”
After this Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples, at the Sea of Ti·beʹri·as. He made the manifestation in this way.
There were together Simon Peter, Thomas (who was called the Twin), Nathanael from Caʹna of Galilee, the sons of Zebʹe·dee, and two others of his disciples.
Simon Peter said to them: “I am going fishing.” They said to him: “We are coming with you.” They went out and got aboard the boat, but during that night they caught nothing.
However, just as day was breaking, Jesus stood on the beach, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus said to them: “Children, you do not have anything to eat, do you?” They answered: “No!”
He said to them: “Cast the net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” So they cast it, but they were not able to haul it in because of the large number of fish.
Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter: “It is the Lord!” Now Simon Peter, on hearing that it was the Lord, put on his outer garment, for he was naked, and plunged into the sea.
But the other disciples came in the small boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not a long way from land, only about 300 feet away.
When they came ashore, they saw there a charcoal fire with fish lying on it and bread.
Jesus said to them: “Bring some of the fish you just now caught.”
So Simon Peter went on board and hauled the net ashore full of big fish, 153 of them. And though there were so many, the net did not burst.
Jesus said to them: “Come, have your breakfast.” Not one of the disciples had the courage to ask him: “Who are you?” because they knew it was the Lord.
Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the same with the fish.
This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after being raised up from the dead.
When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He replied to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Feed my lambs.”
Again he said to him a second time: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He replied: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Shepherd my little sheep.”
He said to him a third time: “Simon son of John, do you have affection for me?” Peter became grieved that he asked him the third time: “Do you have affection for me?” So he said to him: “Lord, you are aware of all things; you know that I have affection for you.” Jesus said to him: “Feed my little sheep.
Most truly I say to you, when you were younger, you used to clothe yourself and walk about where you wanted. But when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands and another man will clothe you and carry you where you do not wish.”
He said this to indicate by what sort of death he would glorify God. After he said this, he said to him: “Continue following me.”
Peter turned around and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following, the one who at the evening meal had also leaned back on his chest and said: “Lord, who is the one betraying you?”
So when he caught sight of him, Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, what about this man?”
Jesus said to him: “If it is my will for him to remain until I come, of what concern is that to you? You continue following me.”
So the saying went out among the brothers that this disciple would not die. However, Jesus did not say to him that he would not die, but he said: “If it is my will for him to remain until I come, of what concern is that to you?”
This is the disciple who gives this witness about these things and who wrote these things, and we know that his witness is true.
There are also, in fact, many other things that Jesus did, which if ever they were written in full detail, I suppose the world itself could not contain the scrolls written.
There was a man of the Pharisees named Nic·o·deʹmus, a ruler of the Jews.
This one came to him in the night and said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you have come from God as a teacher, for no one can perform these signs that you perform unless God is with him.”
In response Jesus said to him: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.”
Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter into the womb of his mother a second time and be born, can he?”
Jesus answered: “Most truly I say to you, unless anyone is born from water and spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
What has been born from the flesh is flesh, and what has been born from the spirit is spirit.
Do not be amazed because I told you: You people must be born again.
The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who has been born from the spirit.”
In answer Nic·o·deʹmus said to him: “How can these things be?”
Jesus replied: “Are you a teacher of Israel and yet do not know these things?
Most truly I say to you, what we know we speak, and what we have seen we bear witness to, but you do not receive the witness we give.
If I have told you earthly things and you still do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
Moreover, no man has ascended into heaven but the one who descended from heaven, the Son of man.
And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lifted up,
so that everyone believing in him may have everlasting life.
“For God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.
For God did not send his Son into the world for him to judge the world, but for the world to be saved through him.
Whoever exercises faith in him is not to be judged. Whoever does not exercise faith has been judged already, because he has not exercised faith in the name of the only-begotten Son of God.
Now this is the basis for judgment: that the light has come into the world, but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.
For whoever practices vile things hates the light and does not come to the light, so that his works may not be reproved.
But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that his works may be made manifest as having been done in harmony with God.”
After this Jesus and his disciples went into the Ju·deʹan countryside, and there he spent some time with them and was baptizing.
But John too was baptizing in Aeʹnon near Saʹlim, because there was a great quantity of water there, and people kept coming and were being baptized;
for John had not yet been thrown into prison.
Now the disciples of John had a dispute with a Jew concerning purification.
So they came to John and said to him: “Rabbi, the man who was with you across the Jordan, about whom you bore witness, see, this one is baptizing, and all are going to him.”
In answer John said: “A man cannot receive a single thing unless it has been given him from heaven.
You yourselves bear me witness that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but I have been sent ahead of that one.’
Whoever has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, when he stands and hears him, has a great deal of joy on account of the voice of the bridegroom. So my joy has been made complete.
That one must keep on increasing, but I must keep on decreasing.”
The one who comes from above is over all others. The one who is from the earth is from the earth and speaks of things of the earth. The one who comes from heaven is over all others.
He bears witness to what he has seen and heard, but no man accepts his witness.
Whoever has accepted his witness has put his seal to it that God is true.
For the one whom God sent speaks the sayings of God, for He does not give the spirit sparingly.
The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand.
The one who exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life; the one who disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.
As he was passing along, he saw a man who had been blind from birth.
And his disciples asked him: “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?”
Jesus answered: Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it was so that the works of God might be made manifest in his case.
We must do the works of the One who sent me while it is day; the night is coming when no man can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the world’s light.
After he said these things, he spat on the ground and made a paste with the saliva, and he smeared the paste on the man’s eyes
and said to him: Go wash in the pool of siloam which is translated “Sent Forth”). And he went and washed, and came back seeing.
Then the neighbors and those who formerly used to see that he was a beggar began to say: “This is the man who used to sit and beg, is it not?”
Some were saying This is he Others were saying: No, but he looks like him.” The man kept saying: “I am he.”
So they asked him How, then, were your eyes opened?”
He answered: The man called Jesus made a paste and smeared it on my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to siloam and wash.’ So I went and washed and gained sight.”
At this they said to him Where is that man?” He said I do not know.
They led the formerly blind man to the Pharisees.
Incidentally, the day that Jesus made the paste and opened his eyes was the Sabbath.
So this time the Pharisees also began asking the man how he gained sight. He said to them: “He put a paste on my eyes, and I washed, and I can see.”
Some of the Pharisees then began to say This is not a man from God, for he does not observe the Sabbath.” Others said: “How can a man who is a sinner perform signs of that sort?” So there was a division among them.
And again they said to the blind man What do you say about him, since it was your eyes that he opened?” The man said: “He is a prophet.”
However, the Jews did not believe that he had been blind and had gained sight, until they called the parents of the man who could now see.
And they asked them Is this your son who you say was born blind? How, then, does he now see?”
His parents answered We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
But how it is that he now sees, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He is of age. He must speak for himself.”
His parents said these things because they were in fear of the Jews, for the Jews had already come to an agreement that if anyone acknowledged him as Christ, that person should be expelled from the synagogue.
This is why his parents said He is of age. Question him.
So a second time they called the man who had been blind and said to him: “Give glory to God; we know that this man is a sinner.”
He answered Whether he is a sinner, I do not know. One thing I do know, that I was blind, but now I can see.”
Then they said to him What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?
He answered them I told you already, and yet you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You do not want to become his disciples also, do you?”
At this they scornfully told him You are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, we do not know where he is from.”
The man answered them: “This is certainly amazing, that you do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes.
We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is God-fearing and does his will, he listens to this one.
From of old it has never been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing at all.
In answer they said to him You were altogether born in sin, and yet are you teaching us?” And they threw him out!
Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and on finding him, he said Are you putting faith in the Son of man?”
The man answered And who is he, sir, so that I may put faith in him?
Jesus said to him You have seen him, and in fact, he is the one speaking with you.”
He said I do put faith in him, Lord And he did obeisance to him.
Jesus then said For this judgment I came into this world, that those not seeing might see and those seeing might become blind.”
Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him: “We are not blind also, are we?”
Jesus said to them If you were blind, you would have no sin. But now you say, ‘We see.’ Your sin remains.”
And on the third day a marriage feast took place in Caʹna of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast.
When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him They have no wine.
But Jesus said to her Woman, why is that of concern to me and to you? My hour has not yet come.”
His mother said to those serving Do whatever he tells you.
Now there were six stone water jars sitting there as required by the purification rules of the Jews, each able to hold two or three liquid measures.
Jesus said to them Fill the jars with water So they filled them to the brim.
Then he said to them Now draw some out and take it to the director of the feast.” So they took it.
When the director of the feast tasted the water that had now been turned into wine, not knowing where it came from (although the servants who had drawn out the water knew), the director of the feast called the bridegroom
and said to him Everyone else puts out the fine wine first, and when people are intoxicated, the inferior. You have saved the fine wine until now.”
Jesus did this in Caʹna of Galilee as the beginning of his signs, and he made his glory manifest, and his disciples put their faith in him.
After this he and his mother and his brothers and his disciples went down to Ca·perʹna·um, but they did not stay there many days.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
He found in the temple those selling cattle and sheep and doves, and the money brokers in their seats.
So after making a whip of ropes, he drove all those with the sheep and cattle out of the temple, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
And he said to those selling the doves Take these things away from here! Stop making the house of my Father a house of commerce!”
His disciples recalled that it is written The zeal for your house will consume me.”
Therefore, in response the Jews said to him What sign can you show us, since you are doing these things?”
Jesus replied to them Tear down this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
The Jews then said This temple was built in 46 years, and will you raise it up in three days?”
But he was talking about the temple of his body.
When, though, he was raised up from the dead, his disciples recalled that he used to say this, and they believed the scripture and what Jesus had spoken.
However, when he was in Jerusalem at the festival of the Passover, many people put their faith in his name when they saw the signs that he was performing.
But Jesus would not entrust himself to them because he knew them all
and because he did not need to have anyone bear witness about man, for he knew what was in man.
“Most truly I say to you, the one who does not enter into the sheepfold through the door but climbs in by another way, that one is a thief and a plunderer.
But the one who enters through the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
The doorkeeper opens to this one, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
When he has brought all his own out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
They will by no means follow a stranger but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.”
Jesus spoke this comparison to them, but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
So Jesus said again Most truly I say to you, I am the door for the sheep.
All those who have come in place of me are thieves and plunderers; but the sheep have not listened to them.
I am the door; whoever enters through me will be saved, and that one will go in and out and find pasturage.
The thief does not come unless it is to steal and slay and destroy. I have come that they may have life and have it in abundance.
I am the fine shepherd; the fine shepherd surrenders his life in behalf of the sheep.
The hired man, who is not a shepherd and to whom the sheep do not belong, sees the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them—
because he is a hired man and does not care for the sheep.
I am the fine shepherd. I know my sheep and my sheep know me,
just as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I surrender my life in behalf of the sheep.
And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold; those too I must bring in, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.
This is why the Father loves me, because I surrender my life, so that I may receive it again.
No man takes it away from me, but I surrender it of my own initiative. I have authority to surrender it, and I have authority to receive it again. This commandment I received from my Father.”
A division again resulted among the Jews because of these words.
Many of them were saying: “He has a demon and is out of his mind. Why do you listen to him?”
Others said: “These are not the sayings of a demonized man. A demon cannot open blind people’s eyes, can it?”
At that time the Festival of Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was wintertime,
and Jesus was walking in the temple in the colonnade of Solʹo·mon.
Then the Jews surrounded him and began to say to him: “How long are you going to keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
Jesus answered them: “I told you, and yet you do not believe. The works that I am doing in my Father’s name, these bear witness about me.
But you do not believe, because you are not my sheep.
My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
I give them everlasting life, and they will by no means ever be destroyed, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
What my Father has given me is something greater than all other things, and no one can snatch them out of the hand of the Father.
I and the Father are one.”
Once again the Jews picked up stones to stone him.
Jesus replied to them: “I displayed to you many fine works from the Father. For which of those works are you stoning me?”
The Jews answered him: “We are stoning you, not for a fine work, but for blasphemy; for you, although being a man, make yourself a god.”
Jesus answered them: “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said: “You are gods”’?
If he called ‘gods’ those against whom the word of God came—and yet the scripture cannot be nullified—
do you say to me whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, ‘I am God’s Son’?
If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not believe me.
But if I am doing them, even though you do not believe me, believe the works, so that you may come to know and may continue knowing that the Father is in union with me and I am in union with the Father.”
So they tried again to seize him, but he escaped from their reach.
And he went away again across the Jordan to the place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
And many people came to him and began saying: “John did not perform a single sign, but all the things John said about this man were true.”
And many put faith in him there.
“I have said these things to you so that you may not be stumbled.
Men will expel you from the synagogue. In fact, the hour is coming when everyone who kills you will think he has offered a sacred service to God.
But they will do these things because they have not come to know either the Father or me.
Nevertheless, I have told you these things so that when the hour for them to happen arrives, you will remember that I told them to you. “I did not tell you these things at first, because I was with you.
But now I am going to the One who sent me; yet not one of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’
But because I have told you these things, grief has filled your hearts.
Nevertheless, I am telling you the truth, it is for your benefit that I am going away. For if I do not go away, the helper will not come to you; but if I do go, I will send him to you.
And when that one comes, he will give the world convincing evidence concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment:
first concerning sin, because they are not exercising faith in me;
then concerning righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will see me no longer;
then concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
“I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.
However, when that one comes, the spirit of the truth, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak of his own initiative, but what he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things to come.
That one will glorify me, because he will receive from what is mine and will declare it to you.
All the things that the Father has are mine. That is why I said he receives from what is mine and declares it to you.
In a little while you will see me no longer, and again, in a little while you will see me.”
At that some of his disciples said to one another: “What does he mean by saying to us, ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?”
So they were saying: “What does he mean by saying, ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.”
Jesus knew they wanted to question him, so he said to them: “Are you asking one another this because I said: ‘In a little while you will not see me, and again, in a little while you will see me’?
Most truly I say to you, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice; you will be grieved, but your grief will be turned into joy.
When a woman is giving birth, she has grief because her hour has come, but when she has given birth to the child, she remembers the tribulation no more because of the joy that a man has been born into the world.
So you also, now you have grief; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.
In that day you will ask me no question at all. Most truly I say to you, if you ask the Father for anything, he will give it to you in my name.
Until now you have not asked for a single thing in my name. Ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.
“I have spoken these things to you in comparisons. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in comparisons, but I will tell you plainly about the Father.
In that day you will make request of the Father in my name; in saying this, I do not mean that I will make request for you.
For the Father himself has affection for you, because you have had affection for me and have believed that I came as God’s representative.
I came as the Father’s representative and have come into the world. Now I am leaving the world and am going to the Father.”
His disciples said: “See! Now you are speaking plainly and are not using comparisons.
Now we know that you know all things and you do not need to have anyone question you. By this we believe that you came from God.”
Jesus answered them: “Do you believe now?
Look! The hour is coming, indeed, it has come, when each one of you will be scattered to his own house and you will leave me alone. But I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
I have said these things to you so that by means of me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the world.”
After this there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now in Jerusalem at the Sheep Gate is a pool called in Hebrew Beth·zaʹtha, with five colonnades.
Within these a multitude of the sick, blind, lame, and those with withered limbs were lying down.
But one man was there who had been sick for 38 years.
Seeing this man lying there and being aware that he had already been sick for a long time, Jesus said to him: “Do you want to get well?”
The sick man answered him: “Sir, I do not have anyone to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I am on my way, another steps down ahead of me.”
Jesus said to him: “Get up! Pick up your mat and walk.”
And the man immediately got well, and he picked up his mat and began to walk. That day was the Sabbath.
So the Jews began to say to the cured man: “It is the Sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to carry the mat.”
But he answered them: “The same one who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’”
They asked him: “Who is the man who told you, ‘Pick it up and walk’?”
But the healed man did not know who he was, for Jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.
After this Jesus found him in the temple and said to him: “See, you have become well. Do not sin anymore, so that something worse does not happen to you.”
The man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
For this reason the Jews were persecuting Jesus, because he was doing these things during the Sabbath.
But he answered them: “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.”
This is why the Jews began seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath but he was also calling God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
Therefore, in response Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, the Son cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things that One does, these things the Son does also in like manner.
For the Father has affection for the Son and shows him all the things he himself does, and he will show him works greater than these, so that you may marvel.
For just as the Father raises the dead up and makes them alive, so the Son also makes alive whomever he wants to.
For the Father judges no one at all, but he has entrusted all the judging to the Son,
so that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
Most truly I say to you, whoever hears my word and believes the One who sent me has everlasting life, and he does not come into judgment but has passed over from death to life.
“Most truly I say to you, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who have paid attention will live.
For just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted also to the Son to have life in himself.
And he has given him authority to do judging, because he is the Son of man.
Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice
and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, and those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.
I cannot do a single thing of my own initiative. Just as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous because I seek, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
“If I alone bear witness about myself, my witness is not true.
There is another who bears witness about me, and I know that the witness he bears about me is true.
You have sent men to John, and he has borne witness to the truth.
However, I do not accept the witness from man, but I say these things so that you may be saved.
That man was a burning and shining lamp, and for a short time you were willing to rejoice greatly in his light.
But I have the witness greater than that of John, for the very works that my Father assigned me to accomplish, these works that I am doing, bear witness that the Father sent me.
And the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his form,
and you do not have his word residing in you, because you do not believe the very one whom he sent.
“You are searching the Scriptures because you think that you will have everlasting life by means of them; and these are the very ones that bear witness about me.
And yet you do not want to come to me so that you may have life.
I do not accept glory from men,
but I well know that you do not have the love of God in you.
I have come in the name of my Father, but you do not receive me. If someone else came in his own name, you would receive that one.
How can you believe, when you are accepting glory from one another and you are not seeking the glory that is from the only God?
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one who accuses you, Moses, in whom you have put your hope.
In fact, if you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me.
But if you do not believe his writings, how will you believe what I say?”
“Do not let your hearts be troubled. Exercise faith in God; exercise faith also in me.
In the house of my Father are many dwelling places. Otherwise, I would have told you, for I am going my way to prepare a place for you.
Also, if I go my way and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you home to myself, so that where I am you also may be.
And where I am going, you know the way.”
Thomas said to him: “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How can we know the way?”
Jesus said to him: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
If you men had known me, you would have known my Father also; from this moment on you know him and have seen him.”
Philip said to him: “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.”
Jesus said to him: “Even after I have been with you men for such a long time, Philip, have you not come to know me? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also. How is it you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
Do you not believe that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me? The things I say to you I do not speak of my own originality, but the Father who remains in union with me is doing his works.
Believe me that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me; otherwise, believe because of the works themselves.
Most truly I say to you, whoever exercises faith in me will also do the works that I do; and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.
Also, whatever you ask in my name, I will do this, so that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.
If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.
“If you love me, you will observe my commandments.
And I will ask the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever,
the spirit of the truth, which the world cannot receive, because it neither sees it nor knows it. You know it, because it remains with you and is in you.
I will not leave you bereaved. I am coming to you.
In a little while the world will see me no more, but you will see me, because I live and you will live.
In that day you will know that I am in union with my Father and you are in union with me and I am in union with you.
Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me. In turn, whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will clearly show myself to him.”
Judas, not Is·carʹi·ot, said to him: “Lord, what has happened that you intend to show yourself clearly to us and not to the world?”
In answer Jesus said to him: “If anyone loves me, he will observe my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
Whoever does not love me does not observe my words. The word that you are hearing is not mine, but belongs to the Father who sent me.
“I have spoken these things to you while I am still with you.
But the helper, the holy spirit, which the Father will send in my name, that one will teach you all things and bring back to your minds all the things I told you.
I leave you peace; I give you my peace. I do not give it to you the way that the world gives it. Do not let your hearts be troubled nor let them shrink out of fear.
You heard that I said to you, ‘I am going away and I am coming back to you.’ If you loved me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I am.
So now I have told you before it occurs, so that you may believe when it does occur.
I will not speak with you much more, for the ruler of the world is coming, and he has no hold on me.
But for the world to know that I love the Father, I am doing just as the Father has commanded me to do. Get up, let us go from here.
“I am the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator.
He takes away every branch in me not bearing fruit, and he cleans every one bearing fruit, so that it may bear more fruit.
You are already clean because of the word that I have spoken to you.
Remain in union with me, and I will remain in union with you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, neither can you unless you remain in union with me.
I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever remains in union with me and I in union with him, this one bears much fruit; for apart from me you can do nothing at all.
If anyone does not remain in union with me, he is thrown out like a branch and dries up. And men gather those branches and throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
If you remain in union with me and my sayings remain in you, ask whatever you wish and it will take place for you.
My Father is glorified in this, that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples.
Just as the Father has loved me, so I have loved you; remain in my love.
If you observe my commandments, you will remain in my love, just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love.
“These things I have spoken to you, so that my joy may be in you and your joy may be made full.
This is my commandment, that you love one another just as I have loved you.
No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.
You are my friends if you do what I am commanding you.
I no longer call you slaves, because a slave does not know what his master does. But I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.
You did not choose me, but I chose you, and I appointed you to go and keep bearing fruit and that your fruit should remain, so that no matter what you ask the Father in my name, he may give it to you.
“These things I command you, that you love one another.
If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.
If you were part of the world, the world would be fond of what is its own. Now because you are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, for this reason the world hates you.
Keep in mind the word I said to you: A slave is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have observed my word, they will also observe yours.
But they will do all these things against you on account of my name, because they do not know the One who sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin. But now they have no excuse for their sin.
Whoever hates me also hates my Father.
If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would have no sin; but now they have both seen me and hated me as well as my Father.
But this happened in order to fulfill the word written in their Law: ‘They hated me without cause.’
When the helper comes that I will send you from the Father, the spirit of the truth, which comes from the Father, that one will bear witness about me;
and you, in turn, are to bear witness, because you have been with me from the beginning.
When the Lord became aware that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John—
although Jesus himself did no baptizing but his disciples did—
he left Ju·deʹa and departed again for Galilee.
But it was necessary for him to go through Sa·marʹi·a.
So he came to a city of Sa·marʹi·a called Syʹchar, near the field that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
In fact, Jacob’s well was there. Now Jesus, tired out as he was from the journey, was sitting at the well. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Sa·marʹi·a came to draw water. Jesus said to her: “Give me a drink.”
(For his disciples had gone off into the city to buy food.)
So the Sa·marʹi·tan woman said to him: “How is it that you, despite being a Jew, ask me for a drink even though I am a Sa·marʹi·tan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Sa·marʹi·tans.)
In answer Jesus said to her: “If you had known of the free gift of God and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”
She said to him: “Sir, you do not even have a bucket for drawing water, and the well is deep. From what source, then, do you have this living water?
You are not greater than our forefather Jacob, who gave us the well and who together with his sons and his cattle drank out of it, are you?”
In answer Jesus said to her: “Everyone drinking from this water will get thirsty again.
Whoever drinks from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty at all, but the water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water bubbling up to impart everlasting life.”
The woman said to him: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may neither thirst nor keep coming over to this place to draw water.”
He said to her: “Go, call your husband and come to this place.”
The woman replied: “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her: “You are right in saying, ‘I do not have a husband.’
For you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. This you have said truthfully.”
The woman said to him: “Sir, I see that you are a prophet.
Our forefathers worshipped on this mountain, but you people say that in Jerusalem is the place where people must worship.”
Jesus said to her: “Believe me, woman, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father.
You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, because salvation begins with the Jews.
Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him.
God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”
The woman said to him: “I know that Mes·siʹah is coming, who is called Christ. Whenever that one comes, he will declare all things to us openly.”
Jesus said to her: “I am he, the one speaking to you.”
Just then his disciples arrived, and they were surprised because he was speaking with a woman. Of course, no one said: “What are you looking for?” or “Why are you talking to her?”
So the woman left her water jar and went off into the city and told the people:
“Come and see a man who told me everything I did. Could this not perhaps be the Christ?”
They left the city and began coming to him.
Meanwhile, the disciples were urging him: “Rabbi, eat.”
But he said to them: “I have food to eat that you do not know about.”
So the disciples said to one another: “No one brought him anything to eat, did he?”
Jesus said to them: “My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.
Do you not say that there are yet four months before the harvest comes? Look! I say to you: Lift up your eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting. Already
the reaper is receiving wages and gathering fruit for everlasting life, so that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.
For in this respect the saying is true: One is the sower and another the reaper.
I sent you to reap what you did not labor on. Others have labored, and you have entered into the benefit of their labor.”
Many of the Sa·marʹi·tans from that city put faith in him because of the word of the woman who bore witness, saying: “He told me all the things I did.”
So when the Sa·marʹi·tans came to him, they asked him to stay with them, and he stayed there two days.
As a result, many more believed because of what he said,
and they said to the woman: “We no longer believe just because of what you said; for we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the savior of the world.”
After the two days, he left there for Galilee.
Jesus himself, however, bore witness that a prophet has no honor in his own homeland.
So when he arrived in Galilee, the Gal·i·leʹans welcomed him, because they had seen all the things he did in Jerusalem at the festival, for they too had gone to the festival.
Then he came again to Caʹna of Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was a royal official whose son was sick in Ca·perʹna·um.
When this man heard that Jesus had come out of Ju·deʹa into Galilee, he went to him and asked him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of dying.
But Jesus said to him: “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will never believe.”
The royal official said to him: “Lord, come down before my young child dies.”
Jesus said to him: “Go your way; your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he left.
But while he was on his way down, his slaves met him to say that his boy was alive.
So he asked them at what hour he got better. They replied to him: “The fever left him yesterday at the seventh hour.”
The father then knew that it was in the very hour that Jesus had said to him: “Your son lives.” So he and his whole household believed.
This was the second sign Jesus performed when he came from Ju·deʹa into Galilee.
On the first day of the week, Mary Magʹda·lene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and she saw that the stone had already been taken away from the tomb.
So she came running to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, for whom Jesus had affection, and she said to them: “They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
Then Peter and the other disciple set out for the tomb.
The two of them began running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb first.
Stooping forward, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.
Then Simon Peter also came, following him, and he went into the tomb. And he saw the linen cloths lying there.
The cloth that had been on his head was not lying with the other cloth bands but was rolled up in a place by itself.
Then the other disciple who had reached the tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed.
For they did not yet understand the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
So the disciples went back to their homes.
Mary, however, kept standing outside near the tomb, weeping. While she was weeping, she stooped forward to look into the tomb,
and she saw two angels in white sitting where the body of Jesus had been lying, one at the head and one at the feet.
And they said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them: “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have laid him.”
After saying this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus.
Jesus said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She, thinking it was the gardener, said to him: “Sir, if you have carried him off, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.”
Jesus said to her: “Mary!” On turning around, she said to him in Hebrew: “Rab·boʹni!” (which means “Teacher!”)
Jesus said to her: “Stop clinging to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father and to my God and your God.’”
Mary Magʹda·lene came and brought the news to the disciples: “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them what he had said to her.
When it was late that day, the first day of the week, and the doors were locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them: “May you have peace.”
After saying this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced at seeing the Lord.
Jesus said to them again: “May you have peace. Just as the Father has sent me, I also am sending you.”
After saying this he blew on them and said to them: “Receive holy spirit.
If you forgive the sins of anyone, they are forgiven; if you retain those of anyone, they are retained.”
But Thomas, one of the Twelve, who was called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples were telling him: “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them: “Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails and stick my finger into the print of the nails and stick my hand into his side, I will never believe it.”
Well, eight days later his disciples were again indoors, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and he stood in their midst and said: “May you have peace.”
Next he said to Thomas: “Put your finger here, and see my hands, and take your hand and stick it into my side, and stop doubting but believe.”
In answer Thomas said to him: “My Lord and my God!”
Jesus said to him: “Because you have seen me, have you believed? Happy are those who have not seen and yet believe.”
To be sure, Jesus also performed many other signs before the disciples, which are not written down in this scroll.
But these have been written down so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and because of believing, you may have life by means of his name.
Six days before the Passover, Jesus arrived at Bethʹa·ny, where Lazʹa·rus was, whom Jesus had raised up from the dead.
So they spread an evening meal for him there, and Martha was serving them, but Lazʹa·rus was one of those dining with him.
Then Mary took a pound of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very costly, and she poured it on the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet dry with her hair. The house became filled with the scent of the perfumed oil.
But Judas Is·carʹi·ot, one of his disciples, who was about to betray him, said:
“Why was this perfumed oil not sold for 300 de·narʹi·i and given to the poor?”
He said this, though, not because he was concerned about the poor, but because he was a thief and had the money box and used to steal the money put in it.
Then Jesus said: “Let her alone, so that she may keep this observance in view of the day of my burial.
For you always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.”
Meanwhile, a large crowd of Jews got to know that he was there, and they came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazʹa·rus, whom he had raised up from the dead.
The chief priests now conspired to kill Lazʹa·rus also,
since it was because of him that many of the Jews were going there and putting faith in Jesus.
The next day the large crowd that had come to the festival heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, and they began to shout: “Save, we pray you! Blessed is the one who comes in Jehovah’s name, the King of Israel!”
When Jesus found a young donkey, he sat on it, just as it is written:
“Have no fear, daughter of Zion. Look! Your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt.”
These things his disciples did not understand at first, but when Jesus was glorified, they recalled that these things were written about him and that they did these things to him.
Now the crowd that was with him when he called Lazʹa·rus out of the tomb and raised him up from the dead kept bearing witness.
This is also why the crowd went to meet him, because they heard he had performed this sign.
So the Pharisees said among themselves: “You see that you are not getting anywhere. Look! The whole world has gone after him.”
Now there were some Greeks among those who had come to worship at the festival.
So these approached Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and they began to request him, saying: “Sir, we want to see Jesus.”
Philip came and told Andrew. Andrew and Philip came and told Jesus.
But Jesus answered them: “The hour has come for the Son of man to be glorified.
Most truly I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains just one grain; but if it dies, it then bears much fruit.
Whoever is fond of his life destroys it, but whoever hates his life in this world will safeguard it for everlasting life.
If anyone would minister to me, let him follow me, and where I am, there my minister will be also. If anyone would minister to me, the Father will honor him.
Now I am troubled, and what should I say? Father, save me out of this hour. Nevertheless, this is why I have come to this hour.
Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came out of heaven: “I have glorified it and will glorify it again.”
The crowd that was standing there heard it and began to say that it had thundered. Others said: “An angel has spoken to him.”
Jesus answered: “This voice has occurred, not for my sake, but for your sakes.
Now there is a judging of this world; now the ruler of this world will be cast out.
And yet I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all sorts of men to myself.”
This he was really saying to indicate what sort of death he was about to die.
Then the crowd answered him: “We heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?”
So Jesus said to them: “The light will be among you a little while longer. Walk while you still have the light, so that darkness does not overpower you; whoever walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.
While you have the light, exercise faith in the light, so that you may become sons of light.” Jesus said these things and went off and hid from them.
Although he had performed so many signs before them, they were not putting faith in him,
so that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, who said: “Jehovah, who has put faith in the thing heard from us? And as for the arm of Jehovah, to whom has it been revealed?”
The reason why they were not able to believe is that again Isaiah said:
“He has blinded their eyes and has made their hearts hard, so that they would not see with their eyes and understand with their hearts and turn around and I heal them.”
Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory, and he spoke about him.
All the same, many even of the rulers actually put faith in him, but they would not acknowledge him because of the Pharisees, so that they would not be expelled from the synagogue;
for they loved the glory of men even more than the glory of God.
However, Jesus called out and said: “Whoever puts faith in me puts faith not only in me but also in him who sent me;
and whoever sees me sees also the One who sent me.
I have come as a light into the world, so that everyone putting faith in me may not remain in the darkness.
But if anyone hears my sayings and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I came, not to judge the world, but to save the world.
Whoever disregards me and does not receive my sayings has one to judge him. The word that I have spoken is what will judge him on the last day.
For I have not spoken of my own initiative, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment about what to say and what to speak.
And I know that his commandment means everlasting life. So whatever I speak, I speak just as the Father has told me.”
After he said these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the Kidʹron Valley to where there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
Now Judas, his betrayer, also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
So Judas brought the detachment of soldiers and officers of the chief priests and of the Pharisees and came there with torches and lamps and weapons.
Then Jesus, knowing all the things that were going to happen to him, stepped forward and said to them: “Whom are you looking for?”
They answered him: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.” He said to them: “I am he.” Now Judas, his betrayer, was also standing with them.
However, when Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
So he asked them again: “Whom are you looking for?” They said: “Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.”
Jesus answered: “I told you that I am he. So if you are looking for me, let these men go.”
This was to fulfill what he had said: “Of those whom you have given me, I have not lost a single one.”
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. The name of the slave was Malchus.
Jesus, however, said to Peter: “Put the sword into its sheath. Should I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”
Then the soldiers and the military commander and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him.
They led him first to Anʹnas, for he was the father-in-law of Caʹia·phas, who was high priest that year.
Caʹia·phas was, in fact, the one who had advised the Jews that it was to their benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people.
Now Simon Peter, as well as another disciple, was following Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest,
but Peter was standing outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in.
The servant girl who was the doorkeeper then said to Peter: “You are not also one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said: “I am not.”
Now the slaves and the officers were standing around a charcoal fire they had made, because it was cold and they were warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and warming himself.
So the chief priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
Jesus answered him: “I have spoken to the world publicly. I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and I said nothing in secret.
Why do you question me? Question those who have heard what I told them. See! These know what I said.”
After he said these things, one of the officers who was standing by gave Jesus a slap in the face and said: “Is that the way you answer the chief priest?”
Jesus answered him: “If I said something wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said was right, why do you hit me?”
Then Anʹnas sent him away bound to Caʹia·phas the high priest.
Now Simon Peter was standing there warming himself. Then they said to him: “You are not also one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said: “I am not.”
One of the slaves of the high priest, who was a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?”
However, Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.
Then they led Jesus from Caʹia·phas to the governor’s residence. It was now early in the morning. But they themselves did not enter into the governor’s residence, so that they would not get defiled but could eat the Passover.
So Pilate came outside to them and said: “What accusation do you bring against this man?”
They answered him: “If this man were not a wrongdoer, we would not have handed him over to you.”
So Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and judge him according to your law.” The Jews said to him: “It is not lawful for us to kill anyone.”
This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to indicate what sort of death he was about to die.
So Pilate entered the governor’s residence again and called Jesus and said to him: “Are you the King of the Jews?”
Jesus answered: “Are you asking this of your own originality, or did others tell you about me?”
Pilate replied: “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me. What did you do?”
Jesus answered: “My Kingdom is no part of this world. If my Kingdom were part of this world, my attendants would have fought that I should not be handed over to the Jews. But as it is, my Kingdom is not from this source.”
So Pilate said to him: “Well, then, are you a king?” Jesus answered: “You yourself are saying that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.”
Pilate said to him: “What is truth?” After saying this, he went out again to the Jews and said to them: “I find no fault in him.
Moreover, you have a custom that I should release a man to you at the Passover. So do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
Again they shouted: “Not this man, but Bar·abʹbas!” Now Bar·abʹbas was a robber.
After this Jesus set out across the Sea of Galilee, or Ti·beʹri·as.
And a large crowd kept following him, because they were observing the miraculous signs he was performing in healing the sick.
So Jesus went up on a mountain and sat down there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, the festival of the Jews, was near.
When Jesus raised his eyes and saw that a large crowd was coming to him, he said to Philip: “Where will we buy bread for these people to eat?”
However, he was saying this to test him, for he knew what he was about to do.
Philip answered him: “Two hundred de·narʹi·i worth of bread is not enough for each of them to get even a little.”
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him:
“Here is a little boy who has five barley loaves and two small fish. But what are these among so many?”
Jesus said: “Have the men sit down.” As there was a lot of grass in that place, the men sat down there, about 5,000 in number.
Jesus took the bread, and after giving thanks, he distributed it to those who were sitting there; he did likewise with the small fish, and they had as much as they wanted.
But when they had eaten their fill, he said to his disciples: “Gather together the fragments left over, so that nothing is wasted.”
So they gathered them together and filled 12 baskets with fragments left over by those who had eaten from the five barley loaves.
When the people saw the sign he performed, they began to say: “This really is the Prophet who was to come into the world.”
Then Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and seize him to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain all alone.
When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,
and boarding a boat, they set out across the sea for Ca·perʹna·um. By now it had grown dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them.
Also, the sea was getting rough because a strong wind was blowing.
However, when they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and getting near the boat, and they became fearful.
But he said to them: “It is I; do not be afraid!”
Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and right away the boat arrived at the land to which they had been heading.
The next day the crowd that had stayed on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there except a small one, and that Jesus had not boarded the boat with his disciples, but his disciples had left by themselves.
Boats from Ti·beʹri·as, however, arrived near the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
So when the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they boarded their boats and came to Ca·perʹna·um to look for Jesus.
When they found him across the sea, they said to him: “Rabbi, when did you get here?”
Jesus answered them: “Most truly I say to you, you are looking for me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate from the loaves and were satisfied.
Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for everlasting life, which the Son of man will give you; for on this one the Father, God himself, has put his seal of approval.”
So they said to him: “What must we do to carry out the works of God?”
In answer Jesus said to them: “This is the work of God, that you exercise faith in the one whom he sent.”
Then they said to him: “What are you performing as a sign, so that we may see it and believe you? What work are you doing?
Our forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written: ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
Jesus then said to them: “Most truly I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
So they said to him: “Lord, always give us this bread.”
Jesus said to them: “I am the bread of life. Whoever comes to me will not get hungry at all, and whoever exercises faith in me will never get thirsty at all.
But as I said to you, you have even seen me and yet do not believe.
All those whom the Father gives me will come to me, and I will never drive away the one who comes to me;
for I have come down from heaven to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
This is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose none out of all those whom he has given me, but that I should resurrect them on the last day.
For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who recognizes the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life, and I will resurrect him on the last day.”
Then the Jews began to murmur about him because he had said: “I am the bread that came down from heaven.”
And they began saying: “Is this not Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How does he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?”
In response Jesus said to them: “Stop murmuring among yourselves.
No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him, and I will resurrect him on the last day.
It is written in the Prophets: ‘They will all be taught by Jehovah.’ Everyone who has listened to the Father and has learned comes to me.
Not that any man has seen the Father, except the one who is from God; this one has seen the Father.
Most truly I say to you, whoever believes has everlasting life.
“I am the bread of life.
Your forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness and yet they died.
This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread he will live forever; and for a fact, the bread that I will give is my flesh in behalf of the life of the world.”
Then the Jews began to argue with one another, saying: “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
So Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves.
Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life, and I will resurrect him on the last day;
for my flesh is true food and my blood is true drink.
Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood remains in union with me, and I in union with him.
Just as the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, so also the one who feeds on me will live because of me.
This is the bread that came down from heaven. It is not as when your forefathers ate and yet died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.”
He said these things as he was teaching in a synagogue in Ca·perʹna·um.
When they heard this, many of his disciples said: “This speech is shocking; who can listen to it?”
But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples were murmuring about this, said to them: “Does this stumble you?
What, therefore, if you should see the Son of man ascending to where he was before?
It is the spirit that is life-giving; the flesh is of no use at all. The sayings that I have spoken to you are spirit and are life.
But there are some of you who do not believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning those who did not believe and the one who would betray him.
He went on to say: “This is why I have said to you, no one can come to me unless it is granted him by the Father.”
Because of this, many of his disciples went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him.
So Jesus said to the Twelve: “You do not want to go also, do you?”
Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life.
We have believed and have come to know that you are the Holy One of God.”
Jesus answered them: “I chose you twelve, did I not? Yet one of you is a slanderer.”
He was, in fact, speaking of Judas the son of Simon Is·carʹi·ot, for this one was going to betray him, although he was one of the Twelve.
12  Then Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”
So the Pharisees said to him: “You bear witness about yourself; your witness is not true.”
In answer Jesus said to them: “Even if I do bear witness about myself, my witness is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I came from and where I am going.
You judge according to the flesh; I do not judge any man at all.
And yet even if I do judge, my judgment is truthful, because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.
Also, in your own Law it is written: ‘The witness of two men is true.’
I am one who bears witness about myself, and the Father who sent me bears witness about me.”
Then they said to him: “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered: “You know neither me nor my Father. If you did know me, you would know my Father also.”
He spoke these words in the treasury as he was teaching in the temple. But no one seized him, for his hour had not yet come.
So he said to them again: “I am going away, and you will look for me, and yet you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”
The Jews then began to say: “He will not kill himself, will he? Because he says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come.’”
He went on to say to them: “You are from the realms below; I am from the realms above. You are from this world; I am not from this world.
That is why I said to you: You will die in your sins. For if you do not believe that I am the one, you will die in your sins.”
So they began to say to him: “Who are you?” Jesus replied to them: “Why am I even speaking to you at all?
I have many things to speak concerning you and to pass judgment on. As a matter of fact, the One who sent me is true, and the very things I heard from him I am speaking in the world.”
They did not grasp that he was talking to them about the Father.
Jesus then said: “After you have lifted up the Son of man, then you will know that I am he and that I do nothing of my own initiative; but just as the Father taught me, I speak these things.
And the One who sent me is with me; he did not abandon me to myself, because I always do the things pleasing to him.”
As he was saying these things, many put faith in him.
Then Jesus went on to say to the Jews who had believed him: “If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples,
and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
They replied to him: “We are Abraham’s offspring and never have been slaves to anyone. How is it you say, ‘You will become free’?”
Jesus answered them: “Most truly I say to you, every doer of sin is a slave of sin.
Moreover, the slave does not remain in the household forever; the son remains forever.
So if the Son sets you free, you will be truly free.
I know that you are Abraham’s offspring. But you are seeking to kill me, because my word makes no progress among you.
I speak the things I have seen while with my Father, but you do the things you have heard from your father.”
In answer they said to him: “Our father is Abraham.” Jesus said to them: “If you were Abraham’s children, you would be doing the works of Abraham.
But now you are seeking to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.
You are doing the works of your father.” They said to him: “We were not born from immorality; we have one Father, God.”
Jesus said to them: “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and I am here. I have not come of my own initiative, but that One sent me.
Why do you not understand what I am saying? Because you cannot listen to my word.
You are from your father the Devil, and you wish to do the desires of your father. That one was a murderer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the father of the lie.
Because I, on the other hand, tell you the truth, you do not believe me.
Who of you convicts me of sin? If I speak truth, why is it that you do not believe me?
The one who is from God listens to the sayings of God. This is why you do not listen, because you are not from God.”
In answer the Jews said to him: “Are we not right in saying, ‘You are a Sa·marʹi·tan and have a demon’?”
Jesus answered: “I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.
But I am not seeking glory for myself; there is One who is seeking and judging.
Most truly I say to you, if anyone observes my word, he will never see death at all.”
The Jews said to him: “Now we do know that you have a demon. Abraham died, also the prophets, but you say, ‘If anyone observes my word, he will never taste death at all.’
You are not greater than our father Abraham, who died, are you? The prophets also died. Who do you claim to be?”
Jesus answered: “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, the one who you say is your God.
Yet you have not known him, but I know him. And if I said I do not know him, I would be like you, a liar. But I do know him and am observing his word.
Abraham your father rejoiced greatly at the prospect of seeing my day, and he saw it and rejoiced.”
Then the Jews said to him: “You are not yet 50 years old, and still you have seen Abraham?”
Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, before Abraham came into existence, I have been.”
So they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid and went out of the temple.
They now traveled through Am·phipʹo·lis and Ap·ol·loʹni·a and came to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
So according to Paul’s custom he went inside to them, and for three sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
explaining and proving by references that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, saying: “This is the Christ, this Jesus whom I am proclaiming to you.”
As a result, some of them became believers and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and so did a great multitude of the Greeks who worshipped God, along with quite a few of the principal women.
But the Jews, getting jealous, gathered together some wicked men who were loitering at the marketplace and formed a mob and proceeded to throw the city into an uproar. They assaulted the house of Jaʹson and were seeking to have Paul and Silas brought out to the mob.
When they did not find them, they dragged Jaʹson and some of the brothers to the city rulers, crying out: “These men who have overturned the inhabited earth are present here also,
and Jaʹson has received them as his guests. All these men act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus.”
When they heard these things, the crowd and the city rulers were alarmed;
and after taking sufficient security from Jaʹson and the others, they let them go.
Immediately by night the brothers sent both Paul and Silas to Be·roeʹa. On arriving, they went into the synagogue of the Jews.
Now these were more noble-minded than those in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, for they accepted the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so.
Therefore, many of them became believers, and so did quite a few of the reputable Greek women as well as some of the men.
But when the Jews from Thes·sa·lo·niʹca learned that the word of God was also being proclaimed by Paul in Be·roeʹa, they came there to incite and agitate the crowds.
Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away to the sea, but both Silas and Timothy remained behind there.
However, those accompanying Paul brought him as far as Athens, and they departed after receiving instructions that Silas and Timothy should come to Paul as quickly as possible.
Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit within him became irritated on seeing that the city was full of idols.
So he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshipped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.
But some of both the Ep·i·cu·reʹan and the Stoʹic philosophers began disputing with him, and some were saying: “What is it this chatterer would like to tell?” Others: “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign deities.” This was because he was declaring the good news of Jesus and the resurrection.
So they took hold of him and led him to the Ar·e·opʹa·gus, saying: “Can we get to know what this new teaching is that you are speaking about?
For you are introducing some things that are strange to our ears, and we want to know what these things mean.”
In fact, all Athenians and the foreigners staying there would spend their leisure time doing nothing else but telling or listening to something new.
Paul now stood in the midst of the Ar·e·opʹa·gus and said: “Men of Athens, I see that in all things you seem to be more given to the fear of the deities than others are.
For instance, while passing along and carefully observing your objects of veneration, I found even an altar on which had been inscribed ‘To an Unknown God.’ Therefore, what you are unknowingly worshipping, this I am declaring to you.
The God who made the world and all the things in it, being, as he is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in handmade temples;
nor is he served by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all people life and breath and all things.
And he made out of one man every nation of men to dwell on the entire surface of the earth, and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of where men would dwell,
so that they would seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us.
For by him we have life and move and exist, even as some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his children.’
“Therefore, since we are the children of God, we should not think that the Divine Being is like gold or silver or stone, like something sculptured by the art and design of humans.
True, God has overlooked the times of such ignorance; but now he is declaring to all people everywhere that they should repent.
Because he has set a day on which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and he has provided a guarantee to all men by resurrecting him from the dead.”
Now when they heard of a resurrection of the dead, some began to scoff, while others said: “We will hear you again about this.”
So Paul left them,
but some men joined him and became believers. Among them were Di·o·nysʹi·us, who was a judge of the court of the Ar·e·opʹa·gus, and a woman named Damʹa·ris, and others besides them.
In the course of events, while A·polʹlos was in Corinth, Paul went through the inland regions and came down to Ephʹe·sus. There he found some disciples
and said to them: “Did you receive holy spirit when you became believers?” They replied to him: “Why, we have never heard that there is a holy spirit.”
So he said: “In what, then, were you baptized?” They said: “In John’s baptism.”
Paul said: “John baptized with the baptism in symbol of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
On hearing this, they got baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul laid his hands on them, the holy spirit came upon them, and they began speaking in foreign languages and prophesying.
There were about 12 men in all.
Entering the synagogue, for three months he spoke with boldness, giving talks and reasoning persuasively about the Kingdom of God.
But when some stubbornly refused to believe, speaking injuriously about The Way before the crowd, he withdrew from them and separated the disciples from them, giving talks daily in the school auditorium of Ty·ranʹnus.
This went on for two years, so that all those living in the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
And God kept performing extraordinary powerful works through the hands of Paul,
so that even cloths and aprons that had touched his body were carried to the sick, and the diseases left them, and the wicked spirits came out.
But some of the Jews who traveled around casting out demons also tried to use the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had wicked spirits; they would say: “I solemnly charge you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.”
Now there were seven sons of a Jewish chief priest named Sceʹva doing this.
But in answer the wicked spirit said to them: “I know Jesus and I am acquainted with Paul; but who are you?”
At that the man with the wicked spirit leaped on them, overpowered them one after the other, and prevailed against them, so that they fled naked and wounded out of that house.
This became known to all, both the Jews and the Greeks who lived in Ephʹe·sus; and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus went on being magnified.
And many of those who had become believers would come and confess and report their practices openly.
Indeed, quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated their value and found them worth 50,000 pieces of silver.
Thus in a mighty way, the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.
After these things had taken place, Paul resolved in his spirit that after going through Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia, he would travel to Jerusalem. He said: “After going there, I must also see Rome.”
So he sent to Mac·e·doʹni·a two of those who ministered to him, Timothy and E·rasʹtus, but he himself stayed on for some time in the province of Asia.
At that time quite a disturbance arose concerning The Way.
For a man named De·meʹtri·us, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Arʹte·mis, brought considerable profit to the craftsmen.
He gathered them and others who worked at such things and said: “Men, you well know that from this business comes our prosperity.
Now you see and hear how, not only in Ephʹe·sus but in nearly all the province of Asia, this Paul has persuaded a considerable crowd and turned them to another opinion, saying that the gods made by hands are not really gods.
Moreover, the danger exists not only that this business of ours will come into disrepute but also that the temple of the great goddess Arʹte·mis will be viewed as nothing, and she who is worshipped in the whole province of Asia and the inhabited earth will be deprived of her magnificence.”
Hearing this and becoming full of anger, the men began crying out: “Great is Arʹte·mis of the E·pheʹsians!”
So the city became filled with confusion, and all together they rushed into the theater, dragging along with them Gaʹius and Ar·is·tarʹchus, Mac·e·doʹni·ans, traveling companions of Paul.
For his part, Paul was willing to go inside to the people, but the disciples would not permit him.
Even some of the commissioners of festivals and games who were friendly to him sent word to him, pleading with him not to risk going into the theater.
Some were, in fact, crying out one thing and others something else; for the assembly was in confusion and the majority of them did not know the reason why they had come together.
So they brought Alexander out of the crowd, the Jews shoving him forward, and Alexander motioned with his hand and wanted to make his defense to the people.
But when they recognized that he was a Jew, they all started shouting in unison for about two hours: “Great is Arʹte·mis of the E·pheʹsians!”
When the city recorder had finally quieted the crowd, he said: “Men of Ephʹe·sus, who really is there among men who does not know that the city of the E·pheʹsians is the temple keeper of the great Arʹte·mis and of the image that fell from heaven?
Since these things are indisputable, you should keep calm and not act rashly.
For you have brought these men here who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of our goddess.
So if De·meʹtri·us and the craftsmen with him do have a case against someone, court days are held and there are proconsuls; let them bring charges against one another.
But if you are searching for anything beyond that, it must be decided in a regular assembly.
For we are really in danger of being charged with sedition over today’s affair, since there are no grounds we could present as a reason for this disorderly mob.”
And after saying this, he dismissed the assembly.
Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Ju·deʹa heard that people of the nations had also accepted the word of God.
So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the supporters of circumcision began to criticize him,
saying: “You went into the house of men who were not circumcised and ate with them.”
At this Peter went on to explain the matter in detail to them, saying:
“I was in the city of Jopʹpa praying, and while in a trance I saw a vision, something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners from heaven, and it came right down to me.
Looking closely into it, I observed four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of heaven.
I also heard a voice say to me: ‘Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!’
But I said: ‘Certainly not, Lord, because a defiled or unclean thing has never entered my mouth.’
The second time, the voice from heaven answered: ‘You stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.’
This happened a third time, and everything was pulled up again into heaven.
Also just at that moment, three men were standing at the house where we were staying, having been sent to me from Caes·a·reʹa.
Then the spirit told me to go with them, not doubting at all. But these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the house of the man.
“He reported to us how he saw the angel stand in his house and say: ‘Send men to Jopʹpa and summon Simon who is called Peter,
and he will tell you things by which you and all your household may get saved.’
But when I started to speak, the holy spirit fell on them just as it did also on us in the beginning.
At this I recalled the saying of the Lord, how he used to say: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit.’
If, therefore, God gave the same free gift to them that he gave to us who have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to hinder God?”
When they heard these things, they stopped objecting, and they glorified God, saying: “So, then, God has also granted to people of the nations repentance leading to life.”
Now those who had been scattered by the tribulation that arose over Stephen went as far as Phoe·niʹcia, Cyʹprus, and Antioch, but they spoke the word only to the Jews.
However, some of the men among them from Cyʹprus and Cy·reʹne came to Antioch and began talking to the Greek-speaking people, declaring the good news of the Lord Jesus.
Furthermore, the hand of Jehovah was with them, and a great number became believers and turned to the Lord.
The report about them reached the ears of the congregation in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barʹna·bas as far as Antioch.
When he arrived and saw the undeserved kindness of God, he rejoiced and began to encourage them all to continue in the Lord with heartfelt resolve;
for he was a good man and full of holy spirit and faith. And a considerable crowd was added to the Lord.
So he went to Tarsus to make a thorough search for Saul.
After he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year they assembled with them in the congregation and taught quite a crowd, and it was first in Antioch that the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.
In those days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
One of them named Agʹa·bus stood up and foretold through the spirit that a great famine was about to come on the entire inhabited earth, which, in fact, did take place in the time of Claudius.
So the disciples determined, each according to what he could afford, to send relief to the brothers living in Ju·deʹa;
and this they did, sending it to the elders by the hand of Barʹna·bas and Saul.
A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “You are permitted to speak in your own behalf.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and proceeded to say in his defense:
“Concerning all the things of which I am accused by the Jews, King A·gripʹpa, I consider myself happy that it is before you I am to make my defense this day,
especially because you are an expert on all the customs as well as the controversies among the Jews. Therefore, I beg you to hear me patiently.
“Indeed, the manner of life I led from youth up among my people and in Jerusalem is well-known by all the Jews
who were previously acquainted with me, if they would be willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our form of worship, I lived as a Pharisee.
But now for the hope of the promise that was made by God to our forefathers, I stand on trial;
this is the same promise our 12 tribes are hoping to see fulfilled by intensely rendering him sacred service night and day. Concerning this hope I am accused by Jews, O King.
“Why is it considered unbelievable among you that God raises up the dead?
I, for one, was convinced that I should commit many acts of opposition against the name of Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.
This is exactly what I did in Jerusalem, and I locked up many of the holy ones in prisons, for I had received authority from the chief priests; and when they were to be executed, I cast my vote against them.
By punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to force them to recant; and since I was extremely furious with them, I went so far as to persecute them even in outlying cities.
“While doing this as I was traveling to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests,
I saw at midday on the road, O King, a light beyond the brilliance of the sun flash from heaven around me and around those traveling with me.
And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? To keep kicking against the goads makes it hard for you.’
But I said: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said: ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But rise and stand on your feet. This is why I have appeared to you, to choose you as a servant and a witness both of things you have seen and things I will make you see respecting me.
And I will rescue you from this people and from the nations, to whom I am sending you
to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those sanctified by their faith in me.’
“Therefore, King A·gripʹpa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but to those in Damascus first and then to those in Jerusalem, and over all the country of Ju·deʹa, and also to the nations, I was bringing the message that they should repent and turn to God by doing works that befit repentance.
This is why the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me.
However, because I have experienced the help that is from God, I continue to this day bearing witness to both small and great, saying nothing except what the Prophets as well as Moses stated was going to take place—
that the Christ was to suffer and that as the first to be resurrected from the dead, he was going to proclaim light both to this people and to the nations.”
Now as Paul was saying these things in his defense, Festus said in a loud voice: “You are going out of your mind, Paul! Great learning is driving you out of your mind!”
But Paul said: “I am not going out of my mind, Your Excellency Festus, but I am speaking words of truth and of a sound mind.
For a fact, the king to whom I am speaking so freely well knows about these things; I am convinced that not one of these things escapes his notice, for none of this has been done in a corner.
Do you, King A·gripʹpa, believe the Prophets? I know that you believe.”
But A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “In a short time you would persuade me to become a Christian.”
At this Paul said: “I wish to God that whether in a short time or in a long time, not only you but also all those who hear me today would become men such as I am, with the exception of these prison bonds.”
Then the king rose and so did the governor and Bernice and the men seated with them.
But as they were leaving, they began saying to one another: “This man is doing nothing deserving of death or prison bonds.”
A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
The first account, O The·ophʹi·lus, I composed about all the things Jesus started to do and to teach
until the day that he was taken up, after he had given instructions through holy spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
After he had suffered, he showed himself alive to them by many convincing proofs. He was seen by them throughout 40 days, and he was speaking about the Kingdom of God.
While he was meeting with them, he ordered them: “Do not leave Jerusalem, but keep waiting for what the Father has promised, about which you heard from me;
for John, indeed, baptized with water, but you will be baptized with holy spirit not many days after this.”
So when they had assembled, they asked him: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”
He said to them: “It does not belong to you to know the times or seasons that the Father has placed in his own jurisdiction.
But you will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you, and you will be witnesses of me in Jerusalem, in all Ju·deʹa and Sa·marʹi·a, and to the most distant part of the earth.”
After he had said these things, while they were looking on, he was lifted up and a cloud caught him up from their sight.
And as they were gazing into the sky while he was on his way, suddenly two men in white garments stood beside them
and said: “Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into the sky will come in the same manner as you have seen him going into the sky.”
Then they returned to Jerusalem from a mountain called the Mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, only a sabbath day’s journey away.
When they arrived, they went up into the upper room where they were staying. There were Peter as well as John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bar·tholʹo·mew and Matthew, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, and Simon the zealous one, and Judas the son of James.
With one purpose all of these were persisting in prayer, together with some women and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brothers.
During those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (the number of people was altogether about 120) and said:
“Men, brothers, it was necessary for the scripture to be fulfilled that the holy spirit spoke prophetically through David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus.
For he had been numbered among us and he obtained a share in this ministry.
(This very man, therefore, purchased a field with the wages for unrighteousness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open and all his insides spilled out.
This became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their language A·kelʹda·ma, that is, “Field of Blood.”)
For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his dwelling become desolate, and let there be no inhabitant in it’ and, ‘His office of oversight let someone else take.’
It is therefore necessary that of the men who accompanied us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus carried on his activities among us,
starting with his baptism by John until the day he was taken up from us, one of these men should become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
So they proposed two, Joseph called Barʹsab·bas, who was also called Justus, and Mat·thiʹas.
Then they prayed and said: “You, O Jehovah, who know the hearts of all, designate which one of these two men you have chosen
to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas deviated to go to his own place.”
So they cast lots over them, and the lot fell to Mat·thiʹas, and he was counted along with the 11 apostles.
But the high priest said: “Are these things so?”
Stephen replied: “Men, brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our forefather Abraham while he was in Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, before he took up residence in Haʹran,
and he said to him: ‘Go out from your land and from your relatives and come into the land that I will show you.’
Then he went out of the land of the Chal·deʹans and took up residence in Haʹran. And from there, after his father died, God caused him to resettle in this land where you now dwell.
And yet, he did not give him any inheritance in it, no, not even enough to put his foot on; but he promised to give it to him as a possession and after him to his offspring, though as yet he had no child.
Moreover, God told him that his offspring would be foreigners in a land not theirs and that the people would enslave them and afflict them for 400 years.
‘And that nation for which they will slave I will judge,’ God said, ‘and after these things they will come out and will offer sacred service to me in this place.’
“He also gave him a covenant of circumcision, and he became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the 12 family heads.
And the family heads became jealous of Joseph and sold him into Egypt. But God was with him,
and he rescued him out of all his tribulations and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharʹaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him to govern Egypt and his whole house.
But a famine came on all of Egypt and Caʹnaan, yes, a great tribulation, and our forefathers could not find anything to eat.
But Jacob heard that there were food supplies in Egypt, and he sent our forefathers out the first time.
During the second time, Joseph made himself known to his brothers, and the family of Joseph became known to Pharʹaoh.
So Joseph sent a message and called his father Jacob and all his relatives from that place, 75 persons in all.
So Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died there, and so did our forefathers.
They were carried to Sheʹchem and were laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver money from the sons of Haʹmor in Sheʹchem.
“Just as the time was approaching to fulfill the promise that God had announced to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
until there rose a different king over Egypt, one who did not know of Joseph.
This one dealt cunningly with our race and wrongfully forced the fathers to abandon their infants so that they would not be kept alive.
At that time Moses was born, and he was divinely beautiful. And he was nursed for three months in his father’s home.
But when he was abandoned, the daughter of Pharʹaoh took him and brought him up as her own son.
So Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. In fact, he was powerful in his words and deeds.
“Now when he reached the age of 40, it came into his heart to make a visit on his brothers, the sons of Israel.
When he caught sight of one of them being unjustly treated, he defended him and avenged the one being abused by striking down the Egyptian.
He thought that his brothers would grasp that God was giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not grasp it.
The next day he appeared to them as they were fighting, and he tried to reconcile them in peace, saying: ‘Men, you are brothers. Why do you mistreat each other?’
But the one who was mistreating his neighbor pushed him away, saying: ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge over us?
You do not want to do away with me the way you did away with the Egyptian yesterday, do you?’
On hearing this, Moses fled and lived as a foreigner in the land of Midʹi·an, where he became the father of two sons.
“After 40 years had passed, an angel appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Siʹnai in the flame of a burning thornbush.
When Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight. But as he was approaching to investigate, Jehovah’s voice was heard:
‘I am the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob.’ Moses started trembling and did not dare to investigate further.
Jehovah said to him: ‘Remove the sandals from your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
I have certainly seen the oppression of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and I have come down to rescue them. Now come, I will send you off to Egypt.’
This same Moses whom they had disowned, saying: ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge?’ is the very one God sent as both ruler and deliverer by means of the angel who appeared to him in the thornbush.
This man led them out, performing wonders and signs in Egypt and at the Red Sea and in the wilderness for 40 years.
“This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel: ‘God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me.’
This is the one who came to be among the congregation in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Siʹnai and with our forefathers, and he received living sacred pronouncements to give us.
Our forefathers refused to obey him, but they pushed him aside and in their hearts they turned back to Egypt,
saying to Aaron: ‘Make gods for us to go ahead of us. For we do not know what has happened to this Moses, who led us out of the land of Egypt.’
So they made a calf in those days and brought a sacrifice to the idol and began to enjoy themselves in the works of their hands.
So God turned away from them and handed them over to offer sacred service to the army of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the Prophets: ‘It was not to me that you made offerings and sacrifices for 40 years in the wilderness, was it, O house of Israel?
But it was the tent of Moʹloch and the star of the god Reʹphan that you took up, the images that you made to worship them. So I will deport you beyond Babylon.’
“Our forefathers had the tent of the witness in the wilderness, just as He gave orders when speaking to Moses to make it according to the pattern he had seen.
And our forefathers received possession of it and brought it in with Joshua into the land possessed by the nations, whom God drove out from before our forefathers. Here it remained until the days of David.
He found favor in the sight of God and asked for the privilege of providing a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
But it was Solʹo·mon who built a house for him.
However, the Most High does not dwell in houses made with hands, just as the prophet says:
‘The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What sort of house will you build for me? Jehovah says. Or where is my resting-place?
My hand made all these things, did it not?’
“Obstinate men and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, you are always resisting the holy spirit; as your forefathers did, so you do.
Which one of the prophets did your forefathers not persecute? Yes, they killed those who announced in advance the coming of the righteous one, whose betrayers and murderers you have now become,
you who received the Law as transmitted by angels but have not kept it.”
Well, at hearing these things, they were infuriated in their hearts and began to grind their teeth at him.
But he, being full of holy spirit, gazed into heaven and caught sight of God’s glory and of Jesus standing at God’s right hand,
and he said: “Look! I see the heavens opened up and the Son of man standing at God’s right hand.”
At this they cried out at the top of their voices and put their hands over their ears and rushed at him all together.
After throwing him outside the city, they began stoning him. The witnesses laid down their outer garments at the feet of a young man called Saul.
As they were stoning Stephen, he made this appeal: “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
Then, kneeling down, he cried out with a strong voice: “Jehovah, do not charge this sin against them.” And after saying this, he fell asleep in death.
Therefore Festus, after arriving in the province and taking charge, went up three days later to Jerusalem from Caes·a·reʹa.
And the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews gave him information against Paul. So they began to beg Festus
as a favor to send for Paul to come to Jerusalem. But they were planning to ambush Paul and kill him along the road.
However, Festus answered that Paul was to be kept in Caes·a·reʹa and that he himself was about to go back there shortly.
“So let those who are in power among you,” he said, “come down with me and accuse him if, indeed, the man has done something wrong.”
So when he had spent not more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caes·a·reʹa, and the next day he sat down on the judgment seat and commanded Paul to be brought in.
When he came in, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many serious charges that they were unable to prove.
But Paul said in defense: “Neither against the Law of the Jews nor against the temple nor against Caesar have I committed any sin.”
Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, said in reply to Paul: “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and be judged before me there concerning these things?”
But Paul said: “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews, of which you are also becoming well-aware.
If I am really a wrongdoer and have committed anything deserving of death, I do not beg off from dying; but if there is no substance to the accusations these men have made against me, no man has the right to hand me over to them as a favor. I appeal to Caesar!”
Then Festus, after speaking with the assembly of counselors, replied: “To Caesar you have appealed; to Caesar you will go.”
After some days had passed, A·gripʹpa the king and Bernice arrived in Caes·a·reʹa for a courtesy visit to Festus.
Since they were spending a number of days there, Festus presented Paul’s case to the king, saying: “There is a man who was left as a prisoner by Felix,
and when I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought information about him, asking for a judgment of condemnation against him.
But I replied to them that it is not Roman procedure to hand any man over as a favor before the accused man meets his accusers face-to-face and gets a chance to speak in his defense concerning the complaint.
So when they arrived here, I did not delay, but the next day I sat down on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought in.
Taking the stand, the accusers did not charge him with any of the wicked things I had expected concerning him.
They simply had certain disputes with him concerning their own worship of the deity and concerning a man named Jesus, who was dead but who Paul kept asserting was alive.
Being at a loss as to how to handle this dispute, I asked if he would like to go to Jerusalem and be judged there concerning these matters.
But when Paul appealed to be kept in custody for the decision by the August One, I commanded him to be held until I should send him on to Caesar.”
A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you will hear him.”
So the next day A·gripʹpa and Bernice came with much pompous show and entered the audience chamber together with military commanders as well as the prominent men in the city; and when Festus gave the command, Paul was brought in.
And Festus said: “King A·gripʹpa and all you who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish populace have petitioned me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
But I perceived that he had done nothing deserving of death. So when this man himself appealed to the August One, I decided to send him.
But I have nothing certain to write about him to my Lord. So I brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King A·gripʹpa, so that after the judicial examination has taken place, I might have something to write.
For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not also to indicate the charges against him.”
Now in Antioch there were prophets and teachers in the local congregation: Barʹna·bas, Symʹe·on who was called Niʹger, Lucius of Cy·reʹne, Manʹa·en who was educated with Herod the district ruler, and Saul.
As they were ministering to Jehovah and fasting, the holy spirit said: “Set aside for me Barʹna·bas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
Then after fasting and praying, they laid their hands on them and sent them off.
So these men, sent out by the holy spirit, went down to Se·leuʹcia, and from there they sailed away to Cyʹprus.
When they arrived in Salʹa·mis, they began proclaiming the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. They also had John as an attendant.
When they had gone through the whole island as far as Paʹphos, they met up with a Jewish man named Bar-Jeʹsus, who was a sorcerer and a false prophet.
He was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. Calling Barʹna·bas and Saul to him, this man was eager to hear the word of God.
But Elʹy·mas the sorcerer (for that is how his name is translated) began opposing them, trying to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
Then Saul, also called Paul, becoming filled with holy spirit, looked at him intently
and said: “O man full of every sort of fraud and every sort of villainy, you son of the Devil, you enemy of everything righteous, will you not quit distorting the right ways of Jehovah?
Look! Jehovah’s hand is upon you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sunlight for a time.” Instantly a thick mist and darkness fell on him, and he went around trying to find someone to lead him by the hand.
Then the proconsul, on seeing what had happened, became a believer, for he was astounded at the teaching of Jehovah.
Now Paul and his companions put out to sea from Paʹphos and arrived at Perga in Pam·phylʹi·a. But John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
However, they went on from Perga and came to Antioch in Pi·sidʹi·a. And going into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, they took a seat.
After the public reading of the Law and the Prophets, the presiding officers of the synagogue sent word to them, saying: “Men, brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, tell it.”
So Paul stood up, and motioning with his hand, he said: “Men, Israelites and you others who fear God, listen.
The God of this people Israel chose our forefathers, and he exalted the people while they lived as foreigners in the land of Egypt and brought them out of it with an uplifted arm.
And for a period of about 40 years, he put up with them in the wilderness.
After destroying seven nations in the land of Caʹnaan, he assigned their land as an inheritance.
All of that was during about 450 years. “After this he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
But afterward they demanded a king, and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for 40 years.
After removing him, he raised up for them David as king, about whom he bore witness and said: ‘I have found David the son of Jesʹse a man agreeable to my heart; he will do all the things I desire.’
According to his promise, from the offspring of this man, God has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.
Before the arrival of that one, John had preached publicly to all the people of Israel baptism in symbol of repentance.
But as John was finishing his course, he would say: ‘What do you suppose I am? I am not he. But look! One is coming after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’
“Men, brothers, you descendants of Abraham’s family and those others among you who fear God, the word of this salvation has been sent to us.
For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize this one, but when acting as judges, they fulfilled the things spoken by the Prophets, which are read aloud every sabbath.
Even though they found no cause for death, they demanded of Pilate to have him executed.
And when they had accomplished all the things written about him, they took him down from the stake and laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him up from the dead,
and for many days he became visible to those who had gone with him from Galilee up to Jerusalem. These are now his witnesses to the people.
“So we are declaring to you the good news about the promise made to the forefathers.
God has completely fulfilled it to us, their children, by resurrecting Jesus; just as it is written in the second psalm: ‘You are my son; today I have become your father.’
And the fact that He resurrected him from the dead never again to return to corruption, He has stated in this way: ‘I will give you the expressions of loyal love promised to David, which are faithful.’
So it also says in another psalm: ‘You will not allow your loyal one to see corruption.’
David, on the one hand, rendered service to God in his own generation, fell asleep in death, was laid with his forefathers, and did see corruption.
On the other hand, the one whom God raised up did not see corruption.
“Let it therefore be known to you, brothers, that through this one a forgiveness of sins is being proclaimed to you,
and that from all the things from which you could not be declared guiltless by means of the Law of Moses, everyone who believes is declared guiltless by means of this one.
Therefore, watch out that what is said in the Prophets does not come upon you:
‘Look at it, you scorners, and be amazed, and perish, for I am doing a work in your days, a work that you will never believe even if anyone relates it to you in detail.’”
Now when they were going out, the people pleaded with them to speak about these matters on the following Sabbath.
So after the synagogue assembly was dismissed, many of the Jews and the proselytes who worshipped God followed Paul and Barʹna·bas, who, as they spoke to them, urged them to remain in the undeserved kindness of God.
The next Sabbath nearly all the city gathered together to hear the word of Jehovah.
When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began blasphemously contradicting the things Paul was saying.
Then Paul and Barʹna·bas boldly said to them: “It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you. Since you are rejecting it and do not judge yourselves worthy of everlasting life, look! we turn to the nations.
For Jehovah has commanded us in these words: ‘I have appointed you as a light of nations, for you to be a salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
When those of the nations heard this, they began to rejoice and to glorify the word of Jehovah, and all those who were rightly disposed for everlasting life became believers.
Furthermore, the word of Jehovah was being spread throughout the whole country.
But the Jews incited the prominent women who were God-fearing and the principal men of the city, and they stirred up persecution against Paul and Barʹna·bas and threw them outside their boundaries.
So they shook the dust off their feet against them and went to I·coʹni·um.
And the disciples continued to be filled with joy and holy spirit.
After tearing ourselves away from them and putting out to sea, we ran with a straight course and came to Cos, on the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patʹa·ra.
When we found a ship that was crossing to Phoe·niʹcia, we went aboard and sailed away.
After coming in sight of the island of Cyʹprus, we left it behind on the left side and sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its cargo.
We searched for and found the disciples and remained there for seven days. But through the spirit they repeatedly told Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.
So when our time there was over, we left and started on our way, but they all, together with the women and children, accompanied us until we were outside the city. And kneeling down on the beach, we prayed
and said good-bye to one another. Then we went aboard the ship, and they returned to their homes.
We then completed the voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptol·e·maʹis, and we greeted the brothers and stayed one day with them.
The next day we left and came to Caes·a·reʹa, and we entered the house of Philip the evangelizer, who was one of the seven men, and we stayed with him.
This man had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
But after we had stayed there for quite a number of days, a prophet named Agʹa·bus came down from Ju·deʹa.
And he came to us and took Paul’s belt and tied his own feet and hands and said: “Thus says the holy spirit, ‘The man to whom this belt belongs will be bound like this by the Jews in Jerusalem, and they will give him into the hands of people of the nations.’”
Now when we heard this, both we and those who were there began begging him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Then Paul answered: “What are you doing by weeping and trying to weaken my resolve? Rest assured, I am ready not only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
When he would not be dissuaded, we stopped objecting and said: “Let the will of Jehovah take place.”
Now after these days we prepared for the journey and started on our way to Jerusalem.
Some of the disciples from Caes·a·reʹa also went with us, taking us to Mnaʹson of Cyʹprus, an early disciple at whose home we were to be guests.
When we got to Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly.
But on the following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.
And he greeted them and began giving a detailed account of the things God did among the nations through his ministry.
After hearing this, they began to glorify God, but they said to him: “You see, brother, how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews, and they are all zealous for the Law.
But they have heard it rumored about you that you have been teaching all the Jews among the nations an apostasy from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or to follow the customary practices.
What, then, is to be done about it? They are certainly going to hear that you have arrived.
So do what we tell you: We have four men who have put themselves under a vow.
Take these men with you and cleanse yourself ceremonially together with them and take care of their expenses, so that they may have their heads shaved. Then everyone will know that there is nothing to the rumors they were told about you, but that you are walking orderly and you are also keeping the Law.
As for the believers from among the nations, we have sent them our decision in writing that they should keep away from what is sacrificed to idols as well as from blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
Then Paul took the men the next day and cleansed himself ceremonially along with them, and he went into the temple to give notice of when the days for the ceremonial cleansing would be completed and the offering should be presented for each one of them.
Now when the seven days were about to end, the Jews from Asia, on seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd, and they seized him,
shouting: “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people and our Law and this place. And what is more, he even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place.”
For they had previously seen Trophʹi·mus the E·pheʹsian in the city with him, and they assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
The whole city was in an uproar, and the people came running together and seized Paul and dragged him outside the temple, and immediately the doors were closed.
While they were trying to kill him, word reached the commander of the army unit that all Jerusalem was in confusion;
and he immediately took soldiers and army officers and ran down to them. When they caught sight of the military commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
Then the military commander came near and took him into custody and ordered that he be bound with two chains; then he inquired who he was and what he had done.
But some in the crowd began shouting out one thing, and others something else. So being unable himself to learn anything for certain because of the disturbance, he commanded him to be brought to the soldiers’ quarters.
But when he reached the stairs, he had to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd,
for a crowd of the people kept following, crying out: “Do away with him!”
As he was about to be led into the soldiers’ quarters, Paul said to the military commander: “Am I allowed to say something to you?” He said: “Can you speak Greek?
Are you not, then, the Egyptian who some time ago stirred up a sedition and led the 4,000 dagger men out into the wilderness?”
Then Paul said: “I am, in fact, a Jew, of Tarsus in Ci·liʹcia, a citizen of no obscure city. So I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.”
After he gave permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, motioned with his hand to the people. When a great silence fell, he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying:
Now Peter and John were going up into the temple for the hour of prayer, the ninth hour,
and a man who was lame from birth was being carried. Every day they would put him near the temple door that was called Beautiful, so he could ask for gifts of mercy from those entering the temple.
When he caught sight of Peter and John about to go into the temple, he began asking for gifts of mercy.
But Peter, together with John, looked straight at him and said: “Look at us.”
So he fixed his attention on them, expecting to get something from them.
However, Peter said: “Silver and gold I do not possess, but what I do have is what I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ the Naz·a·reneʹ, walk!”
With that he took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up. Instantly his feet and his ankles were made firm;
and leaping to his feet, he began walking and went with them into the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God.
And they began to recognize him, that this was the man who used to sit waiting for gifts of mercy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were completely astonished and ecstatic about what had happened to him.
While the man was still holding on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at what was called Solʹo·mon’s Colonnade, completely surprised.
When Peter saw this, he said to the people: “Men of Israel, why are you so amazed at this, and why are you staring at us as though by personal power or godly devotion we have made him walk?
The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his Servant, Jesus, whom you handed over and disowned before Pilate, even though he had decided to release him.
Yes, you disowned that holy and righteous one, and you asked for a man who was a murderer to be given to you,
whereas you killed the Chief Agent of life. But God raised him up from the dead, of which fact we are witnesses.
And through his name, and by our faith in his name, this man whom you see and know has been made strong. The faith that is through him has made this man completely healthy in front of all of you.
And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers also did.
But in this way God has fulfilled the things he announced beforehand through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer.
“Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself
and he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus.
Heaven must hold this one within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old.
In fact, Moses said: ‘Jehovah your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to whatever he tells you.
Indeed, anyone who does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.’
And all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed him, as many as have spoken, have also plainly declared these days.
You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your forefathers, saying to Abraham: ‘And by means of your offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
God, after raising up his Servant, sent him to you first to bless you by turning each one of you away from your wicked deeds.”
But Saul, still breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that he might bring bound to Jerusalem any whom he found who belonged to The Way, both men and women.
Now as he was traveling and getting near Damascus, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him,
and he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him: “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
He asked: “Who are you, Lord?” He said: “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
But get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
Now the men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing, indeed, the sound of a voice but seeing no one.
Saul then got up from the ground, and though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
And for three days he did not see anything, and he neither ate nor drank.
There was a disciple named An·a·niʹas in Damascus, and the Lord said to him in a vision: “An·a·niʹas!” He said: “Here I am, Lord.”
The Lord said to him: “Get up, go to the street called Straight, and look for a man named Saul, from Tarsus, at the house of Judas. For look! he is praying,
and in a vision he has seen a man named An·a·niʹas come in and lay his hands on him so that he may recover sight.”
But An·a·niʹas answered: “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, about all the harm he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to arrest all those calling on your name.”
But the Lord said to him: “Go! because this man is a chosen vessel to me to bear my name to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.
For I will show him plainly how many things he must suffer for my name.”
So An·a·niʹas went and entered the house, and he laid his hands on him and said: “Saul, brother, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road along which you were coming, has sent me so that you may recover sight and be filled with holy spirit.”
And immediately, what looked like scales fell from his eyes, and he recovered his sight. He then got up and was baptized,
and he ate some food and gained strength. He stayed for some days with the disciples in Damascus,
and immediately in the synagogues he began to preach about Jesus, that this one is the Son of God.
But all those hearing him were astonished and were saying: “Is this not the man who ravaged those in Jerusalem who call on this name? Did he not come here for the purpose of arresting them and taking them to the chief priests?”
But Saul kept on acquiring more and more power and was confounding the Jews who lived in Damascus, as he proved logically that this is the Christ.
Now when many days had passed, the Jews plotted together to do away with him.
However, their plot against Saul became known to him. They were also watching the gates closely both day and night in order to do away with him.
So his disciples took him and let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
On arriving in Jerusalem, he made efforts to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, because they did not believe he was a disciple.
So Barʹna·bas came to his aid and led him to the apostles, and he told them in detail how on the road he had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
So he remained with them, moving about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
He was talking and disputing with the Greek-speaking Jews, but these made attempts to do away with him.
When the brothers found out about this, they brought him down to Caes·a·reʹa and sent him off to Tarsus.
Then, indeed, the congregation throughout the whole of Ju·deʹa and Galilee and Sa·marʹi·a entered into a period of peace, being built up; and as it walked in the fear of Jehovah and in the comfort of the holy spirit, it kept on multiplying.
Now as Peter was traveling through all the region, he came down also to the holy ones who lived in Lydʹda.
There he found a man named Ae·neʹas, who had been lying flat on his bed for eight years, for he was paralyzed.
Peter said to him: “Ae·neʹas, Jesus Christ heals you. Rise and make up your bed.” And he got up immediately.
When all those living in Lydʹda and the Plain of Sharʹon saw him, they turned to the Lord.
Now there was in Jopʹpa a disciple named Tabʹi·tha, which means, when translated, “Dorʹcas.” She abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy that she was making.
But in those days she fell sick and died. So they bathed her and laid her in an upper room.
Since Lydʹda was near Jopʹpa, when the disciples heard that Peter was in that city, they sent two men to him to urge him: “Please come to us without delay.”
At that Peter got up and went with them. And when he arrived, they led him up into the upper room; and all the widows presented themselves to him, weeping and showing many garments and robes that Dorʹcas had made while she was with them.
Peter then put everyone outside, and kneeling down, he prayed. Then turning toward the body, he said: “Tabʹi·tha, rise!” She opened her eyes, and as she caught sight of Peter, she sat up.
Giving her his hand, he raised her up, and he called the holy ones and the widows and presented her alive.
This became known throughout all Jopʹpa, and many became believers in the Lord.
He remained for quite a few days in Jopʹpa with a tanner named Simon.
Five days later the high priest An·a·niʹas came down with some elders and a public speaker named Ter·tulʹlus, and they presented their case against Paul to the governor.
When he was called, Ter·tulʹlus started accusing him, saying: “Seeing that we enjoy great peace through you and that through your forethought reforms are taking place in this nation,
at all times and also in all places we acknowledge this, Your Excellency Felix, with the greatest thankfulness.
But that I may not detain you any further, I beg you to hear us briefly in your kindness.
For we have found this man to be a pest, stirring up seditions among all the Jews throughout the inhabited earth, and he is a spearhead of the sect of the Naz·a·renesʹ.
He also tried to profane the temple, so we seized him.
When you examine him yourself, you will find out about all these things of which we are accusing him.”
With that the Jews also joined in the attack, asserting that these things were true.
When the governor nodded to Paul to speak, he answered: “Knowing well that this nation has had you as judge for many years, I readily speak in my own defense.
As you can verify for yourself, it has not been more than 12 days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem;
and they found me neither arguing with anyone in the temple nor stirring up a mob, either in the synagogues or throughout the city.
Nor can they prove to you the things they are accusing me of right now.
But I do admit this to you, that according to the way that they call a sect, in this manner I am rendering sacred service to the God of my forefathers, as I believe all the things set forth in the Law and written in the Prophets.
And I have hope toward God, which hope these men also look forward to, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.
Because of this I always strive to maintain a clear conscience before God and men.
Now after quite a number of years, I arrived to bring gifts of mercy to my nation and to make offerings.
While I was caring for these matters, they found me ceremonially cleansed in the temple, but not with a crowd or causing a disturbance. But there were some Jews from the province of Asia
who ought to be present before you to accuse me if they actually have anything against me.
Or let the men here say for themselves what wrong they found as I stood before the Sanʹhe·drin,
except for this one thing that I cried out while standing among them: ‘Over the resurrection of the dead I am today being judged before you!’”
However, Felix, knowing quite well the facts concerning this Way, began to put them off and say: “Whenever Lysʹi·as the military commander comes down, I will decide these matters involving you.”
And he gave orders to the army officer that the man be kept under arrest but given some freedom, and that his people be allowed to attend to his needs.
Some days later Felix came with Dru·silʹla his wife, who was Jewish, and he sent for Paul and listened to him speak about the belief in Christ Jesus.
But as Paul talked about righteousness and self-control and the judgment to come, Felix became frightened and answered: “Go away for now, but when I have an opportunity I will send for you again.”
At the same time he was hoping that Paul would give him money. For that reason, he sent for him even more frequently and conversed with him.
But when two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus; and because Felix desired to gain favor with the Jews, he left Paul in custody.
Now as it was decided for us to sail away to Italy, they handed Paul and some other prisoners over to an army officer named Julius, of the unit of Au·gusʹtus.
Going aboard a ship from Ad·ra·mytʹti·um that was about to sail to ports along the coast of the province of Asia, we set sail; Ar·is·tarʹchus, a Mac·e·doʹni·an from Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, was with us.
The next day we landed at Siʹdon, and Julius treated Paul with kindness and permitted him to go to his friends and enjoy their care.
And putting out to sea from there, we sailed under the shelter of Cyʹprus, because the winds were against us.
Then we navigated through the open sea along Ci·liʹcia and Pam·phylʹi·a and put into port at Myʹra in Lyʹci·a.
There the army officer found a ship from Alexandria that was sailing for Italy, and he made us board it.
Then after sailing on slowly quite a number of days, we came to Cniʹdus with difficulty. Because the wind did not let us make headway, we sailed under the shelter of Crete off Sal·moʹne.
And sailing with difficulty along the coast, we came to a place called Fair Havens, which was near the city of La·seʹa.
A considerable time had passed and by now it was hazardous to navigate, because even the fast of Atonement Day was already over, so Paul made a recommendation
to them: “Men, I can see that this voyage is going to result in damage and great loss not only of the cargo and the ship but also of our lives.”
However, the army officer listened to the pilot and the shipowner rather than to what Paul was saying.
Since the harbor was unsuitable for wintering, the majority advised setting sail from there to see if they could somehow make it to spend the winter in Phoenix, a harbor of Crete that opens toward the northeast and toward the southeast.
When the south wind blew softly, they thought they had achieved their purpose, and they lifted anchor and began sailing along Crete close to the shore.
After a short time, however, a violent wind called Eu·ro·aqʹui·lo rushed down on it.
As the ship was violently seized and was not able to keep its head against the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along.
Then we ran under the shelter of a small island called Cauʹda, and yet we were hardly able to get the skiff at the stern of the ship under control.
But after hoisting it aboard, they used supports to undergird the ship, and fearing that they would run aground on the Syrʹtis, they lowered the gear and so were driven along.
Because we were being violently tossed by the storm, they began to lighten the ship the following day.
And on the third day, they threw away the tackling of the ship with their own hands.
When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and a violent storm was battering us, all hope of our being saved finally began to fade.
After they had gone a long time without food, Paul stood up in their midst and said: “Men, you certainly should have taken my advice and not have put out to sea from Crete and as a result suffered this damage and loss.
Still, I now urge you to take courage, for not one of you will be lost, only the ship will.
This night an angel of the God to whom I belong and to whom I render sacred service stood by me
and said: ‘Have no fear, Paul. You must stand before Caesar, and look! God has granted to you all those sailing with you.’
So take courage, men, for I believe God that it will be exactly as I was told.
However, we must be cast ashore on some island.”
Now when the 14th night fell and we were being tossed about on the Sea of Aʹdri·a, at midnight the sailors began to suspect that they were getting near to some land.
They sounded the depth and found it 20 fathoms, so they proceeded a short distance and again made a sounding and found it 15 fathoms.
And fearing that we might run aground on the rocks, they cast out four anchors from the stern and began wishing for it to become day.
But when the sailors began trying to escape from the ship and were lowering the skiff into the sea under the pretense of intending to let down anchors from the bow,
Paul said to the army officer and the soldiers: “Unless these men remain in the ship, you cannot be saved.”
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the skiff and let it fall off.
Now close to daybreak, Paul encouraged them all to take some food, saying: “Today is the 14th day you have been waiting anxiously, and you have gone without taking any food at all.
So I encourage you to eat some food; this is in the interests of your safety, for not a hair of the head of any one of you will perish.”
After he said this, he took bread, gave thanks to God before them all, broke it, and started eating.
So they all took courage and began taking some food themselves.
In all we were 276 persons in the ship.
When they had eaten enough food to be satisfied, they lightened the ship by throwing the wheat overboard into the sea.
When daylight came, they could not recognize the land, but they saw a bay with a beach and were determined to beach the ship there if they could.
So they cut away the anchors and let them fall into the sea, at the same time loosening the lashings of the rudder oars; and after hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
When they struck a shoal washed on each side by the sea, they ran the ship aground and the bow got stuck and stayed immovable, but the stern began to be violently broken to pieces by the waves.
At this the soldiers decided to kill the prisoners so that no one might swim away and escape.
But the army officer was determined to bring Paul safely through and prevented them from carrying out their plan. He commanded those able to swim to jump into the sea and make it to land first,
and the rest were to follow, some on planks and some on pieces of the ship. So all were brought safely to land.
Now while the day of the Festival of Pentecost was in progress, they were all together at the same place.
Suddenly there was a noise from heaven, just like that of a rushing, stiff breeze, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
And tongues as if of fire became visible to them and were distributed, and one came to rest on each one of them,
and they all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak in different languages, just as the spirit enabled them to speak.
At that time devout Jews from every nation under heaven were staying in Jerusalem.
So when this sound occurred, a crowd gathered and was bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
Indeed, they were utterly amazed and said: “See here, all these who are speaking are Gal·i·leʹans, are they not?
How is it, then, that each one of us is hearing his own native language?
Parʹthi·ans, Medes, and Eʹlam·ites, the inhabitants of Mes·o·po·taʹmi·a, Ju·deʹa and Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Ponʹtus and the province of Asia,
Phrygʹi·a and Pam·phylʹi·a, Egypt and the regions of Libʹy·a near Cy·reʹne, sojourners from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
Creʹtans, and Arabians—we hear them speaking in our languages about the magnificent things of God.”
Yes, they were all astonished and perplexed, saying to one another: “What does this mean?”
However, others mocked them and said: “They are full of sweet wine.”
But Peter stood up with the Eleven and spoke to them in a loud voice: “Men of Ju·deʹa and all you inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you and listen carefully to my words.
These people are, in fact, not drunk, as you suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
On the contrary, this is what was said through the prophet Joel:
‘“And in the last days,” God says, “I will pour out some of my spirit on every sort of flesh, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy and your young men will see visions and your old men will dream dreams,
and even on my male slaves and on my female slaves I will pour out some of my spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
And I will give wonders in heaven above and signs on earth below—blood and fire and clouds of smoke.
The sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood before the great and illustrious day of Jehovah comes.
And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”’
“Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ was a man publicly shown to you by God through powerful works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, just as you yourselves know.
This man, who was handed over by the determined will and foreknowledge of God, you fastened to a stake by the hand of lawless men, and you did away with him.
But God resurrected him by releasing him from the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held fast by it.
For David says about him: ‘I keep Jehovah constantly in front of me, for he is at my right hand that I may never be shaken.
On this account my heart became cheerful and my tongue rejoiced greatly. And I will reside in hope;
because you will not leave me in the Grave, nor will you allow your loyal one to see corruption.
You have made life’s ways known to me; you will fill me with great joy in your presence.’
“Men, brothers, it is permissible to speak with freeness of speech to you about the family head David, that he died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
Because he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath that he would seat one of his offspring on his throne,
he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he forsaken in the Grave nor did his flesh see corruption.
God resurrected this Jesus, and of this we are all witnesses.
Therefore, because he was exalted to the right hand of God and received the promised holy spirit from the Father, he has poured out what you see and hear.
For David did not ascend to the heavens, but he himself says, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
Therefore, let all the house of Israel know for a certainty that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you executed on a stake.”
Now when they heard this, they were stabbed to the heart, and they said to Peter and the rest of the apostles: “Men, brothers, what should we do?”
Peter said to them: “Repent, and let each one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the free gift of the holy spirit.
For the promise is to you and your children, and to all those who are far away, to all those whom Jehovah our God may call to himself.”
And with many other words he gave a thorough witness and kept exhorting them, saying: “Get saved from this crooked generation.”
So those who gladly accepted his word were baptized, and on that day about 3,000 people were added.
And they continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles, to associating together, to the taking of meals, and to prayers.
Indeed, fear began to fall upon everyone, and many wonders and signs began to occur through the apostles.
All those who became believers were together and had everything in common,
and they were selling their possessions and properties and distributing the proceeds to all, according to what each one needed.
And day after day they were in constant attendance in the temple with a united purpose, and they took their meals in different homes and shared their food with great rejoicing and sincerity of heart,
praising God and finding favor with all the people. At the same time Jehovah continued to add to them daily those being saved.
Now there was a man in Caes·a·reʹa named Cornelius, an army officer in what was called the Italian unit.
He was a devout man who feared God together with all his household, and he made many gifts of mercy to the people and made supplication to God continually.
About the ninth hour of the day, he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say: “Cornelius!”
Cornelius stared at him, terrified, and asked: “What is it, Lord?” He said to him: “Your prayers and gifts of mercy have ascended as a remembrance before God.
So now send men to Jopʹpa and summon a man named Simon who is called Peter.
This man is staying as a guest with Simon, a tanner who has a house by the sea.”
As soon as the angel who spoke to him left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among those who were his attendants,
and he related everything to them and sent them to Jopʹpa.
The next day as they were continuing on their journey and were approaching the city, Peter went up to the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.
But he became very hungry and wanted to eat. While they were preparing the meal, he fell into a trance
and saw heaven opened and something descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four corners on the earth;
and in it were all sorts of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth and birds of heaven.
Then a voice said to him: “Get up, Peter, slaughter and eat!”
But Peter said: “Not at all, Lord, because I have never eaten anything defiled and unclean.”
And the voice spoke again to him, the second time: “Stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.”
This happened a third time, and immediately it was taken up into heaven.
While Peter was still perplexed about what the vision he had seen could mean, just then the men sent by Cornelius asked where Simon’s house was and stood there at the gate.
They called out and inquired whether Simon who was called Peter was a guest there.
As Peter was still pondering over the vision, the spirit said: “Look! Three men are asking for you.
So get up, go downstairs and go with them, not doubting at all, because I have sent them.”
Then Peter went downstairs to the men and said: “Here I am, the one you are looking for. Why are you here?”
They said: “Cornelius, an army officer, a righteous and God-fearing man who is well-reported-on by the whole nation of the Jews, was given divine instructions by a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear what you have to say.”
So he invited them in and had them stay as his guests. The next day he got up and went off with them, and some of the brothers from Jopʹpa went with him.
The following day he entered into Caes·a·reʹa. Cornelius, of course, was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
As Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and did obeisance to him.
But Peter lifted him up, saying: “Rise; I too am just a man.”
As he conversed with him, he went in and found many people assembled.
He said to them: “You well know how unlawful it is for a Jew to associate with or approach a man of another race, and yet God has shown me that I should call no man defiled or unclean.
So I came, really without objection, when I was sent for. Therefore, I ask you why you sent for me.”
Then Cornelius said: “Four days ago counting from this hour, I was praying in my house at the ninth hour; just then a man in bright clothing stood in front of me
and said: ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been favorably heard, and your gifts of mercy have been remembered before God.
Therefore, send to Jopʹpa and call for Simon who is called Peter. This man is a guest in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’
I then sent for you at once, and you were kind enough to come here. So now we are all present before God to hear all the things you have been commanded by Jehovah to say.”
At this Peter began to speak, and he said: “Now I truly understand that God is not partial,
but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.
He sent out the word to the sons of Israel to declare to them the good news of peace through Jesus Christ—this one is Lord of all.
You know the subject that was talked about throughout all Ju·deʹa, starting from Galilee after the baptism that John preached:
about Jesus who was from Nazret, how God anointed him with holy spirit and power, and he went through the land doing good and healing all those oppressed by the Devil, because God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all the things he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; but they did away with him by hanging him on a stake.
God raised this one up on the third day and allowed him to become manifest,
not to all the people, but to witnesses appointed beforehand by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after his rising from the dead.
Also, he ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness that this is the one decreed by God to be judge of the living and the dead.
To him all the prophets bear witness, that everyone putting faith in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
While Peter was still speaking about these matters, the holy spirit came upon all those hearing the word.
And the circumcised believers who had come with Peter were amazed, because the free gift of the holy spirit was being poured out also on people of the nations.
For they heard them speaking in foreign languages and magnifying God. Then Peter responded:
“Can anyone deny water to prevent these from being baptized who have received the holy spirit just as we have?”
With that he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they requested him to stay for some days.
So he arrived at Derʹbe and also at Lysʹtra. And a disciple named Timothy was there, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father,
and he was well-reported-on by the brothers in Lysʹtra and I·coʹni·um.
Paul expressed the desire for Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
As they traveled on through the cities, they would deliver to them for observance the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.
Then, indeed, the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.
Moreover, they traveled through Phrygʹi·a and the country of Ga·laʹti·a, because they were forbidden by the holy spirit to speak the word in the province of Asia.
Further, when they came down to Mysʹi·a, they made efforts to go into Bi·thynʹi·a, but the spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
So they passed by Mysʹi·a and came down to Troʹas.
And during the night a vision appeared to Paul—a Mac·e·doʹni·an man was standing there urging him and saying: “Step over into Mac·e·doʹni·a and help us.”
As soon as he had seen the vision, we tried to go into Mac·e·doʹni·a, drawing the conclusion that God had summoned us to declare the good news to them.
So we put out to sea from Troʹas and made a straight run to Samʹo·thrace, but on the following day to Ne·apʹo·lis;
and from there we went to Phi·lipʹpi, a colony, which is the principal city of the district of Mac·e·doʹni·a. We stayed in this city for some days.
On the Sabbath day we went outside the gate beside a river, where we thought there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and began speaking to the women who had assembled.
And a woman named Lydʹi·a, a seller of purple from the city of Thy·a·tiʹra and a worshipper of God, was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide to pay attention to the things Paul was saying.
Now when she and her household got baptized, she urged us: “If you have considered me to be faithful to Jehovah, come and stay at my house.” And she just made us come.
Now it happened that as we were going to the place of prayer, a servant girl with a spirit, a demon of divination, met us. She supplied her masters with much profit by fortune-telling.
This girl kept following Paul and us and crying out with the words: “These men are slaves of the Most High God and are proclaiming to you the way of salvation.”
She kept doing this for many days. Finally Paul got tired of it and turned and said to the spirit: “I order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.
Well, when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers.
Leading them up to the civil magistrates, they said: “These men are disturbing our city very much. They are Jews,
and they are proclaiming customs that it is not lawful for us to adopt or practice, seeing that we are Romans.”
And the crowd rose up together against them, and the civil magistrates, after tearing the garments off them, gave the command to beat them with rods.
After they had inflicted many blows on them, they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer to guard them securely.
Because he got such an order, he threw them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.
But about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song, and the prisoners were listening to them.
Suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so that the foundations of the jail were shaken. Moreover, all the doors were instantly opened, and everyone’s bonds came loose.
When the jailer woke up and saw that the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
But Paul called out with a loud voice: “Do not hurt yourself, for we are all here!”
So he asked for lights and rushed in, and seized with trembling, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
He brought them outside and said: “Sirs, what must I do to get saved?”
They said: “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will get saved, you and your household.”
Then they spoke the word of Jehovah to him together with all those in his house.
And he took them along in that hour of the night and washed their wounds. Then he and his entire household were baptized without delay.
He brought them into his house and set a table before them, and he rejoiced greatly with all his household now that he had believed in God.
When it became day, the civil magistrates sent the constables to say: “Release those men.”
The jailer reported their words to Paul: “The civil magistrates have sent men to have you two released. So come out now and go in peace.”
But Paul said to them: “They flogged us publicly, uncondemned, though we are Romans, and threw us into prison. Are they now throwing us out secretly? No, indeed! Let them come themselves and escort us out.”
The constables reported these words to the civil magistrates. These grew fearful when they heard that the men were Romans.
So they came and pleaded with them, and after escorting them out, they requested them to depart from the city.
But they came out of the prison and went to the home of Lydʹi·a; and when they saw the brothers, they encouraged them and departed.
However, a man named An·a·niʹas, together with his wife Sap·phiʹra, sold some property.
But he secretly held back some of the price, with his wife’s knowledge, and he brought just a part of it and deposited it at the feet of the apostles.
But Peter said: “An·a·niʹas, why has Satan emboldened you to lie to the holy spirit and secretly hold back some of the price of the field?
As long as it remained with you, did it not remain yours? And after it was sold, was it not in your control? Why have you thought up such a deed as this in your heart? You have lied, not to men, but to God.”
On hearing these words, An·a·niʹas collapsed and died. And great fear came over all those who heard about it.
Then the younger men rose, wrapped him in cloths, carried him out, and buried him.
Now after an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
Peter said to her: “Tell me, did you two sell the field for so much?” She said: “Yes, for that amount.”
So Peter said to her: “Why did you two agree to make a test of the spirit of Jehovah? Look! The feet of those who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.”
Instantly she collapsed at his feet and died. When the young men came in, they found her dead and they carried her out and buried her alongside her husband.
So great fear came over the whole congregation and over all those hearing about these things.
Moreover, through the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders continued to occur among the people; and they would all meet together in Solʹo·mon’s Colonnade.
True, none of the others had the courage to join them; nevertheless, the people were speaking highly of them.
More than that, believers in the Lord kept on being added, great numbers both of men and of women.
They even brought the sick out into the main streets and laid them there on small beds and mats, so that as Peter would pass by, at least his shadow might fall on some of them.
Also, crowds of people from the cities around Jerusalem kept coming, carrying sick people and those troubled with unclean spirits, and they were one and all cured.
But the high priest rose, and all those with him, who were of the sect of the Sadducees, and they were filled with jealousy.
And they seized the apostles and put them in the public jail.
But during the night, Jehovah’s angel opened the doors of the prison, brought them out, and said:
“Go and take your stand in the temple, and keep on speaking to the people all the sayings about this life.”
After hearing this, they entered the temple at daybreak and began to teach. Now when the high priest and those with him arrived, they called together the Sanʹhe·drin and the entire assembly of elders of the sons of Israel, and they sent out to the jail to have the apostles brought before them.
But when the officers got there, they did not find them in the prison. So they returned and made their report,
saying: “We found the jail locked and secure, and the guards were standing at the doors, but on opening it up, we found no one inside.”
Well, when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were perplexed about what would come of this.
But someone came and reported to them: “Look! The men you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.”
Then the captain went off with his officers and brought them in, but without violence, because they were afraid of being stoned by the people.
So they brought them and stood them before the Sanʹhe·drin. Then the high priest questioned them
and said: “We strictly ordered you not to keep teaching on the basis of this name, and yet look! you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you are determined to bring the blood of this man upon us.”
In answer Peter and the other apostles said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.
The God of our forefathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, hanging him on a stake.
God exalted this one as Chief Agent and Savior to his right hand, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.
And we are witnesses of these matters, and so is the holy spirit, which God has given to those obeying him as ruler.”
When they heard this, they were infuriated and wanted to do away with them.
But a Pharisee named Ga·maʹli·el rose in the Sanʹhe·drin; he was a Law teacher esteemed by all the people, and he gave the command to put the men outside for a little while.
Then he said to them: “Men of Israel, be careful as to what you intend to do about these men.
For instance, before these days Theuʹdas rose up, saying he himself was somebody, and a number of men, about 400, joined his party. But he was done away with, and all those who were following him were dispersed and came to nothing.
After him, Judas the Gal·i·leʹan rose up in the days of the registration, and he drew followers after himself. That man also perished, and all those who were following him were scattered.
So under the present circumstances, I say to you, do not meddle with these men, but let them alone. For if this scheme or this work is from men, it will be overthrown;
but if it is from God, you will not be able to overthrow them. Otherwise, you may even be found fighters against God himself.”
At this they took his advice, and they summoned the apostles, flogged them, and ordered them to stop speaking on the basis of Jesus’ name, and let them go.
So they went out from before the Sanʹhe·drin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name.
And every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.
Now in I·coʹni·um they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a manner that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks became believers.
But the Jews who did not believe stirred up and wrongly influenced the people of the nations against the brothers.
So they spent considerable time speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah, who bore witness to the word of his undeserved kindness by allowing signs and wonders to be performed through them.
However, the multitude of the city was divided; some were for the Jews but others for the apostles.
When both the people of the nations and the Jews with their rulers made an attempt to treat them insolently and stone them,
they were informed of it, and they fled to the cities of Lyc·a·oʹni·a, Lysʹtra and Derʹbe, and to the surrounding country.
There they went on declaring the good news.
Now in Lysʹtra there was a man sitting down whose feet were crippled. He was lame from birth and had never walked.
This man was listening to Paul as he was speaking. Paul, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to be made well,
said with a loud voice: “Stand up on your feet.” So the man leaped up and began walking.
When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they cried out in the Lyc·a·oʹni·an language: “The gods have become like humans and have come down to us!”
And they started calling Barʹna·bas Zeus, but Paul Herʹmes, since he was taking the lead in speaking.
And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance of the city, brought bulls and garlands to the gates and wanted to offer sacrifices with the crowds.
However, when the apostles Barʹna·bas and Paul heard of it, they ripped their garments and leaped out into the crowd and cried out:
“Men, why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have. And we are declaring the good news to you, for you to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them.
In past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways,
although he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”
And yet despite saying these things, they barely restrained the crowds from sacrificing to them.
But Jews arrived from Antioch and I·coʹni·um and persuaded the crowds, and they stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, imagining that he was dead.
However, when the disciples surrounded him, he got up and entered the city. On the next day he left with Barʹna·bas for Derʹbe.
After declaring the good news to that city and making quite a few disciples, they returned to Lysʹtra, I·coʹni·um, and Antioch.
There they strengthened the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith and saying: “We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.”
Moreover, they appointed elders for them in each congregation, offering prayer with fasting, and they entrusted them to Jehovah, in whom they had become believers.
Then they went through Pi·sidʹi·a and came into Pam·phylʹi·a,
and after proclaiming the word in Perga, they went down to At·ta·liʹa.
From there they sailed off for Antioch, where they had been entrusted to the undeserved kindness of God for the work they had now completed.
When they had arrived and had gathered the congregation together, they related the many things God had done by means of them, and that he had opened to the nations the door to faith.
So they spent considerable time with the disciples.
After we made it to safety, we learned that the island was called Malta.
And the foreign-speaking people showed us extraordinary kindness. They kindled a fire and received all of us kindly because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold.
But when Paul collected a bundle of sticks and laid it on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
When the foreign-speaking people caught sight of the venomous creature hanging from his hand, they began saying to one another: “Surely this man is a murderer, and although he made it to safety from the sea, Justice did not permit him to keep on living.”
However, he shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
But they were expecting him to swell up or suddenly to drop dead. After they waited for a long time and saw that nothing bad happened to him, they changed their mind and began saying he was a god.
Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the principal man of the island, whose name was Pubʹli·us, and he welcomed us and entertained us hospitably for three days.
It so happened that the father of Pubʹli·us was lying in bed sick with fever and dysentery, and Paul went in to him and prayed, laid his hands on him, and healed him.
After this occurred, the rest of the people on the island who were sick also began to come to him and be cured.
They also honored us with many gifts, and when we were setting sail, they loaded us up with whatever we needed.
Three months later we set sail in a ship with the figurehead “Sons of Zeus.” The ship was from Alexandria and had wintered in the island.
Putting into port at Syracuse, we remained there for three days;
from there we went along and arrived at Rheʹgi·um. A day later a south wind sprang up and we made it into Pu·teʹo·li on the second day.
Here we found brothers and were urged to remain with them for seven days, and so we went toward Rome.
From there the brothers, when they heard the news about us, came as far as the Marketplace of Apʹpi·us and Three Taverns to meet us. On catching sight of them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
When finally we entered Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the soldier guarding him.
However, three days later he called together the principal men of the Jews. When they had assembled, he said to them: “Men, brothers, although I had done nothing contrary to the people or the customs of our forefathers, I was handed over as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
And after making an examination, they wanted to release me, for there were no grounds for putting me to death.
But when the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, but not because I had any accusation to make against my nation.
So for this reason I asked to see and speak to you, for it is because of the hope of Israel that I have this chain around me.”
They said to him: “We have not received letters about you from Ju·deʹa, nor have any of the brothers who came from there reported or spoken anything bad about you.
But we think it proper to hear from you what your thoughts are, for truly as regards this sect, we know that it is spoken against everywhere.”
They now arranged for a day to meet with him, and they came in even greater numbers to him in his lodging place. And from morning to evening, he explained the matter to them by bearing thorough witness concerning the Kingdom of God, to persuade them about Jesus from both the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
Some began to believe the things he said; others would not believe.
So because they disagreed with one another, they began to leave, and Paul made this one comment: “The holy spirit aptly spoke through Isaiah the prophet to your forefathers,
saying, ‘Go to this people and say: “You will indeed hear but by no means understand, and you will indeed look but by no means see.
For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes, so that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn back and I heal them.”’
So let it be known to you that this salvation from God has been sent out to the nations; they will certainly listen to it.”
So he remained there for an entire two years in his own rented house, and he would kindly receive all those who came to him,
preaching the Kingdom of God to them and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech, without hindrance.
“Men, brothers and fathers, hear my defense to you now.”
Well, when they heard that he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they kept all the more silent, and he said:
“I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Ci·liʹcia, but educated in this city at the feet of Ga·maʹli·el, instructed according to the strictness of the ancestral Law, and zealous for God just as all of you are this day.
I persecuted this Way to the point of death, binding and handing over to prisons both men and women,
as the high priest and all the assembly of elders can bear witness. From them I also obtained letters to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring those who were there in bonds to Jerusalem to be punished.
“But as I was traveling and getting near to Damascus, about midday, suddenly out of heaven a great light flashed all around me,
and I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
I answered: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me: ‘I am Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ, whom you are persecuting.’
Now the men who were with me did see the light, but they did not hear the voice of the one speaking to me.
At that I said: ‘What should I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me: ‘Rise, go into Damascus, and there you will be told about everything it is appointed for you to do.’
But since I could not see anything because of the glory of that light, I arrived in Damascus led by the hand of those who were with me.
“Then a man named An·a·niʹas, a devout man according to the Law, well-reported-on by all the Jews living there,
came to me. He stood by me and said to me: ‘Saul, brother, regain your sight!’ And that very moment I looked up and saw him.
He said: ‘The God of our forefathers has chosen you to come to know his will and to see the righteous one and to hear the voice of his mouth,
because you are to be a witness for him to all men of the things you have seen and heard.
And now why are you delaying? Rise, get baptized, and wash your sins away by your calling on his name.’
“But when I had returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
and saw him saying to me: ‘Hurry up and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your witness concerning me.’
And I said: ‘Lord, they themselves well know that I used to imprison and flog in one synagogue after another those believing in you;
and when the blood of Stephen your witness was being spilled, I was standing by and approving and guarding the outer garments of those doing away with him.’
And yet he said to me: ‘Go, because I will send you out to nations far away.’”
Now they kept listening to him down to this word. Then they raised their voices, saying: “Take such a man away from the earth, for he is not fit to live!”
Because they were crying out, throwing their outer garments about, and tossing dust into the air,
the military commander ordered Paul to be brought into the soldiers’ quarters and said that he should be interrogated under scourging, so that he could learn exactly why they were shouting against Paul this way.
But when they had stretched him out for the whipping, Paul said to the army officer standing there: “Is it lawful for you to scourge a Roman who has not been condemned?”
Well, when the army officer heard this, he went to the military commander and reported it, saying: “What are you intending to do? For this man is a Roman.”
So the military commander approached and said to him: “Tell me, are you a Roman?” He said: “Yes.”
The military commander responded: “I purchased these rights as a citizen for a large sum of money.” Paul said: “But I have them by birth.”
Immediately, therefore, the men who were about to interrogate him under torture backed away from him; and the military commander became afraid when he realized that he was a Roman and that he had bound him in chains.
So the next day, because he wanted to know for sure just why he was being accused by the Jews, he released him and commanded the chief priests and all the Sanʹhe·drin to assemble. He then brought Paul down and had him stand among them.
Now some men came down from Ju·deʹa and began to teach the brothers: “Unless you get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
But after quite a bit of dissension and disputing by Paul and Barʹna·bas with them, it was arranged for Paul, Barʹna·bas, and some of the others to go up to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem regarding this issue.
So after being escorted partway by the congregation, these men continued on through both Phoe·niʹcia and Sa·marʹi·a, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations and bringing great joy to all the brothers.
On arriving in Jerusalem, they were kindly received by the congregation and the apostles and the elders, and they related the many things God had done by means of them.
But some of those of the sect of the Pharisees who had become believers stood up from their seats and said: “It is necessary to circumcise them and command them to observe the Law of Moses.”
So the apostles and the elders gathered together to look into this matter.
After much intense discussion had taken place, Peter rose and said to them: “Men, brothers, you well know that from early days God made the choice among you that through my mouth people of the nations should hear the word of the good news and believe.
And God, who knows the heart, bore witness by giving them the holy spirit, just as he did to us also.
And he made no distinction at all between us and them, but purified their hearts by faith.
So why are you now making a test of God by imposing on the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our forefathers nor we were capable of bearing?
On the contrary, we have faith that we are saved through the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus in the same way that they are.”
At that the entire group became silent, and they began to listen to Barʹna·bas and Paul relate the many signs and wonders that God had done through them among the nations.
After they finished speaking, James replied: “Men, brothers, hear me.
Symʹe·on has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.
And with this the words of the Prophets agree, just as it is written:
‘After these things I will return and raise up again the tent of David that is fallen down; I will rebuild its ruins and restore it,
so that the men who remain may earnestly seek Jehovah, together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah, who is doing these things,
known from of old.’
Therefore, my decision is not to trouble those from the nations who are turning to God,
but to write them to abstain from things polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
For from ancient times Moses has had those who preach him in city after city, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”
Then the apostles and the elders, together with the whole congregation, decided to send chosen men from among them to Antioch, along with Paul and Barʹna·bas; they sent Judas who was called Barʹsab·bas and Silas, who were leading men among the brothers.
They wrote this and sent it through them: “The apostles and the elders, your brothers, to those brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Ci·liʹcia who are from the nations: Greetings!
Since we have heard that some went out from among us and caused you trouble with what they have said, trying to subvert you, although we did not give them any instructions,
we have come to a unanimous decision to choose men to send to you together with our beloved Barʹna·bas and Paul,
men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We are therefore sending Judas and Silas, so that they also may report the same things by word of mouth.
For the holy spirit and we ourselves have favored adding no further burden to you except these necessary things:
to keep abstaining from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what is strangled, and from sexual immorality. If you carefully keep yourselves from these things, you will prosper. Good health to you!”
So when these men were dismissed, they went down to Antioch, and they gathered the whole group together and handed them the letter.
After reading it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
And Judas and Silas, since they were also prophets, encouraged the brothers with many talks and strengthened them.
After they had spent some time there, they were sent off in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.
But Paul and Barʹna·bas stayed in Antioch, teaching and declaring, along with many others, the good news of the word of Jehovah.
After some days, Paul said to Barʹna·bas: “Let us now return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities where we proclaimed the word of Jehovah, to see how they are.”
Barʹna·bas was determined to take along John, who was called Mark.
Paul, however, was not in favor of taking him along with them, seeing that he had departed from them in Pam·phylʹi·a and had not gone with them to the work.
At this there was a sharp burst of anger, so that they separated from each other; and Barʹna·bas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyʹprus.
Paul selected Silas and departed after he had been entrusted by the brothers to the undeserved kindness of Jehovah.
He went through Syria and Ci·liʹcia, strengthening the congregations.
While the two were speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees came up to them.
These were annoyed because the apostles were teaching the people and were openly declaring the resurrection of Jesus from the dead.
So they seized them and took them into custody until the next day, for it was already evening.
However, many of those who had listened to the speech believed, and the number of the men became about 5,000.
The next day their rulers, elders, and scribes gathered together in Jerusalem,
along with Anʹnas the chief priest, Caʹia·phas, John, Alexander, and all who were relatives of the chief priest.
They stood Peter and John in their midst and began to question them: “By what power or in whose name did you do this?”
Then Peter, filled with holy spirit, said to them: “Rulers of the people and elders,
if we are being examined today about a good deed to a crippled man, and you want to know who made this man well,
let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that in the name of Jesus Christ the Naz·a·reneʹ, whom you executed on a stake but whom God raised up from the dead, by means of him this man stands here healthy in front of you.
This is ‘the stone that was treated by you builders as of no account that has become the chief cornerstone.’
Furthermore, there is no salvation in anyone else, for there is no other name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.”
Now when they saw the outspokenness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were uneducated and ordinary men, they were astonished. And they began to realize that they had been with Jesus.
As they were looking at the man who had been cured standing with them, they had nothing to say in answer to this.
So they commanded them to go outside the Sanʹhe·drin hall, and they began consulting with one another,
saying: “What should we do with these men? Because, for a fact, a noteworthy sign has occurred through them, one evident to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.
So that this does not spread any further among the people, let us threaten them and tell them not to speak to anyone anymore on the basis of this name.”
With that they called them and ordered them not to say anything at all or to teach on the basis of the name of Jesus.
But in reply Peter and John said to them: “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves.
But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”
So after they had threatened them further, they released them, since they did not find any grounds for punishing them and on account of the people, because they were all glorifying God over what had happened.
For the man on whom this miracle of healing had been done was more than 40 years old.
After being released, they went to their own people and reported what the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
On hearing this, they raised their voices with one accord to God and said: “Sovereign Lord, you are the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them,
and who said through holy spirit by the mouth of our forefather David, your servant: ‘Why did nations become agitated and peoples meditate on empty things?
The kings of the earth took their stand and the rulers gathered together as one against Jehovah and against his anointed one.’
For truly both Herod and Pontius Pilate with men of the nations and with peoples of Israel were gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed,
to do what your hand and counsel had determined beforehand to occur.
And now, Jehovah, give attention to their threats, and grant to your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness,
while you stretch out your hand for healing and while signs and wonders occur through the name of your holy servant Jesus.”
And when they had made supplication, the place where they were gathered together was shaken, and they were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.
Moreover, the multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul, and not even one of them would say that any of the things he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common.
And with great power the apostles continued giving the witness about the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and undeserved kindness was upon them all in large measure.
In fact, no one was in need among them, for all those who owned fields or houses would sell them and bring the value of what was sold,
and they would deposit it at the feet of the apostles. In turn distribution would be made to each one according to his need.
So Joseph, who was also called by the apostles Barʹna·bas (which means, when translated, “Son of Comfort”), a Levite, a native of Cyʹprus,
owned a piece of land, and he sold it and brought the money and deposited it at the feet of the apostles.
When the uproar had subsided, Paul sent for the disciples, and after he had encouraged them and said farewell, he began his journey to Mac·e·doʹni·a.
After going through those regions and giving many words of encouragement to the ones there, he arrived in Greece.
He spent three months there, but because a plot was hatched against him by the Jews when he was about to set sail for Syria, he made up his mind to return through Mac·e·doʹni·a.
He was accompanied by Sopʹa·ter the son of Pyrʹrhus of Be·roeʹa, Ar·is·tarʹchus and Se·cunʹdus of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans, Gaʹius of Derʹbe, Timothy and, from the province of Asia, Tychʹi·cus and Trophʹi·mus.
These men went on ahead and were waiting for us in Troʹas;
but we put out to sea from Phi·lipʹpi after the days of the Unleavened Bread, and within five days we came to them in Troʹas, and there we spent seven days.
On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to have a meal, Paul began addressing them, as he was going to depart the next day; and he prolonged his speech until midnight.
So there were quite a few lamps in the upper room where we were gathered together.
Seated at the window, a young man named Euʹty·chus sank into a deep sleep while Paul kept talking, and overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
But Paul went downstairs, threw himself on him and embraced him, and said: “Stop making a commotion, for he is alive.”
He then went upstairs and began the meal and ate. He continued conversing for quite a while, until daybreak, and then he departed.
So they took the boy away alive and were comforted beyond measure.
We now went ahead to the ship and set sail for Asʹsos, where we were intending to take Paul aboard, for after giving instructions to this effect, he was intending to go there on foot.
So when he caught up with us in Asʹsos, we took him aboard and went to Mit·y·leʹne.
And sailing away from there the next day, we arrived off Chiʹos, but the day after that, we touched at Saʹmos, and on the following day, we arrived at Mi·leʹtus.
Paul had decided to sail past Ephʹe·sus so as not to spend any time in the province of Asia, for he was hurrying to get to Jerusalem on the day of the Festival of Pentecost if he possibly could.
However, from Mi·leʹtus he sent word to Ephʹe·sus and called for the elders of the congregation.
When they came to him, he said to them: “You well know how I conducted myself among you from the first day I stepped into the province of Asia,
slaving for the Lord with all humility and with tears and trials that befell me by the plots of the Jews,
while I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house.
But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
And now look! bound in the spirit, I am traveling to Jerusalem, although not knowing what will happen to me there,
except that from city to city the holy spirit repeatedly bears witness to me, saying that imprisonment and tribulations are waiting for me.
Nevertheless, I do not consider my own life of any importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.
“And now look! I know that none of you among whom I preached the Kingdom will ever see my face again.
So I call you to witness this very day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
for I have not held back from telling you all the counsel of God.
Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own Son.
I know that after my going away oppressive wolves will enter in among you and will not treat the flock with tenderness,
and from among you yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.
“Therefore keep awake, and bear in mind that for three years, night and day, I never stopped admonishing each one of you with tears.
And now I entrust you to God and to the word of his undeserved kindness, which word can build you up and give you the inheritance among all the sanctified ones.
I have desired no man’s silver or gold or clothing.
You yourselves know that these hands have provided for my own needs and the needs of those with me.
I have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way, you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’”
And when he had said these things, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.
Indeed, quite a bit of weeping broke out among them all, and they embraced Paul and affectionately kissed him,
for they were especially pained at the word he had spoken that they would not see his face anymore. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
About that time Herod the king began mistreating some of those of the congregation.
He put James the brother of John to death by the sword.
When he saw that it was pleasing to the Jews, he also went on to arrest Peter. (This was during the days of the Unleavened Bread.)
He seized him and put him in prison, turning him over to four shifts of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out before the people after the Passover.
So Peter was being kept in the prison, but the congregation was intensely praying to God for him.
When Herod was about to bring him out, that night Peter was sleeping bound with two chains between two soldiers, and guards in front of the door were keeping watch over the prison.
But look! Jehovah’s angel was standing there, and a light shone in the prison cell. Hitting Peter on the side, he woke him, saying: “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off his hands.
The angel said to him: “Get dressed and put on your sandals.” He did so. Finally he said to him: “Put your outer garment on, and keep following me.”
And he went out and kept following him, but he did not know that what was happening through the angel was real. In fact, he thought he was seeing a vision.
Going past the first sentinel guard and the second, they reached the iron gate leading into the city, and this opened to them by itself. After they went out, they made their way down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
And Peter, realizing what was happening, said: “Now I know for sure that Jehovah sent his angel and rescued me from Herod’s hand and from everything that the Jews were expecting to happen.”
After he realized this, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John who was called Mark, where quite a few were gathered together and were praying.
When he knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer the call.
On recognizing the voice of Peter, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the gate, but ran inside and reported that Peter was standing at the gateway.
They said to her: “You are out of your mind.” But she kept insisting that it was so. They began to say: “It is his angel.”
But Peter remained there, knocking. When they opened the door, they saw him and were astonished.
But he motioned to them with his hand to be silent and told them in detail how Jehovah had brought him out of the prison, and he said: “Report these things to James and the brothers.” With that he went out and traveled to another place.
Now when it became day, there was quite a disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
Herod made a diligent search for him, and not finding him, he interrogated the guards and commanded them to be led off to punishment; and he went down from Ju·deʹa to Caes·a·reʹa and spent some time there.
Now he was in an angry mood against the people of Tyre and Siʹdon. So they came to him with one purpose, and after persuading Blastus, the man in charge of the king’s household affairs, they sued for peace, because their country was supplied with food from the land of the king.
On a set day, Herod clothed himself with royal raiment and sat down on the judgment seat and began giving them a public address.
Then the people who were assembled began shouting: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!”
Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him, because he did not give the glory to God, and he was eaten up with worms and died.
But the word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.
As for Barʹna·bas and Saul, after fully carrying out the relief work in Jerusalem, they returned and took along with them John, the one also called Mark.
After this he departed from Athens and came to Corinth.
And he found a Jew named Aqʹui·la, a native of Ponʹtus who had recently come from Italy with Pris·cilʹla his wife, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. So he went to them,
and because he had the same trade, he stayed at their home and worked with them, for they were tentmakers by trade.
He would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.
When, now, both Silas and Timothy came down from Mac·e·doʹni·a, Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.
But after they kept on opposing him and speaking abusively, he shook out his garments and said to them: “Let your blood be on your own heads. I am clean. From now on I will go to people of the nations.”
So he transferred from there and went into the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshipper of God, whose house adjoined the synagogue.
But Crisʹpus, the presiding officer of the synagogue, became a believer in the Lord, along with all his household. And many of the Corinthians who heard began to believe and be baptized.
Moreover, the Lord said to Paul in a vision by night: “Do not be afraid, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent,
for I am with you and no man will assault you to harm you; for I have many people in this city.”
So he stayed there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
While Galʹli·o was proconsul of A·chaʹia, the Jews made a concerted attack against Paul and led him to the judgment seat,
saying: “This man is persuading people to worship God in a way contrary to the law.”
But as Paul was about to speak, Galʹli·o said to the Jews: “If, indeed, it were some wrong or a serious crime, O Jews, it would be reasonable for me to hear you out patiently.
But if it is controversies over speech and names and your own law, you yourselves must see to it. I do not wish to be a judge of these things.”
With that he drove them away from the judgment seat.
So they all seized Sosʹthe·nes, the presiding officer of the synagogue, and began beating him in front of the judgment seat. But Galʹli·o would not get involved at all with these things.
However, after staying quite a few days longer, Paul said good-bye to the brothers and sailed away for Syria, accompanied by Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la. He had his hair clipped short in Cenʹchre·ae, for he had made a vow.
So they arrived at Ephʹe·sus, and he left them there; but he entered the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
Although they kept requesting him to stay longer, he would not consent
but said good-bye and told them: “I will return to you again, if Jehovah is willing.” And he put out to sea from Ephʹe·sus
and came down to Caes·a·reʹa. And he went up and greeted the congregation and then went down to Antioch.
After spending some time there, he departed and went from place to place through the country of Ga·laʹti·a and Phrygʹi·a, strengthening all the disciples.
Now a Jew named A·polʹlos, a native of Alexandria, arrived in Ephʹe·sus; he was an eloquent man who was well-versed in the Scriptures.
This man had been instructed in the way of Jehovah, and aglow with the spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about Jesus, but he was acquainted only with the baptism of John.
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, and when Pris·cilʹla and Aqʹui·la heard him, they took him into their company and explained the way of God more accurately to him.
Further, because he wanted to go across to A·chaʹia, the brothers wrote to the disciples, urging them to receive him kindly. So when he got there, he greatly helped those who through God’s undeserved kindness had become believers;
for publicly and with great intensity he thoroughly proved the Jews to be wrong, showing them from the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
Looking intently at the Sanʹhe·drin, Paul said: “Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this day.”
At this the high priest An·a·niʹas ordered those standing by him to strike him on the mouth.
Then Paul said to him: “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall. Do you sit to judge me according to the Law and at the same time violate the Law by commanding me to be struck?”
Those standing by said: “Are you insulting the high priest of God?”
And Paul said: “Brothers, I did not know he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.’”
Now Paul, knowing that the one part was made up of Sadducees but the other of Pharisees, cried out in the Sanʹhe·drin: “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Over the hope of the resurrection of the dead I am being judged.”
Because he said this, a dissension arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was split.
For the Sadducees say that there is neither resurrection nor angel nor spirit, but the Pharisees accept them all.
So a great uproar broke out, and some of the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rose and began arguing fiercely, saying: “We find nothing wrong in this man, but if a spirit or an angel spoke to him—.”
Now when the dissension grew great, the military commander feared that Paul would be torn apart by them, and he commanded the soldiers to go down and snatch him from their midst and bring him into the soldiers’ quarters.
But the following night the Lord stood by him and said: “Take courage! For just as you have been giving a thorough witness about me in Jerusalem, so you must also bear witness in Rome.”
When it became day, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
There were more than 40 men who formed this oath-bound conspiracy.
These men went to the chief priests and the elders and said: “We have solemnly bound ourselves with a curse not to eat anything at all until we have killed Paul.
So now you together with the Sanʹhe·drin should inform the military commander that he should bring him down to you as though you want to examine his case more thoroughly. But before he gets near, we will be ready to do away with him.”
However, the son of Paul’s sister heard of the ambush they were planning, and he entered the soldiers’ quarters and reported it to Paul.
Paul then called one of the army officers to him and said: “Take this young man to the military commander, for he has something to report to him.”
So he brought him and led him to the military commander and said: “The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you.”
The military commander took him by the hand and withdrew privately and asked him: “What do you have to report to me?”
He said: “The Jews have agreed to request you to bring Paul down to the Sanʹhe·drin tomorrow, as though they intend to learn more details about his case.
But do not let them persuade you, for more than 40 of their men are waiting to ambush him, and they have bound themselves with a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him; and they are now ready, waiting for the promise from you.”
So the military commander let the young man go, after ordering him: “Do not tell anyone that you have informed me of this.”
And he summoned two of the army officers and said: “Get 200 soldiers ready to march clear to Caes·a·reʹa, also 70 horsemen and 200 spearmen, at the third hour of the night.
Also, provide horses for Paul to ride, to take him safely to Felix the governor.”
And he wrote a letter with this content:
“Claudius Lysʹi·as to His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings!
This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them, but I came quickly with my soldiers and rescued him, because I learned that he is a Roman.
And wanting to find out the cause for which they were accusing him, I brought him down into their Sanʹhe·drin.
I found him to be accused about questions of their Law, but not charged with a single thing deserving of death or prison bonds.
But because a plot against the man has been made known to me, I am at once sending him to you and ordering the accusers to speak against him before you.”
So these soldiers took Paul according to their orders and brought him by night to An·tipʹa·tris.
The next day they permitted the horsemen to go on with him, but they returned to the soldiers’ quarters.
The horsemen entered Caes·a·reʹa and delivered the letter to the governor and also presented Paul to him.
So he read it and asked what province he was from and learned that he was from Ci·liʹcia.
“I will give you a thorough hearing,” he said, “when your accusers arrive.” And he commanded that he be kept under guard in Herod’s palace.
Now in those days when the disciples were increasing, the Greek-speaking Jews began complaining against the Hebrew-speaking Jews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
So the Twelve called the multitude of the disciples together and said: “It is not right for us to leave the word of God to distribute food to tables.
So, brothers, select for yourselves seven reputable men from among you, full of spirit and wisdom, that we may appoint them over this necessary matter;
but we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
What they said was pleasing to the whole multitude, and they selected Stephen, a man full of faith and holy spirit, as well as Philip, Prochʹo·rus, Ni·caʹnor, Tiʹmon, Parʹme·nas, and Nic·o·laʹus, a proselyte of Antioch.
They brought them to the apostles, and after praying, they laid their hands on them.
Consequently, the word of God continued to spread, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying very much in Jerusalem; and a large crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.
Now Stephen, full of divine favor and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
But some men of the so-called Synagogue of the Freedmen came forward, along with some Cy·reʹni·ans and Alexandrians, and some from Ci·liʹcia and Asia, to dispute with Stephen.
But they could not hold their own against the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking.
Then they secretly persuaded men to say: “We have heard him speaking blasphemous things against Moses and God.”
And they stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and coming upon him suddenly, they forcibly seized him and led him to the Sanʹhe·drin.
And they brought forward false witnesses, who said: “This man does not stop speaking things against this holy place and against the Law.
For instance, we have heard him say that this Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ will throw down this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
And as all those sitting in the Sanʹhe·drin stared at him, they saw that his face was like an angel’s face.
Saul, for his part, approved of his murder. On that day great persecution arose against the congregation that was in Jerusalem; all except the apostles were scattered throughout the regions of Ju·deʹa and Sa·marʹi·a.
But devout men carried Stephen away to bury him, and they made a great mourning over him.
Saul, though, began to ravage the congregation. He would invade one house after another, dragging out both men and women and turning them over to prison.
However, those who had been scattered went through the land declaring the good news of the word.
Now Philip went down to the city of Sa·marʹi·a and began to preach the Christ to them.
The crowds with one accord were paying attention to what Philip said while they listened and observed the signs he was performing.
For many had unclean spirits, and these would cry out with a loud voice and come out. Moreover, many who were paralyzed and lame were cured.
So there came to be a great deal of joy in that city.
Now in the city was a man named Simon, who prior to this had been practicing magical arts and amazing the nation of Sa·marʹi·a, claiming that he was somebody great.
All of them, from the least to the greatest, would pay attention to him and say: “This man is the Power of God, which is called Great.”
So they would pay attention to him because he had amazed them for quite a while by his magical arts.
But when they believed Philip, who was declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, both men and women were getting baptized.
Simon himself also became a believer, and after being baptized, he continued with Philip; and he was amazed at seeing the signs and great powerful works taking place.
When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Sa·marʹi·a had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them;
and these went down and prayed for them to get holy spirit.
For it had not yet come upon any one of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they laid their hands on them, and they began to receive holy spirit.
Now when Simon saw that the spirit was given through the laying on of the hands of the apostles, he offered them money,
saying: “Give me this authority also, so that anyone on whom I lay my hands may receive holy spirit.”
But Peter said to him: “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could acquire the free gift of God with money.
You have neither part nor share in this matter, for your heart is not straight in the sight of God.
So repent of this badness of yours, and supplicate Jehovah that, if possible, the wicked intention of your heart may be forgiven you;
for I see you are a bitter poison and a slave of unrighteousness.”
In answer Simon said to them: “Make supplication for me to Jehovah that none of the things you have said may come upon me.”
Therefore, when they had given the witness thoroughly and had spoken the word of Jehovah, they started back toward Jerusalem, and they went declaring the good news to many villages of the Sa·marʹi·tans.
However, Jehovah’s angel spoke to Philip, saying: “Get up and go to the south to the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gazʹa.” (This is a desert road.)
With that he got up and went, and look! an E·thi·oʹpi·an eunuch, a man who had authority under Can·daʹce, queen of the E·thi·oʹpi·ans, and who was in charge of all her treasure. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship,
and he was returning and was sitting in his chariot, reading aloud the prophet Isaiah.
So the spirit said to Philip: “Go over and approach this chariot.”
Philip ran alongside and heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet, and he said: “Do you actually know what you are reading?”
He said: “Really, how could I ever do so unless someone guided me?” So he urged Philip to get on and sit down with him.
Now this was the passage of Scripture that he was reading: “Like a sheep he was brought to the slaughter, and like a lamb that is silent before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth.
During his humiliation, justice was taken away from him. Who will tell the details of his generation? Because his life is taken away from the earth.”
The eunuch then said to Philip: “I beg you, about whom does the prophet say this? About himself or about some other man?”
Philip began to speak, and starting with this scripture, he declared to him the good news about Jesus.
Now as they were going along the road, they came to a body of water, and the eunuch said: “Look! Here is water; what prevents me from getting baptized?”
With that he commanded the chariot to halt, and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and he baptized him.
When they came up out of the water, Jehovah’s spirit quickly led Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him anymore, but he went on his way rejoicing.
Philip, however, found himself in Ashʹdod, and he went through the territory and kept on declaring the good news to all the cities until he got to Caes·a·reʹa.
I ask, then, God did not reject his people, did he? By no means! For I too am an Israelite, of the offspring of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
God did not reject his people, whom he first recognized. Do you not know what the scripture says in connection with E·liʹjah, as he pleads with God against Israel?
“Jehovah, they have killed your prophets, they have dug up your altars, and I alone am left, and now they are trying to take my life.”
Yet, what does the divine pronouncement say to him? “I have left for myself 7,000 men who have not bent the knee to Baʹal.”
So in the same way, at the present time also, there is a remnant according to a choosing through undeserved kindness.
Now if it is by undeserved kindness, it is no longer through works; otherwise, the undeserved kindness would no longer be undeserved kindness.
What, then? The very thing Israel is earnestly seeking he did not obtain, but the ones chosen obtained it. The rest had their senses dulled,
just as it is written: “God has given them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes that do not see and ears that do not hear, down to this very day.”
Also, David says: “Let their table become a snare and a trap and a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, and always make them bend their backs.”
So I ask, They did not stumble and fall completely, did they? Certainly not! But by their false step, there is salvation to people of the nations, to incite them to jealousy.
Now if their false step means riches to the world and their decrease means riches to people of the nations, how much more will their full number mean!
Now I speak to you who are people of the nations. Seeing that I am an apostle to the nations, I glorify my ministry
to see if I may in some way incite my own people to jealousy and save some from among them.
For if their being cast away means reconciliation for the world, what will the acceptance of them mean but life from the dead?
Further, if the part of the dough taken as firstfruits is holy, the entire batch is also holy; and if the root is holy, the branches are also.
However, if some of the branches were broken off and you, although being a wild olive, were grafted in among them and became a sharer of the richness of the olive’s root,
do not be arrogant toward the branches. If, though, you are arrogant toward them, remember that it is not you who bears the root, but the root bears you.
You will say, then: “Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.”
That is true! For their lack of faith, they were broken off, but you are standing by faith. Do not be haughty, but be in fear.
For if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
Consider, therefore, God’s kindness and severity. There is severity toward those who fell, but toward you there is God’s kindness, provided you remain in his kindness; otherwise, you too will be lopped off.
And they also, if they do not remain in their lack of faith, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them back in.
For if you were cut out of the olive tree that is wild by nature and were grafted contrary to nature into the garden olive tree, how much more will these who are natural branches be grafted back into their own olive tree!
For I do not want you to be unaware of this sacred secret, brothers, so that you do not become wise in your own eyes: A partial dulling of senses has come upon Israel until the full number of people of the nations has come in,
and in this manner all Israel will be saved. Just as it is written: “The deliverer will come out of Zion and turn away ungodly practices from Jacob.
And this is my covenant with them, when I take their sins away.”
True, with respect to the good news, they are enemies for your sakes; but with respect to God’s choosing, they are beloved for the sake of their forefathers.
For the gifts and the calling of God are not things he will regret.
For just as you were once disobedient to God but have now been shown mercy because of their disobedience,
so also these now have been disobedient with mercy resulting to you, so that they themselves may also now be shown mercy.
For God has confined all of them together in disobedience so that he might show all of them mercy.
O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing out his ways are!
For “who has come to know Jehovah’s mind, or who has become his adviser?”
Or, “who has first given to him, so that it must be repaid to him?”
Because from him and by him and for him are all things. To him be the glory forever. Amen.
Paul, a slave of Christ Jesus and called to be an apostle, set apart for God’s good news,
which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
concerning his Son, who came to be from the offspring of David according to the flesh,
but who with power was declared God’s Son according to the spirit of holiness by means of resurrection from the dead—yes, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Through him we received undeserved kindness and an apostleship with a view to obedience by faith among all the nations respecting his name,
among which nations you also have been called to belong to Jesus Christ—
to all those who are in Rome as God’s beloved ones, called to be holy ones: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First of all, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ concerning all of you, because your faith is talked about throughout the whole world.
For God, to whom I render sacred service with my spirit in connection with the good news about his Son, is my witness of how without ceasing I always mention you in my prayers,
begging that if at all possible I may now at last succeed in coming to you by God’s will.
For I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm;
or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.
But I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that many times I have intended to come to you—but I have been prevented until now—in order that I might acquire some fruitage also among you just as among the rest of the nations.
Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to wise and to senseless ones, I am a debtor;
so I am eager to declare the good news also to you there in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.
For in it God’s righteousness is being revealed by faith and for faith, just as it is written: “But the righteous one will live by reason of faith.”
For God’s wrath is being revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who are suppressing the truth in an unrighteous way,
because what may be known about God is clearly evident among them, for God made it clear to them.
For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.
For although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God nor did they thank him, but they became empty-headed in their reasonings and their senseless hearts became darkened.
Although claiming they were wise, they became foolish
and turned the glory of the incorruptible God into something like the image of corruptible man and birds and four-footed creatures and reptiles.
Therefore, God, in keeping with the desires of their hearts, gave them up to uncleanness, so that their bodies might be dishonored among them.
They exchanged the truth of God for the lie and venerated and rendered sacred service to the creation rather than the Creator, who is praised forever. Amen.
That is why God gave them over to uncontrolled sexual passion, for their females changed the natural use of themselves into one contrary to nature;
likewise also the males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene and receiving in themselves the full penalty, which was due for their error.
Just as they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them over to a disapproved mental state, to do the things not fitting.
And they were filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, and badness, being full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice, being whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, boastful, schemers of what is harmful, disobedient to parents,
without understanding, false to agreements, having no natural affection, and merciless.
Although these know full well the righteous decree of God—that those practicing such things are deserving of death—they not only keep on doing them but also approve of those practicing them.
Can it be that you do not know, brothers, (for I am speaking to those who know law) that the Law is master over a man as long as he lives?
For instance, a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive; but if her husband dies, she is released from the law of her husband.
So, then, while her husband is living, she would be called an adulteress if she became another man’s. But if her husband dies, she is free from his law, so that she is not an adulteress if she becomes another man’s.
So, my brothers, you also were made dead to the Law through the body of the Christ, that you might become another’s, the one who was raised up from the dead, so that we should bear fruit to God.
For when we were living according to the flesh, the sinful passions that were awakened by the Law were at work in our bodies to produce fruit for death.
But now we have been released from the Law, because we have died to that which restrained us, in order that we might be slaves in a new sense by the spirit and not in the old sense by the written code.
What, then, are we to say? Is the Law sin? Certainly not! Really, I would not have come to know sin had it not been for the Law. For example, I would not have known covetousness if the Law had not said: “You must not covet.”
But sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, worked out in me covetousness of every sort, for apart from law sin was dead.
In fact, I was once alive apart from law. But when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.
And the commandment that was to lead to life, this I found led to death.
For sin, finding the opportunity afforded by the commandment, seduced me and killed me through it.
So the Law in itself is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Therefore, did what is good result in my death? Certainly not! But sin did, that it might be shown to be sin working out death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become far more sinful.
For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate.
However, if I do what I do not wish, I agree that the Law is fine.
But now I am no longer the one doing it, but it is the sin that resides in me.
For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells nothing good; for I have the desire to do what is fine but not the ability to carry it out.
For I do not do the good that I wish, but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice.
If, then, I do what I do not wish, I am no longer the one carrying it out, but it is the sin dwelling in me.
I find, then, this law in my case: When I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me.
I really delight in the law of God according to the man I am within,
but I see in my body another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my body.
Miserable man that I am! Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death?
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So, then, with my mind I myself am a slave to God’s law, but with my flesh to sin’s law.
Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God; the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.
Therefore, whoever opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God; those who have taken a stand against it will bring judgment against themselves.
For those rulers are an object of fear, not to the good deed, but to the bad. Do you want to be free of fear of the authority? Keep doing good, and you will have praise from it;
for it is God’s minister to you for your good. But if you are doing what is bad, be in fear, for it is not without purpose that it bears the sword. It is God’s minister, an avenger to express wrath against the one practicing what is bad.
There is therefore compelling reason for you to be in subjection, not only on account of that wrath but also on account of your conscience.
That is why you are also paying taxes; for they are God’s public servants constantly serving this very purpose.
Render to all their dues: to the one who calls for the tax, the tax; to the one who calls for the tribute, the tribute; to the one who calls for fear, such fear; to the one who calls for honor, such honor.
Do not owe anything to anyone except to love one another; for whoever loves his fellow man has fulfilled the law.
For the law code, “You must not commit adultery, you must not murder, you must not steal, you must not covet,” and whatever other commandment there is, is summed up in this saying: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor; therefore, love is the law’s fulfillment.
And do this because you know the season, that it is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.
The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore throw off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.
Let us walk decently as in the daytime, not in wild parties and drunkenness, not in immoral intercourse and brazen conduct, not in strife and jealousy.
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
What, then, is the advantage of the Jew, or what is the benefit of circumcision?
A great deal in every way. First of all, that they were entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.
What, then, is the case? If some lacked faith, will their lack of faith invalidate the faithfulness of God?
Certainly not! But let God be found true, even if every man be found a liar, just as it is written: “That you might be proved righteous in your words and might win when you are being judged.”
However, if our unrighteousness highlights God’s righteousness, what are we to say? God is not unjust when he expresses his wrath, is he? (I am speaking in human terms.)
By no means! How, otherwise, will God judge the world?
But if by my lie the truth of God has been made more prominent to his glory, why am I also being judged as a sinner?
And why not say, just as some men falsely claim that we say, “Let us do bad things that good things may come”? The judgment against those men is in harmony with justice.
What then? Are we in a better position? Not at all! For above we have made the charge that Jews as well as Greeks are all under sin;
just as it is written: “There is not a righteous man, not even one;
there is no one who has any insight; there is no one who searches for God.
All men have turned aside, all of them have become worthless; there is no one who shows kindness, not so much as one.”
“Their throat is an open grave; they have deceived with their tongues.” “Venom of asps is behind their lips.”
“And their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.”
“Their feet are swift to shed blood.”
“Ruin and misery are in their ways,
and they have not known the way of peace.”
“There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
Now we know that all the things the Law says, it addresses to those under the Law, so that every mouth may be silenced and all the world may become accountable to God for punishment.
Therefore, no one will be declared righteous before him by works of law, for by law comes the accurate knowledge of sin.
But now apart from law God’s righteousness has been revealed, as the Law and the Prophets bear witness,
yes, God’s righteousness through the faith in Jesus Christ, for all those having faith. For there is no distinction.
For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
and it is as a free gift that they are being declared righteous by his undeserved kindness through the release by the ransom paid by Christ Jesus.
God presented him as an offering for propitiation through faith in his blood. This was to demonstrate his own righteousness, because God in his forbearance was forgiving the sins that occurred in the past.
This was to demonstrate his own righteousness in this present season, so that he might be righteous even when declaring righteous the man who has faith in Jesus.
Where, then, is the boasting? There is no place for it. Through what law? That of works? No indeed, but through the law of faith.
For we consider that a man is declared righteous by faith apart from works of law.
Or is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also the God of people of the nations? Yes, also of people of the nations.
Since God is one, he will declare circumcised people righteous as a result of faith and uncircumcised people righteous by means of their faith.
Do we, then, abolish law by means of our faith? Not at all! On the contrary, we uphold law.
I am telling the truth in Christ; I am not lying, as my conscience bears witness with me in holy spirit,
that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were separated from the Christ as the cursed one for the sake of my brothers, my relatives according to the flesh,
who are Israelites. To them belong the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the sacred service and the promises.
To them the forefathers belong, and from them the Christ descended according to the flesh. God, who is over all, be praised forever. Amen.
However, it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who descend from Israel are really “Israel.”
Neither are they all children because they are Abraham’s offspring; rather, “What will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.”
That is, the children in the flesh are not really the children of God, but the children by the promise are counted as the offspring.
For the word of promise was as follows: “At this time I will come and Sarah will have a son.”
Not only then but also when Re·bekʹah conceived twins from the one man, Isaac our forefather;
for when they had not yet been born and had not practiced anything good or bad, so that God’s purpose respecting the choosing might continue dependent, not on works, but on the One who calls,
it was said to her: “The older will be the slave of the younger.”
Just as it is written: “I loved Jacob, but Eʹsau I hated.”
What are we to say, then? Is there injustice with God? Certainly not!
For he says to Moses: “I will show mercy to whomever I will show mercy, and I will show compassion to whomever I will show compassion.”
So, then, it depends, not on a person’s desire or on his effort, but on God, who has mercy.
For the scripture says to Pharʹaoh: “For this very reason I have let you remain: to show my power in connection with you and to have my name declared in all the earth.”
So, then, he has mercy on whomever he wishes, but he lets whomever he wishes become obstinate.
You will therefore say to me: “Why does he still find fault? For who has withstood his will?”
But who are you, O man, to be answering back to God? Does the thing molded say to its molder: “Why did you make me this way?”
What? Does not the potter have authority over the clay to make from the same lump one vessel for an honorable use, another for a dishonorable use?
What, then, if God had the will to demonstrate his wrath and to make his power known, and he tolerated with much patience vessels of wrath made fit for destruction?
And if this was done to make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory,
namely, us, whom he called not only from among Jews but also from among nations, what of it?
It is as he says also in Ho·seʹa: “Those not my people I will call ‘my people,’ and her who was not loved, ‘beloved’;
and in the place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
Moreover, Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Although the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
For Jehovah will make an accounting on the earth, concluding it and cutting it short.”
Also, just as Isaiah foretold: “Unless Jehovah of armies had left an offspring to us, we should have become just like Sodʹom, and we should have resembled Go·morʹrah.”
What are we to say, then? That people of the nations, although not pursuing righteousness, attained righteousness, the righteousness that results from faith;
but Israel, although pursuing a law of righteousness, did not attain to that law.
For what reason? Because they pursued it, not by faith, but as by works. They stumbled over the “stone of stumbling”;
as it is written: “Look! I am laying in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, but the one who rests his faith on it will not be disappointed.”
Therefore you are inexcusable, O man, whoever you are, if you judge; for when you judge another, you condemn yourself, because you who judge practice the same things.
Now we know that God’s judgment is in harmony with truth, against those who practice such things.
But do you suppose, O man, that while you judge those who practice such things and yet you do them, you will escape the judgment of God?
Or do you despise the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience, because you do not know that God in his kindness is trying to lead you to repentance?
But according to your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath and of the revealing of God’s righteous judgment.
And he will pay back to each one according to his works:
everlasting life to those who are seeking glory and honor and incorruptibleness by endurance in work that is good;
however, for those who are contentious and who disobey the truth but obey unrighteousness, there will be wrath and anger.
There will be tribulation and distress on every person who works what is harmful, on the Jew first and also on the Greek;
but glory and honor and peace for everyone who works what is good, for the Jew first and also for the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For all those who sinned without law will also perish without law; but all those who sinned under law will be judged by law.
For the hearers of law are not the ones righteous before God, but the doers of law will be declared righteous.
For when people of the nations, who do not have law, do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves.
They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts, while their conscience is bearing witness with them, and by their own thoughts they are being accused or even excused.
This will take place in the day when God through Christ Jesus judges the secret things of mankind, according to the good news I declare.
If, now, you are a Jew in name and rely on law and take pride in God,
and you know his will and approve of things that are excellent because you are instructed out of the Law,
and you are convinced that you are a guide of the blind, a light for those in darkness,
a corrector of the unreasonable ones, a teacher of young children, and having the framework of the knowledge and of the truth in the Law—
do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself? You, the one preaching, “Do not steal,” do you steal?
You, the one saying, “Do not commit adultery,” do you commit adultery? You, the one abhorring idols, do you rob temples?
You who take pride in law, do you dishonor God by your transgressing of the Law?
For “the name of God is being blasphemed among the nations because of you,” just as it is written.
Circumcision is, in fact, of benefit only if you practice law; but if you are a transgressor of law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
If, therefore, an uncircumcised person keeps the righteous requirements of the Law, his uncircumcision will be counted as circumcision, will it not?
And the physically uncircumcised person will, by carrying out the Law, judge you who are a transgressor of law despite having its written code and circumcision.
For he is not a Jew who is one on the outside, nor is circumcision something on the outside, on the flesh.
But he is a Jew who is one on the inside, and his circumcision is that of the heart by spirit and not by a written code. That person’s praise comes from God, not from people.
Brothers, the goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are indeed for their salvation.
For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.
For because of not knowing the righteousness of God but seeking to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of the Law, so that everyone exercising faith may have righteousness.
For Moses writes about the righteousness that is by the Law: “The man who does these things will live by means of them.”
But the righteousness resulting from faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ that is, to bring Christ down,
or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.”
But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart”; that is, “the word” of faith, which we are preaching.
For if you publicly declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and exercise faith in your heart that God raised him up from the dead, you will be saved.
For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.
For the scripture says: “No one who rests his faith on him will be disappointed.”
For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek. There is the same Lord over all, who is rich toward all those calling on him.
For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”
However, how will they call on him if they have not put faith in him? How, in turn, will they put faith in him about whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?
How, in turn, will they preach unless they have been sent out? Just as it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!”
Nevertheless, they did not all obey the good news. For Isaiah says: “Jehovah, who has put faith in the thing heard from us?”
So faith follows the thing heard. In turn, what is heard is through the word about Christ.
But I ask, They did not fail to hear, did they? Why, in fact, “into all the earth their sound went out, and to the ends of the inhabited earth their message.”
But I ask, Israel did not fail to know, did they? First Moses says: “I will incite you to jealousy through that which is not a nation; I will incite you to violent anger through a foolish nation.”
But Isaiah becomes very bold and says: “I was found by those who were not seeking me; I became known to those who were not asking for me.”
But he says regarding Israel: “All day long I have spread out my hands toward a disobedient and obstinate people.”
I am introducing to you Phoeʹbe, our sister, who is a minister of the congregation that is in Cenʹchre·ae,
so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones and give her whatever help she may need, for she herself also proved to be a defender of many, including me.
Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
who have risked their own necks for me and to whom not only I but also all the congregations of the nations give thanks.
Also greet the congregation that is in their house. Greet my beloved E·paeʹne·tus, who is a firstfruits of Asia for Christ.
Greet Mary, who has worked hard for you.
Greet An·dronʹi·cus and Juʹni·as, my relatives and fellow prisoners, who are men well-known to the apostles and who have been in union with Christ longer than I have.
Give my greetings to Am·pli·aʹtus, my beloved in the Lord.
Greet Ur·baʹnus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Staʹchys.
Greet A·pelʹles, the approved one in Christ. Greet those from the household of A·ris·tobʹu·lus.
Greet He·roʹdi·on, my relative. Greet those from the household of Nar·cisʹsus who are in the Lord.
Greet Try·phaeʹna and Try·phoʹsa, women who are working hard in the Lord. Greet Perʹsis, our beloved one, for she has worked hard in the Lord.
Greet Ruʹfus, the chosen one in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Greet A·synʹcri·tus, Phleʹgon, Herʹmes, Patʹro·bas, Herʹmas, and the brothers with them.
Greet Phi·lolʹo·gus and Julia, Neʹreus and his sister, and O·lymʹpas, and all the holy ones with them.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the congregations of the Christ greet you.
Now I urge you, brothers, to keep your eye on those who create divisions and causes for stumbling contrary to the teaching that you have learned, and avoid them.
For men of that sort are slaves, not of our Lord Christ, but of their own appetites, and by smooth talk and flattering speech they seduce the hearts of unsuspecting ones.
Your obedience has come to the notice of all, and so I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise as to what is good, but innocent as to what is evil.
For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly. May the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus be with you.
Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, and so do Lucius, Jaʹson, and So·sipʹa·ter, my relatives.
I, Terʹtius, who have done the writing of this letter, greet you in the Lord.
Gaʹius, host to me and to all the congregation, greets you. E·rasʹtus, the city treasurer, greets you, and so does Quarʹtus, his brother.
Now to Him who can make you firm according to the good news I declare and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the sacred secret that has been kept in silence for long-lasting times
but has now been made manifest and has been made known through the prophetic Scriptures among all the nations according to the command of the everlasting God to promote obedience by faith;
to God, who alone is wise, be the glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.
Therefore, now that we have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we also have obtained access by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand; and let us rejoice, based on hope of the glory of God.
Not only that, but let us rejoice while in tribulations, since we know that tribulation produces endurance;
endurance, in turn, an approved condition; the approved condition, in turn, hope,
and the hope does not lead to disappointment; because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given to us.
For, indeed, while we were still weak, Christ died for ungodly men at the appointed time.
For hardly would anyone die for a righteous man; though perhaps for a good man someone may dare to die.
But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more, then, since we have now been declared righteous by his blood, will we be saved through him from wrath.
For if when we were enemies we became reconciled to God through the death of his Son, how much more we will be saved by his life, now that we have become reconciled.
Not only that, but we are also rejoicing in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.
For sin was in the world before the Law, but sin is not charged against anyone when there is no law.
Nevertheless, death ruled as king from Adam down to Moses, even over those who had not sinned in the same way that Adam transgressed, who bears a resemblance to the one who was to come.
But the gift is not like the trespass. For if by one man’s trespass many died, how much more did the undeserved kindness of God and his free gift by the undeserved kindness of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to many!
Also, it is not the same with the free gift as with the way things worked through the one man who sinned. For the judgment after one trespass was condemnation, but the gift after many trespasses was a declaration of righteousness.
For if by the trespass of the one man death ruled as king through that one, how much more will those who receive the abundance of the undeserved kindness and of the free gift of righteousness rule as kings in life through the one person, Jesus Christ!
So, then, as through one trespass the result to men of all sorts was condemnation, so too through one act of justification the result to men of all sorts is their being declared righteous for life.
For just as through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one person many will be made righteous.
Now the Law came on the scene so that trespassing might increase. But where sin abounded, undeserved kindness abounded still more.
To what end? So that just as sin ruled as king with death, so also undeserved kindness might rule as king through righteousness leading to everlasting life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Welcome the man having weaknesses in his faith, but do not pass judgment on differing opinions.
One man has faith to eat everything, but the man who is weak eats only vegetables.
Let the one eating not look down on the one not eating, and let the one not eating not judge the one eating, for God has welcomed him.
Who are you to judge the servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand, for Jehovah can make him stand.
One man judges one day as above another; another judges one day the same as all others; let each one be fully convinced in his own mind.
The one who observes the day observes it to Jehovah. Also, the one who eats, eats to Jehovah, for he gives thanks to God; and the one who does not eat does not eat to Jehovah, and yet gives thanks to God.
Not one of us, in fact, lives with regard to himself only, and no one dies with regard to himself only.
For if we live, we live to Jehovah, and if we die, we die to Jehovah. So both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.
For to this end Christ died and came to life again, so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you also look down on your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.
For it is written: “‘As surely as I live,’ says Jehovah, ‘to me every knee will bend, and every tongue will make open acknowledgment to God.’”
So, then, each of us will render an account for himself to God.
Therefore, let us not judge one another any longer but, rather, be determined not to put a stumbling block or an obstacle before a brother.
I know and am convinced in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself; only where a man considers something to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
For if your brother is being offended because of food, you are no longer walking according to love. Do not by your food ruin that one for whom Christ died.
Therefore, do not let the good you do be spoken of as bad.
For the Kingdom of God does not mean eating and drinking, but means righteousness and peace and joy with holy spirit.
For whoever slaves for Christ in this way is acceptable to God and has approval with men.
So, then, let us pursue the things making for peace and the things that build one another up.
Stop tearing down the work of God just for the sake of food. True, all things are clean, but it is detrimental for a man to eat when it will cause stumbling.
It is best not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything over which your brother stumbles.
The faith that you have, keep it to yourself before God. Happy is the man who does not judge himself by what he approves.
But if he has doubts, he is already condemned if he eats, because he does not eat based on faith. Indeed, everything that is not based on faith is sin.
We, though, who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to be pleasing ourselves.
Let each of us please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.
For even the Christ did not please himself, but just as it is written: “The reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.”
For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.
Now may the God who supplies endurance and comfort grant you to have among yourselves the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had,
so that unitedly you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So welcome one another, just as the Christ also welcomed you, with glory to God in view.
For I tell you that Christ became a minister of those who are circumcised in behalf of God’s truthfulness, so as to verify the promises He made to their forefathers,
and that the nations might glorify God for his mercy. Just as it is written: “That is why I will openly acknowledge you among the nations, and to your name I will sing praises.”
And again he says: “Be glad, you nations, with his people.”
And again: “Praise Jehovah, all you nations, and let all the peoples praise him.”
And again Isaiah says: “There will be the root of Jesʹse, the one arising to rule nations; on him nations will rest their hope.”
May the God who gives hope fill you with all joy and peace by your trusting in him, so that you may abound in hope with power of holy spirit.
Now I myself am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are also full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and that you are able to admonish one another.
However, I have written to you more outspokenly on some points, so as to give you another reminder, because of the undeserved kindness given to me from God
for me to be a public servant of Christ Jesus to the nations. I am engaging in the holy work of the good news of God, so that these nations might be an acceptable offering, sanctified with holy spirit.
So I have reason to exult in Christ Jesus over the things pertaining to God.
For I will not presume to speak about anything except what Christ has done through me in order for the nations to be obedient, by my word and deed,
with the power of signs and wonders, with the power of God’s spirit, so that from Jerusalem and in a circuit as far as Il·lyrʹi·cum I have thoroughly preached the good news about the Christ.
In this way, indeed, I made it my aim not to declare the good news where the name of Christ had already been made known, so as not to build on another man’s foundation;
but just as it is written: “Those who received no report about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
This is also why I was many times hindered from coming to you.
But now I no longer have untouched territory in these regions, and for many years I have longed to come to you.
Therefore, when I journey to Spain, I hope that I will see you and be accompanied partway there by you after I have first enjoyed your company for a time.
But now I am about to travel to Jerusalem to minister to the holy ones.
For those in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia have been pleased to share their things by a contribution to the poor among the holy ones in Jerusalem.
True, they have been pleased to do so, and indeed they were debtors to them; for if the nations have shared in their spiritual things, they also owe it to minister to them with their material things.
So after I have finished with this and have delivered this contribution securely to them, I will depart by way of you for Spain.
Moreover, I know that when I do come to you, I will come with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
Now I urge you, brothers, through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the spirit, that you exert yourselves with me in prayers to God for me,
that I may be rescued from the unbelievers in Ju·deʹa and that my ministry in behalf of Jerusalem may prove to be acceptable to the holy ones,
so that by God’s will I will come to you with joy and be refreshed together with you.
May the God who gives peace be with all of you. Amen.
That being so, what will we say was gained by Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh?
For instance, if Abraham was declared righteous as a result of works, he would have reason to boast, but not with God.
For what does the scripture say? “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Now to the man who works, his pay is not counted as an undeserved kindness but as something owed to him.
On the other hand, to the man who does not work but puts faith in the One who declares the ungodly one righteous, his faith is counted as righteousness.
Just as David also speaks of the happiness of the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works:
“Happy are those whose lawless deeds have been pardoned and whose sins have been covered;
happy is the man whose sin Jehovah will by no means take into account.”
Does this happiness, then, only come to circumcised people or also to uncircumcised people? For we say: “Abraham’s faith was counted to him as righteousness.”
Under what circumstances, then, was it counted as righteousness? When he was circumcised or uncircumcised? He was not yet circumcised but was uncircumcised.
And he received a sign—namely, circumcision—as a seal of the righteousness by the faith he had while in his uncircumcised state, so that he might be the father of all those having faith while uncircumcised, in order for righteousness to be counted to them;
and so that he might be a father to circumcised offspring, not only to those who adhere to circumcision but also to those who walk orderly in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had while in the uncircumcised state.
For it was not through law that Abraham or his offspring had the promise that he should be heir of a world, but it was through righteousness by faith.
For if those who adhere to law are heirs, faith becomes useless and the promise has been abolished.
In reality the Law produces wrath, but where there is no law, neither is there any transgression.
That is why it is through faith, so that it might be according to undeserved kindness, in order for the promise to be sure to all his offspring, not only to those who adhere to the Law but also to those who adhere to the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
(This is just as it is written: “I have appointed you a father of many nations.”) This was in the sight of God, in whom he had faith, who makes the dead alive and calls the things that are not as though they are.
Although beyond hope, yet based on hope, he had faith that he would become the father of many nations according to what had been said: “So your offspring will be.”
And although he did not grow weak in faith, he considered his own body, now as good as dead (since he was about 100 years old), as well as the deadness of the womb of Sarah.
But because of the promise of God, he did not waver in a lack of faith; but he became powerful by his faith, giving God glory
and being fully convinced that what He had promised He was also able to do.
Therefore, “it was counted to him as righteousness.”
However, the words “it was counted to him” were not written for his sake only,
but also for our sake, to whom it will be counted, because we believe in Him who raised Jesus our Lord up from the dead.
He was handed over for the sake of our trespasses and was raised up for the sake of declaring us righteous.
Therefore, I appeal to you by the compassions of God, brothers, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.
And stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
For through the undeserved kindness given to me, I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has given to him a measure of faith.
For just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function,
so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ, but individually we are members belonging to one another.
Since, then, we have gifts that differ according to the undeserved kindness given to us, if it is of prophecy, let us prophesy in proportion to our faith;
or if it is a ministry, let us be at this ministry; or the one who teaches, let him be at his teaching;
or the one who encourages, let him give encouragement; the one who distributes, let him do it liberally; the one who presides, let him do it diligently; the one who shows mercy, let him do it cheerfully.
Let your love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.
In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
Be industrious, not lazy. Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.
Rejoice in the hope. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.
Share with the holy ones according to their needs. Follow the course of hospitality.
Keep on blessing those who persecute; bless and do not curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.
Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things, but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.
Return evil for evil to no one. Take into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men.
If possible, as far as it depends on you, be peaceable with all men.
Do not avenge yourselves, beloved, but yield place to the wrath; for it is written: “‘Vengeance is mine; I will repay,’ says Jehovah.”
But “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by doing this you will heap fiery coals on his head.”
Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil with the good.
What are we to say then? Should we continue in sin so that undeserved kindness may increase?
Certainly not! Seeing that we died with reference to sin, how can we keep living any longer in it?
Or do you not know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
So we were buried with him through our baptism into his death, in order that just as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in a newness of life.
If we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will certainly also be united with him in the likeness of his resurrection.
For we know that our old personality was nailed to the stake along with him in order for our sinful body to be made powerless, so that we should no longer go on being slaves to sin.
For the one who has died has been acquitted from his sin.
Moreover, if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
For we know that Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more; death is no longer master over him.
For the death that he died, he died with reference to sin once for all time, but the life that he lives, he lives with reference to God.
Likewise you, consider yourselves to be dead with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.
Therefore, do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal bodies so that you should obey their desires.
Neither go on presenting your bodies to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also your bodies to God as weapons of righteousness.
For sin must not be master over you, seeing that you are not under law but under undeserved kindness.
What follows? Are we to commit a sin because we are not under law but under undeserved kindness? Certainly not!
Do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey, either of sin leading to death or of obedience leading to righteousness?
But thanks to God that although you were once the slaves of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that pattern of teaching to which you were handed over.
Yes, since you were set free from sin, you became slaves to righteousness.
I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh; for just as you presented your members as slaves to uncleanness and lawlessness leading to lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to holiness.
For when you were slaves of sin, you were free as to righteousness.
What, then, was the fruit that you used to produce at that time? Things of which you are now ashamed. For the end of those things is death.
However, now that you were set free from sin and became slaves to God, you are producing your fruit in the way of holiness, and the end is everlasting life.
For the wages sin pays is death, but the gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.
Therefore, those in union with Christ Jesus have no condemnation.
For the law of the spirit that gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death.
What the Law was incapable of doing because it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, condemning sin in the flesh,
so that the righteous requirement of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.
For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the spirit, on the things of the spirit.
For setting the mind on the flesh means death, but setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace;
because setting the mind on the flesh means enmity with God, for it is not in subjection to the law of God, nor, in fact, can it be.
So those who are in harmony with the flesh cannot please God.
However, you are in harmony, not with the flesh, but with the spirit, if God’s spirit truly dwells in you. But if anyone does not have Christ’s spirit, this person does not belong to him.
But if Christ is in union with you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.
If, now, the spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, the one who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also make your mortal bodies alive through his spirit that resides in you.
So, then, brothers, we are under obligation, not to the flesh to live according to the flesh;
for if you live according to the flesh, you are sure to die; but if you put the practices of the body to death by the spirit, you will live.
For all who are led by God’s spirit are indeed God’s sons.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery causing fear again, but you received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: “Abba, Father!”
The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are God’s children.
If, then, we are children, we are also heirs—heirs indeed of God, but joint heirs with Christ—provided we suffer together so that we may also be glorified together.
For I consider that the sufferings of the present time do not amount to anything in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed in us.
For the creation is waiting with eager expectation for the revealing of the sons of God.
For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will, but through the one who subjected it, on the basis of hope
that the creation itself will also be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.
For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.
Not only that, but we ourselves also who have the firstfruits, namely, the spirit, yes, we ourselves groan within ourselves while we are earnestly waiting for adoption as sons, the release from our bodies by ransom.
For we were saved in this hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, for when a man sees a thing, does he hope for it?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we keep eagerly waiting for it with endurance.
In like manner, the spirit also joins in with help for our weakness; for the problem is that we do not know what we should pray for as we need to, but the spirit itself pleads for us with unuttered groanings.
But the one who searches the hearts knows what the meaning of the spirit is, because it is pleading in harmony with God for the holy ones.
We know that God makes all his works cooperate together for the good of those who love God, those who are the ones called according to his purpose;
because those whom he gave his first recognition he also foreordained to be patterned after the image of his Son, so that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
Moreover, those whom he foreordained are the ones he also called; and those whom he called are the ones he also declared to be righteous. Finally those whom he declared righteous are the ones he also glorified.
What, then, are we to say about these things? If God is for us, who will be against us?
Since he did not even spare his own Son but handed him over for us all, will he not also, along with him, kindly give us all other things?
Who will file accusation against God’s chosen ones? God is the One who declares them righteous.
Who will condemn them? Christ Jesus is the one who died, yes, more than that the one who was raised up, who is at the right hand of God and who also pleads for us.
Who will separate us from the love of the Christ? Will tribulation or distress or persecution or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?
Just as it is written: “For your sake we are being put to death all day long; we have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.”
On the contrary, in all these things we are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us.
For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers
nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Become imitators of me, just as I am of Christ.
I commend you because in all things you remember me and you are holding fast the traditions just as I handed them on to you.
But I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.
Every man who prays or prophesies with something on his head shames his head;
but every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered shames her head, for it is one and the same as if she were a woman with a shaved head.
For if a woman does not cover herself, she should have her hair cut off; but if it is disgraceful for a woman to have her hair cut off or shaved, she should be covered.
For a man should not have his head covered, as he is God’s image and glory, but the woman is man’s glory.
For man did not come from woman, but woman came from man.
And what is more, man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man.
That is why the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
Besides, in connection with the Lord, neither is woman separate from man nor is man separate from woman.
For just as the woman is from the man, so also the man is through the woman; but all things are from God.
Judge for yourselves: Is it fitting for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
Does not nature itself teach you that long hair is a dishonor to a man,
but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her? For her hair is given to her instead of a covering.
However, if anyone wants to argue in favor of some other custom, we have no other, nor do the congregations of God.
But while giving these instructions, I do not commend you, because it is, not for the better, but for the worse that you meet together.
For first of all, I hear that when you come together in a congregation, divisions exist among you; and to an extent I believe it.
For there will certainly also be sects among you, so that those of you who are approved may also become evident.
When you come together in one place, it is not really to eat the Lord’s Evening Meal.
For when you eat it, each one takes his own evening meal beforehand, so that one is hungry but another is intoxicated.
Do you not have houses for eating and drinking? Or do you despise the congregation of God and make those who have nothing feel ashamed? What can I say to you? Should I commend you? In this I do not commend you.
For I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night on which he was going to be betrayed took a loaf,
and after giving thanks, he broke it and said: “This means my body, which is in your behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
He did the same with the cup also, after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood. Keep doing this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
For whenever you eat this loaf and drink this cup, you keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he comes.
Therefore, whoever eats the loaf or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty respecting the body and the blood of the Lord.
First let a man approve himself after scrutiny, and only then let him eat of the loaf and drink of the cup.
For the one who eats and drinks without discerning the body eats and drinks judgment against himself.
That is why many among you are weak and sick, and quite a few are sleeping in death.
But if we would discern what we ourselves are, we would not be judged.
However, when we are judged, we are disciplined by Jehovah, so that we may not become condemned with the world.
Consequently, my brothers, when you come together to eat it, wait for one another.
If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, so that when you come together it is not for judgment. But as for the remaining matters, I will put them in order when I get there.
Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will, and Sosʹthe·nes our brother,
to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, to you who have been sanctified in union with Christ Jesus, called to be holy ones, together with all those everywhere who are calling on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I always thank my God for you in view of the undeserved kindness of God given to you in Christ Jesus;
because in everything you have been enriched in him, in full ability to speak and in full knowledge,
just as the witness about the Christ has been made firm among you,
so that you do not lack in any gift at all, while you are eagerly waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He will also make you firm to the end so that you may be open to no accusation in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful, by whom you were called into fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.
For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.
What I mean is this, that each one of you says: “I belong to Paul,” “But I to A·polʹlos,” “But I to Ceʹphas,” “But I to Christ.”
Is the Christ divided? Paul was not executed on the stake for you, was he? Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you except Crisʹpus and Gaʹius,
so that no one may say that you were baptized in my name.
Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephʹa·nas. As for the rest, I do not know whether I baptized anyone else.
For Christ sent me, not to baptize, but to declare the good news; and not with wisdom of speech, so that the torture stake of the Christ should not be made useless.
For the speech about the torture stake is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved, it is God’s power.
For it is written: “I will make the wisdom of the wise men perish, and the intelligence of the intellectuals I will reject.”
Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this system of things? Has not God made the wisdom of the world foolish?
For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did not get to know God through its wisdom, God was pleased through the foolishness of what is preached to save those believing.
For the Jews ask for signs and the Greeks look for wisdom;
but we preach Christ executed on the stake, to the Jews a cause for stumbling but to the nations foolishness.
However, to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
Because a foolish thing of God is wiser than men, and a weak thing of God is stronger than men.
For you see his calling of you, brothers, that there are not many wise in a fleshly way, not many powerful, not many of noble birth,
but God chose the foolish things of the world to put the wise men to shame; and God chose the weak things of the world to put the strong things to shame;
and God chose the insignificant things of the world and the things looked down on, the things that are not, to bring to nothing the things that are,
so that no one might boast in the sight of God.
But it is due to him that you are in union with Christ Jesus, who has become to us wisdom from God, also righteousness and sanctification and release by ransom,
so that it may be just as it is written: “The one who boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
Now concerning the things about which you wrote, it is better for a man not to touch a woman;
but because of the prevalence of sexual immorality, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.
Let the husband give to his wife her due, and let the wife also do likewise to her husband.
The wife does not have authority over her own body, but her husband does; likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but his wife does.
Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent for an appointed time, so that you may devote time to prayer and may come together again, in order that Satan may not keep tempting you for your lack of self-control.
However, I say this by way of concession, not as a command.
But I wish all men were as I am. Nevertheless, each one has his own gift from God, one in this way, another in that way.
Now I say to those who are unmarried and to the widows that it is better for them if they remain as I am.
But if they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.
To the married people I give instructions, not I but the Lord, that a wife should not separate from her husband.
But if she does separate, let her remain unmarried or else be reconciled with her husband; and a husband should not leave his wife.
But to the others I say, yes, I, not the Lord: If any brother has an unbelieving wife and she is agreeable to staying with him, let him not leave her;
and if a woman has an unbelieving husband and he is agreeable to staying with her, let her not leave her husband.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in relation to his wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in relation to the brother; otherwise, your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.
But if the unbelieving one chooses to depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not bound under such circumstances, but God has called you to peace.
For wife, how do you know whether you will save your husband? Or, husband, how do you know whether you will save your wife?
Nevertheless, just as Jehovah has given each one a portion, let each one so walk as God has called him. And so I give this directive in all the congregations.
Was any man already circumcised when he was called? Let him not undo his circumcision. Has any man been called while uncircumcised? Let him not get circumcised.
Circumcision means nothing, and uncircumcision means nothing; what means something is the observing of God’s commandments.
In whatever state each one was called, let him remain in it.
Were you called when a slave? Do not let it concern you; but if you can become free, then seize the opportunity.
For anyone who was called in the Lord when a slave is the Lord’s freedman; likewise anyone who was called when a freeman is a slave of Christ.
You were bought with a price; stop becoming slaves of men.
In whatever state each one was called, brothers, let him remain in it before God.
Now concerning virgins, I have no command from the Lord, but I give my opinion as one who had mercy shown him by the Lord to be faithful.
Therefore, I think that it is best for a man to continue as he is in view of the present difficulty.
Are you bound to a wife? Stop seeking a release. Are you freed from a wife? Stop seeking a wife.
But even if you did marry, you would commit no sin. And if a virgin married, such a person would commit no sin. However, those who do will have tribulation in their flesh. But I am trying to spare you.
Moreover, this I say, brothers, the time left is reduced. From now on, let those who have wives be as though they had none,
and those who weep as those who do not weep, and those who rejoice as those who do not rejoice, and those who buy as those who do not possess,
and those making use of the world as those not using it to the full; for the scene of this world is changing.
Indeed, I want you to be free from anxiety. The unmarried man is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he may gain the Lord’s approval.
But the married man is anxious for the things of the world, how he may gain the approval of his wife,
and he is divided. Further, the unmarried woman, as well as the virgin, is anxious for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in her body and in her spirit. However, the married woman is anxious for the things of the world, how she may gain the approval of her husband.
But I am saying this for your personal advantage, not to restrict you, but to move you to what is appropriate and to constant devotion to the Lord without distraction.
But if anyone thinks he is behaving improperly by remaining unmarried, and if he is past the bloom of youth, then this is what should take place: Let him do what he wants; he does not sin. Let them marry.
But if anyone stands settled in his heart and has no necessity, but has authority over his own will and has made the decision in his own heart to remain unmarried, he will do well.
So also, whoever marries does well, but whoever does not marry will do better.
A wife is bound as long as her husband is alive. But if her husband should fall asleep in death, she is free to be married to whomever she wants, only in the Lord.
But in my opinion, she is happier if she remains as she is; and I certainly think I also have God’s spirit.
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love, I have become a clanging gong or a clashing cymbal.
And if I have the gift of prophecy and understand all the sacred secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all the faith so as to move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body so that I may boast, but do not have love, I do not benefit at all.
Love is patient and kind. Love is not jealous. It does not brag, does not get puffed up,
does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.
It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth.
It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Love never fails. But if there are gifts of prophecy, they will be done away with; if there are tongues, they will cease; if there is knowledge, it will be done away with.
For we have partial knowledge and we prophesy partially,
but when what is complete comes, what is partial will be done away with.
When I was a child, I used to speak as a child, to think as a child, to reason as a child; but now that I have become a man, I have done away with the traits of a child.
For now we see in hazy outline by means of a metal mirror, but then it will be face-to-face. At present I know partially, but then I will know accurately, just as I am accurately known.
Now, however, these three remain: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.
So, brothers, I was not able to speak to you as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men, as to infants in Christ.
I fed you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet strong enough. In fact, neither are you strong enough now,
for you are still fleshly. Since there are jealousy and strife among you, are you not fleshly and are you not walking as men do?
For when one says, “I belong to Paul,” but another says, “I to A·polʹlos,” are you not acting like mere men?
What, then, is A·polʹlos? Yes, what is Paul? Ministers through whom you became believers, just as the Lord granted each one.
I planted, A·polʹlos watered, but God kept making it grow,
so that neither is the one who plants anything nor is the one who waters, but God who makes it grow.
Now the one who plants and the one who waters are one, but each person will receive his own reward according to his own work.
For we are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.
According to the undeserved kindness of God that was given to me, I laid a foundation as a skilled master builder, but someone else is building on it. But let each one keep watching how he is building on it.
For no one can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Now if anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
each one’s work will be shown for what it is, for the day will show it up, because it will be revealed by means of fire, and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one has built.
If anyone’s work that he has built on it remains, he will receive a reward;
if anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved; yet, if so, it will be as through fire.
Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s temple and that the spirit of God dwells in you?
If anyone destroys the temple of God, God will destroy him; for the temple of God is holy, and you are that temple.
Let no one deceive himself: If anyone among you thinks he is wise in this system of things, let him become a fool, so that he may become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written: “He catches the wise in their own cunning.”
And again: “Jehovah knows that the reasonings of the wise men are futile.”
So let no one boast in men; for all things belong to you,
whether Paul or A·polʹlos or Ceʹphas or the world or life or death or things now here or things to come, all things belong to you;
in turn you belong to Christ; Christ, in turn, belongs to God.
Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord?
Even if I am not an apostle to others, I most certainly am to you! For you are the seal confirming my apostleship in the Lord.
My defense to those who examine me is as follows:
We have the right to eat and drink, do we not?
We have the right to be accompanied by a believing wife, as the rest of the apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Ceʹphas, do we not?
Or is it only Barʹna·bas and I who do not have the right to refrain from working for a living?
What soldier ever serves at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who shepherds a flock and does not partake of some of the milk of the flock?
Am I saying these things from a human viewpoint? Or does not the Law also say these things?
For it is written in the Law of Moses: “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain.” Is it bulls that God is concerned about?
Or is it actually for our sakes that he says it? It was really written for our sakes, because the man who plows and the man who threshes ought to do so in the hope of receiving a share.
If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material support from you?
If other men have this rightful claim over you, do we not have it much more so? Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we are enduring all things so that we might not in any way hinder the good news about the Christ.
Do you not know that the men performing sacred duties eat the things of the temple, and that those regularly serving at the altar receive a share from the altar?
In this way, too, the Lord commanded for those proclaiming the good news to live by means of the good news.
But I have not made use of a single one of these provisions. Indeed, I have not written these things so that this would be done for me, for it would be better to die than—no man will take away my grounds for boasting!
Now if I am declaring the good news, it is no reason for me to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe to me if I do not declare the good news!
If I do this willingly, I have a reward; but even if I do it against my will, I still have a stewardship entrusted to me.
What, then, is my reward? That when I declare the good news, I may offer the good news without cost, to avoid abusing my authority in the good news.
For though I am free from all people, I have made myself the slave to all, so that I may gain as many people as possible.
To the Jews I became as a Jew in order to gain Jews; to those under law I became as under law, though I myself am not under law, in order to gain those under law.
To those without law I became as without law, although I am not without law toward God but under law toward Christ, in order to gain those without law.
To the weak I became weak, in order to gain the weak. I have become all things to people of all sorts, so that I might by all possible means save some.
But I do all things for the sake of the good news, in order to share it with others.
Do you not know that the runners in a race all run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win it.
Now everyone competing in a contest exercises self-control in all things. Of course, they do it to receive a crown that can perish, but we, one that does not perish.
Therefore, the way I am running is not aimlessly; the way I am aiming my blows is so as not to be striking the air;
but I pummel my body and lead it as a slave, so that after I have preached to others, I myself should not become disapproved somehow.
So when I came to you, brothers, I did not come with extravagant speech or wisdom declaring the sacred secret of God to you.
For I decided not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, and him executed on the stake.
And I came to you in weakness and in fear and with much trembling;
and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power,
so that your faith might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.
Now we speak wisdom among those who are mature, but not the wisdom of this system of things nor that of the rulers of this system of things, who are to come to nothing.
But we speak God’s wisdom in a sacred secret, the hidden wisdom, which God foreordained before the systems of things for our glory.
It is this wisdom that none of the rulers of this system of things came to know, for if they had known it, they would not have executed the glorious Lord.
But just as it is written: “Eye has not seen and ear has not heard, nor have there been conceived in the heart of man the things that God has prepared for those who love him.”
For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.
For who among men knows the things of a man except the man’s spirit within him? So, too, no one has come to know the things of God except the spirit of God.
Now we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit that is from God, so that we might know the things that have been kindly given us by God.
These things we also speak, not with words taught by human wisdom, but with those taught by the spirit, as we explain spiritual matters with spiritual words.
But a physical man does not accept the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; and he cannot get to know them, because they are examined spiritually.
However, the spiritual man examines all things, but he himself is not examined by any man.
For “who has come to know the mind of Jehovah, so that he may instruct him?” But we do have the mind of Christ.
Now I want you to know, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea
and all got baptized into Moses by means of the cloud and of the sea,
and all ate the same spiritual food
and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they used to drink from the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock meant the Christ.
Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the wilderness.
Now these things became examples for us, in order for us not to desire injurious things, as they desired them.
Neither become idolaters, as some of them did; just as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink. Then they got up to have a good time.”
Neither let us practice sexual immorality, as some of them committed sexual immorality, only to fall, 23,000 of them in one day.
Neither let us put Jehovah to the test, as some of them put him to the test, only to perish by the serpents.
Neither be murmurers, as some of them murmured, only to perish by the destroyer.
Now these things happened to them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have come.
So let the one who thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.
No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.
Therefore, my beloved ones, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to men with discernment; judge for yourselves what I say.
The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a sharing in the blood of the Christ? The loaf that we break, is it not a sharing in the body of the Christ?
Because there is one loaf, we, although many, are one body, for we are all partaking of that one loaf.
Look at Israel in the fleshly sense: Are not those who eat the sacrifices sharers with the altar?
What, then, am I saying? That what is sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
No; but I say that what the nations sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God; and I do not want you to become sharers with the demons.
You cannot be drinking the cup of Jehovah and the cup of demons; you cannot be partaking of “the table of Jehovah” and the table of demons.
Or ‘are we inciting Jehovah to jealousy’? We are not stronger than he is, are we?
All things are lawful, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful, but not all things build up.
Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.
Eat whatever is sold in a meat market, making no inquiry because of your conscience,
for “to Jehovah belong the earth and everything in it.”
If an unbeliever invites you and you want to go, eat whatever is set before you, making no inquiry on account of your conscience.
But if anyone says to you, “This is something offered in sacrifice,” do not eat because of the one who told you and because of conscience.
I do not mean your own conscience, but that of the other person. For why should my freedom be judged by another person’s conscience?
If I am partaking with thanks, why am I to be spoken of abusively over that for which I give thanks?
Therefore, whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.
Keep from becoming causes for stumbling to Jews as well as Greeks and to the congregation of God,
just as I am trying to please all people in all things, not seeking my own advantage, but that of the many, so that they may be saved.
Now concerning the collection for the holy ones, you may follow the directions I gave to the congregations of Ga·laʹti·a.
On the first day of every week, each of you should set something aside according to his own means, so that collections will not take place when I arrive.
But when I get there, I will send the men you approve of in your letters to take your kind gift to Jerusalem.
However, if it seems advisable for me to go there also, they will go there with me.
But I will come to you when I have gone through Mac·e·doʹni·a, for I will be going through Mac·e·doʹni·a;
and perhaps I will stay or even spend the winter with you, so that you may accompany me partway to where I may be going.
For I do not want to see you now just in passing, since I hope to spend some time with you, if Jehovah permits.
But I am remaining in Ephʹe·sus until the Festival of Pentecost,
because a large door that leads to activity has been opened to me, but there are many opposers.
Now if Timothy arrives, make sure that he has nothing to fear while among you, for he is performing the work of Jehovah, just as I am.
Therefore, let no one look down on him. Send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me, for I am waiting for him together with the brothers.
Now concerning A·polʹlos our brother, I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers. It was not his intention to come now, but he will come when he has the opportunity.
Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on in a manly way, grow mighty.
Let everything you do be done with love.
Now I urge you, brothers: You know that the household of Stephʹa·nas is the firstfruits of A·chaʹia and that they devoted themselves to ministering to the holy ones.
May you also keep submitting yourselves to people like that and to all those cooperating and working hard.
But I rejoice over the presence of Stephʹa·nas and For·tu·naʹtus and A·chaʹi·cus, because they have made up for your not being here.
For they have refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore, give recognition to men of that sort.
The congregations of Asia send you their greetings. Aqʹui·la and Prisʹca together with the congregation that is in their house greet you heartily in the Lord.
All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand.
If anyone has no affection for the Lord, let him be accursed. O our Lord, come!
May the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus be with you.
May my love be with all of you in union with Christ Jesus.
Actually sexual immorality is reported among you, and such immorality as is not even found among the nations—of a man living with his father’s wife.
And are you proud of it? Should you not rather mourn, so that the man who committed this deed should be taken away from your midst?
Although absent in body, I am present in spirit, and I have already judged the man who has done this, as if I were actually with you.
When you are gathered together in the name of our Lord Jesus, and knowing that I am with you in spirit along with the power of our Lord Jesus,
you must hand such a man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven ferments the whole batch of dough?
Clear away the old leaven so that you may be a new batch, inasmuch as you are free from ferment. For, indeed, Christ our Passover lamb has been sacrificed.
So, then, let us keep the festival, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of badness and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
In my letter I wrote you to stop keeping company with sexually immoral people,
not meaning entirely with the sexually immoral people of this world or the greedy people or extortioners or idolaters. Otherwise, you would actually have to get out of the world.
But now I am writing you to stop keeping company with anyone called a brother who is sexually immoral or a greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a man.
For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Do you not judge those inside,
while God judges those outside? “Remove the wicked person from among yourselves.”
Pursue love, yet keep striving for the spiritual gifts, but preferably that you may prophesy.
For the one who speaks in a tongue speaks, not to men, but to God, for no one listens, but he speaks sacred secrets by the spirit.
However, the one who prophesies builds up and encourages and consoles men by his speech.
The one who speaks in a tongue builds up himself, but the one who prophesies builds up a congregation.
Now I would like for all of you to speak in tongues, but I prefer that you prophesy. Indeed, the one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets, so that the congregation may be built up.
But at this time, brothers, if I should come speaking to you in tongues, what good would I do you unless I spoke to you either with a revelation or with knowledge or with a prophecy or with a teaching?
It is the same with the inanimate things that produce sound, whether a flute or a harp. Unless there is an interval to the tones, how can what is being played on the flute or on the harp be recognized?
For if the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?
In the same way, unless you with the tongue use speech that is easily understood, how will anyone know what is being said? You will, in fact, be speaking into the air.
It may be that there are many kinds of speech in the world, and yet no kind is without meaning.
For if I do not understand the sense of the speech, I will be a foreigner to the one speaking, and the one speaking will be a foreigner to me.
So also with you, since you eagerly desire the gifts of the spirit, seek to abound in gifts that will build up the congregation.
Therefore, let the one who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.
For if I am praying in a tongue, it is my gift of the spirit that is praying, but my mind is unproductive.
What is to be done, then? I will pray with the gift of the spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing praise with the gift of the spirit, but I will also sing praise with my mind.
Otherwise, if you offer praise with a gift of the spirit, how will the ordinary person in your midst say “Amen” to your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying?
True, you are giving thanks in a fine way, but the other man is not being built up.
I thank God that I speak in more tongues than all of you do.
Nevertheless, in a congregation I would rather speak five words with my mind, that I might also instruct others, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
Brothers, do not become young children in your understanding, but be young children as to badness; and become full-grown in your understanding.
In the Law it is written: “‘With the tongues of foreigners and with the lips of strangers I will speak to this people, and even then they will refuse to listen to me,’ says Jehovah.”
Therefore, tongues are not a sign for the believers but for the unbelievers, whereas prophecy is not for the unbelievers but for the believers.
So if the whole congregation comes together to one place and they all speak in tongues, but ordinary people or unbelievers come in, will they not say that you have lost your minds?
But if you are all prophesying and an unbeliever or an ordinary person comes in, he will be reproved and closely examined by them all.
The secrets of his heart then become evident, so that he will fall facedown and worship God, declaring: “God is really among you.”
What is to be done, then, brothers? When you come together, one has a psalm, another has a teaching, another has a revelation, another has a tongue, and another has an interpretation. Let all things take place for building up.
And if someone speaks in a tongue, let it be limited to two or three at the most, and in turns, and someone must interpret.
But if there is no interpreter, he must keep silent in the congregation and speak to himself and to God.
Let two or three prophets speak, and let the others discern the meaning.
But if another one receives a revelation while sitting there, let the first speaker keep silent.
For you can all prophesy one at a time, so that all may learn and all may be encouraged.
And gifts of the spirit of the prophets are to be controlled by the prophets.
For God is a God not of disorder but of peace. As in all the congregations of the holy ones,
let the women keep silent in the congregations, for it is not permitted for them to speak. Rather, let them be in subjection, as the Law also says.
If they want to learn something, let them ask their husbands at home, for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the congregation.
Was it from you that the word of God originated, or did it reach only as far as you?
If anyone thinks he is a prophet or is gifted with the spirit, he must acknowledge that the things I am writing to you are the Lord’s commandment.
But if anyone disregards this, he will be disregarded.
So, my brothers, keep striving to prophesy, and yet do not forbid the speaking in tongues.
But let all things take place decently and by arrangement.
Now I remind you, brothers, of the good news that I declared to you, which you also accepted, and for which you have taken your stand.
Through it you are also being saved if you hold firmly to the good news I declared to you, unless you became believers for nothing.
For among the first things I handed on to you was what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures;
and that he was buried, yes, that he was raised up on the third day according to the Scriptures;
and that he appeared to Ceʹphas, and then to the Twelve.
After that he appeared to more than 500 brothers at one time, most of whom are still with us, though some have fallen asleep in death.
After that he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
But last of all he appeared also to me as if to one born prematurely.
For I am the least of the apostles, and I am not worthy of being called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God.
But by God’s undeserved kindness I am what I am. And his undeserved kindness to me was not in vain, but I labored more than all of them; yet it was not I, but the undeserved kindness of God that is with me.
Whether, then, it is I or they, this is the way we preach, and this is the way you believed.
Now if it is being preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how is it that some among you say there is no resurrection of the dead?
If, indeed, there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been raised up.
But if Christ has not been raised up, our preaching is certainly in vain, and your faith is also in vain.
Moreover, we are also found to be false witnesses of God, because we have given witness against God by saying that he raised up the Christ, whom he did not raise up if the dead are really not to be raised up.
For if the dead are not to be raised up, neither has Christ been raised up.
Further, if Christ has not been raised up, your faith is useless; you remain in your sins.
Then also those who have fallen asleep in death in union with Christ have perished.
If in this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are to be pitied more than anyone.
But now Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death.
For since death came through a man, resurrection of the dead also comes through a man.
For just as in Adam all are dying, so also in the Christ all will be made alive.
But each one in his own proper order: Christ the firstfruits, afterward those who belong to the Christ during his presence.
Next, the end, when he hands over the Kingdom to his God and Father, when he has brought to nothing all government and all authority and power.
For he must rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet.
And the last enemy, death, is to be brought to nothing.
For God “subjected all things under his feet.” But when he says that ‘all things have been subjected,’ it is evident that this does not include the One who subjected all things to him.
But when all things will have been subjected to him, then the Son himself will also subject himself to the One who subjected all things to him, that God may be all things to everyone.
Otherwise, what will they do who are being baptized for the purpose of being dead ones? If the dead are not to be raised up at all, why are they also being baptized for the purpose of being such?
Why are we also in danger every hour?
Daily I face death. This is as sure as my exultation over you, brothers, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
If like other men, I have fought with wild beasts at Ephʹe·sus, of what good is it to me? If the dead are not to be raised up, “let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die.”
Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.
Come to your senses in a righteous way and do not practice sin, for some have no knowledge of God. I am speaking to move you to shame.
Nevertheless, someone will say: “How are the dead to be raised up? Yes, with what sort of body are they coming?”
You unreasonable person! What you sow is not made alive unless first it dies.
And as for what you sow, you sow, not the body that will develop, but just a bare grain, whether of wheat or of some other kind of seed;
but God gives it a body just as it has pleased him, and gives to each of the seeds its own body.
Not all flesh is the same flesh, but there is one of mankind, there is another flesh of cattle, another flesh of birds, and another of fish.
And there are heavenly bodies and earthly bodies; but the glory of the heavenly bodies is one sort, and that of the earthly bodies is a different sort.
The glory of the sun is one sort, and the glory of the moon is another, and the glory of the stars is another; in fact, one star differs from another star in glory.
So it is with the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised up in incorruption.
It is sown in dishonor; it is raised up in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised up in power.
It is sown a physical body; it is raised up a spiritual body. If there is a physical body, there is also a spiritual one.
So it is written: “The first man Adam became a living person.” The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
However, what is spiritual is not first. What is physical is first, and afterward what is spiritual.
The first man is from the earth and made of dust; the second man is from heaven.
Like the one made of dust, so too are those made of dust; and like the heavenly one, so too are those who are heavenly.
And just as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we will bear also the image of the heavenly one.
But I tell you this, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit God’s Kingdom, nor does corruption inherit incorruption.
Look! I tell you a sacred secret: We will not all fall asleep in death, but we will all be changed,
in a moment, in the blink of an eye, during the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised up incorruptible, and we will be changed.
For this which is corruptible must put on incorruption, and this which is mortal must put on immortality.
But when this which is corruptible puts on incorruption and this which is mortal puts on immortality, then the saying that is written will take place: “Death is swallowed up forever.”
“Death, where is your victory? Death, where is your sting?”
The sting producing death is sin, and the power for sin is the Law.
But thanks to God, for he gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!
Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.
A man should regard us as attendants of Christ and stewards of God’s sacred secrets.
In this regard, what is expected of stewards is that they be found faithful.
Now to me it is of very little importance to be examined by you or by a human tribunal. In fact, I do not even examine myself.
For I am not conscious of anything against myself. But by this I am not proved righteous; the one who examines me is Jehovah.
Therefore, do not judge anything before the due time, until the Lord comes. He will bring the secret things of darkness to light and make known the intentions of the hearts, and then each one will receive his praise from God.
Now, brothers, these things I have applied to myself and A·polʹlos for your good, that through us you may learn the rule: “Do not go beyond the things that are written,” so that you may not be puffed up with pride, favoring one against the other.
For who makes you different from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, in fact, you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not receive it?
Are you already satisfied? Are you already rich? Have you begun ruling as kings without us? I really wish that you had begun ruling as kings, so that we also might rule with you as kings.
For it seems to me that God has put us the apostles last on exhibition as men condemned to death, because we have become a theatrical spectacle to the world, and to angels and to men.
We are fools because of Christ, but you are discreet in Christ; we are weak, but you are strong; you are held in honor, but we in dishonor.
Down to this very hour we continue to hunger and thirst and to be poorly clothed and to be beaten and to be homeless
and to toil, working with our own hands. When insulted, we bless; when persecuted, we patiently endure;
when slandered, we answer mildly; we have become as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things, until now.
I am writing these things, not to put you to shame, but to admonish you as my beloved children.
For though you may have 10,000 guardians in Christ, you certainly do not have many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, I have become your father through the good news.
I urge you, therefore, become imitators of me.
That is why I am sending Timothy to you, because he is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus, just as I am teaching everywhere in every congregation.
Some are puffed up with pride, as though I were not coming to you.
But I will come to you shortly, if Jehovah wills, and I will get to know, not the speech of those who are puffed up with pride, but their power.
For the Kingdom of God is a matter not of speech but of power.
Which do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a rod or with love and mildness of spirit?
Now concerning the spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed.
You know that when you were people of the nations, you were influenced and led astray to those voiceless idols, following wherever they might lead you.
Now I would have you know that nobody when speaking by God’s spirit says: “Jesus is accursed!” and nobody can say: “Jesus is Lord!” except by holy spirit.
Now there are different gifts, but there is the same spirit;
and there are different ministries, and yet there is the same Lord;
and there are different activities, and yet it is the same God who performs them all in everyone.
But the manifestation of the spirit is given to each one for a beneficial purpose.
For to one is given speech of wisdom through the spirit, to another speech of knowledge according to the same spirit,
to another faith by the same spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one spirit,
to yet another operations of powerful works, to another prophesying, to another discernment of inspired expressions, to another different tongues, and to another interpretation of tongues.
But all these operations are performed by the very same spirit, distributing to each one respectively just as it wills.
For just as the body is one but has many members, and all the members of that body, although many, are one body, so too is the Christ.
For by one spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all made to drink one spirit.
For, indeed, the body is made up not of one member but of many.
If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.
If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If it were all hearing, where would the sense of smell be?
But now God has arranged each of the body members just as he pleased.
If they were all the same member, where would the body be?
But now they are many members, yet one body.
The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you,” or again, the head cannot say to the feet, “I do not need you.”
On the contrary, the members of the body that seem to be weaker are necessary,
and the parts of the body that we think to be less honorable we surround with greater honor, so our unseemly parts are treated with greater modesty,
whereas our attractive parts do not need anything. Nevertheless, God has so composed the body, giving greater honor to the part that had a lack,
so that there should be no division in the body, but its members should have mutual concern for one another.
If one member suffers, all the other members suffer with it; or if a member is glorified, all the other members rejoice with it.
Now you are Christ’s body, and each of you individually is a member.
And God has assigned the respective ones in the congregation: first, apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers; then powerful works; then gifts of healings; helpful services; abilities to direct; different tongues.
Not all are apostles, are they? Not all are prophets, are they? Not all are teachers, are they? Not all perform powerful works, do they?
Not all have gifts of healings, do they? Not all speak in tongues, do they? Not all are interpreters, are they?
But keep striving for the greater gifts. And yet I will show you a surpassing way.
Does any one of you who has a dispute with another dare to go to court before unrighteous men, and not before the holy ones?
Or do you not know that the holy ones will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you not competent to try very trivial matters?
Do you not know that we will judge angels? Then why not matters of this life?
If, then, you do have matters of this life to be tried, is it the men looked down on in the congregation whom you assign as judges?
I am speaking to move you to shame. Is there not one wise man among you who is able to judge between his brothers?
Instead, brother goes to court against brother, and before unbelievers at that!
Really, it is already a defeat for you when you have lawsuits with one another. Why not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why do you not rather let yourselves be defrauded?
Instead, you wrong and defraud, and your brothers at that!
Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled. Those who are sexually immoral, idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,
thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean; you have been sanctified; you have been declared righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.
All things are lawful for me, but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful for me, but I will not let myself be controlled by anything.
Food is for the stomach and the stomach is for food, but God will bring both of them to nothing. The body is not for sexual immorality but for the Lord, and the Lord is for the body.
But God raised up the Lord and will also raise us up out of death through his power.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Should I, then, take the members of the Christ away and join them to a prostitute? By no means!
Do you not know that anyone who is joined to a prostitute is one body with her? For “the two,” says he, “will be one flesh.”
But whoever is joined to the Lord is one with him in spirit.
Flee from sexual immorality! Every other sin that a man may commit is outside his body, but whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body.
Do you not know that your body is the temple of the holy spirit within you, which you have from God? Also, you do not belong to yourselves,
for you were bought with a price. By all means, glorify God in your body.
Now concerning food offered to idols: We know we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
If anyone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know it as he should know it.
But if anyone loves God, this one is known by him.
Now concerning the eating of food offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world and that there is no God but one.
For even though there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many “gods” and many “lords,”
there is actually to us one God, the Father, from whom all things are and we for him; and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things are and we through him.
However, not all have this knowledge. But some, because of their former association with the idol, eat food as something sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
But food will not bring us nearer to God; we are no worse off if we do not eat, nor better off if we eat.
But keep watching that your right to choose does not somehow become a stumbling block to those who are weak.
For if anyone should see you who have knowledge having a meal in an idol temple, will not the conscience of that one who is weak be emboldened to the point of eating food offered to idols?
So by your knowledge the man who is weak is being ruined, your brother for whose sake Christ died.
When you sin against your brothers in this way and wound their weak conscience, you are sinning against Christ.
That is why if food makes my brother stumble, I will never again eat meat at all, so that I will not make my brother stumble.
I wish you would put up with me in a little unreasonableness. But, in fact, you are putting up with me!
For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, for I personally promised you in marriage to one husband that I might present you as a chaste virgin to the Christ.
But I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning, your minds might be corrupted away from the sincerity and the chastity that are due the Christ.
For as it is, if someone comes and preaches a Jesus other than the one we preached, or you receive a spirit other than what you received, or good news other than what you accepted, you easily put up with him.
For I consider that I have not proved inferior to your superfine apostles in a single thing.
But even if I am unskilled in speech, I certainly am not in knowledge; indeed we made it clear to you in every way and in everything.
Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself that you might be exalted, because I gladly declared the good news of God to you without cost?
Other congregations I deprived by accepting provisions in order to minister to you.
Yet, when I was present with you and I fell into need, I did not become a burden on anyone, for the brothers who came from Mac·e·doʹni·a abundantly supplied my needs. Yes, in every way I kept myself from becoming a burden to you and will continue to do so.
As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, I will not stop this boasting in the regions of A·chaʹia.
For what reason? Because I do not love you? God knows I do.
But what I am doing I will continue to do, in order to eliminate the pretext of those who are wanting a basis for being found equal to us in the things about which they boast.
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, disguising themselves as apostles of Christ.
And no wonder, for Satan himself keeps disguising himself as an angel of light.
It is therefore nothing extraordinary if his ministers also keep disguising themselves as ministers of righteousness. But their end will be according to their works.
I say again: Let no one think I am unreasonable. But even if you do, then accept me as an unreasonable person, so that I too may boast a little.
What I now say is, not as following the Lord’s example, but as an unreasonable person would, with boastful self-confidence.
Since many are boasting according to the flesh, I too will boast.
Since you are so “reasonable,” you gladly put up with the unreasonable ones.
In fact, you put up with whoever enslaves you, whoever devours your possessions, whoever grabs what you have, whoever exalts himself over you, and whoever strikes you in the face.
I say this to our dishonor, since it may seem that we have acted in weakness. But if others act boldly—I am talking unreasonably—I too act boldly.
Are they Hebrews? I am one also. Are they Israelites? I am one also. Are they Abraham’s offspring? I am also.
Are they ministers of Christ? I reply like a madman, I am more outstandingly one: I have done more work, been imprisoned more often, suffered countless beatings, and experienced many near-deaths.
Five times I received 40 strokes less one from the Jews,
three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I experienced shipwreck, a night and a day I have spent in the open sea;
in journeys often, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers, in dangers from my own people, in dangers from the nations, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers,
in labor and toil, in sleepless nights often, in hunger and thirst, frequently without food, in cold and lacking clothing.
Besides those things of an external kind, there is what rushes in on me from day to day: the anxiety for all the congregations.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is stumbled, and I am not incensed?
If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, the One who is to be praised forever, knows I am not lying.
In Damascus the governor under A·reʹtas the king was guarding the city of the Dam·a·scenesʹ to seize me,
but I was lowered in a basket through a window in the city wall, and I escaped his hands.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother, to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, including all the holy ones who are in all A·chaʹia:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
For just as the sufferings for the Christ abound in us, so the comfort we receive through the Christ also abounds.
Now if we face trials, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if we are being comforted, it is for your comfort, which acts to help you to endure the same sufferings that we also suffer.
And our hope for you is unwavering, knowing as we do that just as you share in the sufferings, so you will also share in the comfort.
For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced in the province of Asia. We were under extreme pressure beyond our own strength, so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
In fact, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. This was so that we would trust, not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
From such a great risk of death he did rescue us and will rescue us, and our hope is in him that he will also continue to rescue us.
You also can help us by your supplication for us, in order that many may give thanks in our behalf for the favor we receive in answer to the prayers of many.
For the thing we boast of is this, our conscience bears witness that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially toward you, with holiness and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but with God’s undeserved kindness.
For we are really not writing you about anything except what you can read and understand, and I hope you will continue to understand these things fully,
just as you have also understood to an extent that we are a cause for you to boast, just as you will also be for us in the day of our Lord Jesus.
So with this confidence, I was intending to come first to you, so that you might have a second occasion for joy;
for I intended to visit you on my way to Mac·e·doʹni·a, to return to you from Mac·e·doʹni·a, and then to have you send me off to Ju·deʹa.
Well, when I had such an intention, I did not view the matter lightly, did I? Or do I purpose things in a fleshly way, so that I am saying “Yes, yes” and then “No, no”?
But God can be relied on that what we say to you is not “yes” and yet “no.”
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you through us, that is, through me and Sil·vaʹnus and Timothy, did not become “yes” and yet “no,” but “yes” has become “yes” in his case.
For no matter how many the promises of God are, they have become “yes” by means of him. Therefore, also through him is the “Amen” said to God, which brings him glory through us.
But the one who guarantees that you and we belong to Christ and the one who anointed us is God.
He has also put his seal on us and has given us the token of what is to come, that is, the spirit, in our hearts.
Now I call on God as a witness against me that it is to spare you that I have not yet come to Corinth.
Not that we are the masters over your faith, but we are fellow workers for your joy, for it is by your faith that you are standing.
Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one.
I do not say this to condemn you. For I have said before that you are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
I have great freeness of speech toward you. I have great boasting in regard to you. I am filled with comfort; I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction.
In fact, when we arrived in Mac·e·doʹni·a, our bodies got no relief, but we continued to be afflicted in every way—there were fights on the outside, fears within.
But God, who comforts those who are downhearted, comforted us by the presence of Titus;
and not only by his presence but also by the comfort he received because of you, as he reported back to us about your longing for me, your deep sorrow, and your earnest concern for me; so I rejoiced even more.
For even if I saddened you by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I did at first regret it (seeing that the letter saddened you, though only for a little while),
now I rejoice, not because you were just saddened, but because you were saddened into repenting. For you were saddened in a godly way, so that you suffered no harm because of us.
For sadness in a godly way produces repentance leading to salvation, leaving no regret; but the sadness of the world produces death.
For see what a great earnestness your being saddened in a godly way produced in you, yes, clearing of yourselves, yes, indignation, yes, fear, yes, earnest desire, yes, zeal, yes, righting of the wrong! In every respect you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in this matter.
Although I wrote to you, I did not do it for the one who did the wrong, nor for the one who was wronged, but so that your earnestness for us might be made evident among you in the sight of God.
That is why we have been comforted. But in addition to our comfort, we rejoiced even more over the joy of Titus, because all of you refreshed his spirit.
For if I have boasted to him about you, I have not been put to shame; but just as all the things we told you were true, so also our boasting to Titus has proved true.
Also, his tender affections toward you are greater as he remembers the obedience of all of you, how you received him with fear and trembling.
I rejoice that in every way I may have confidence in you.
This is the third time I am coming to you. “On the testimony of two or three witnesses every matter must be established.”
Although I am absent now, it is as if I were present for the second time, and I give my warning in advance to those who sinned previously and to all the rest, that if ever I come again I will not spare them,
since you are seeking proof that Christ, who is not weak toward you but strong among you, is really speaking through me.
For, indeed, he was executed on the stake because of weakness, but he is alive because of God’s power. True, we also are weak with him, but we will live together with him because of God’s power toward you.
Keep testing whether you are in the faith; keep proving what you yourselves are. Or do you not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with you? Unless you are disapproved.
I truly hope you will recognize that we are not disapproved.
Now we pray to God that you may do nothing wrong, not that we may appear approved, but that you may do what is fine, even if we may appear disapproved.
For we can do nothing against the truth, but only for the truth.
We certainly rejoice whenever we are weak but you are powerful. And this is what we are praying for, your being readjusted.
That is why I write these things while absent, so that when I am present, I may not have to be severe in using the authority that the Lord gave me, to build up and not to tear down.
Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted, to be comforted, to think in agreement, to live peaceably; and the God of love and of peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the holy ones send you their greetings.
The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the sharing in the holy spirit be with all of you.
Are we starting to recommend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some men, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
You yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts and known and being read by all mankind.
For you are shown to be a letter of Christ written by us as ministers, inscribed not with ink but with the spirit of a living God, not on stone tablets but on fleshly tablets, on hearts.
We have this sort of confidence toward God through the Christ.
Not that we of ourselves are adequately qualified to consider that anything comes from us, but our being adequately qualified comes from God,
who has indeed adequately qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant, not of a written code, but of spirit; for the written code condemns to death, but the spirit makes alive.
Now if the code that administers death and that was engraved in letters on stones came with such glory that the sons of Israel could not gaze at the face of Moses because of the glory of his face, a glory that was to be done away with,
why should the administering of the spirit not be with even greater glory?
For if the code administering condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious would be the administering of righteousness!
In fact, even what had once been made glorious has been stripped of glory because of the glory that excels it.
For if what was to be done away with was brought in with glory, how much greater would be the glory of what remains!
Since we have such a hope, we are using great freeness of speech,
and not doing what Moses did when he would put a veil over his face so that the sons of Israel might not gaze intently at the end of what was to be done away with.
But their minds were dulled. For to this present day, the same veil remains unlifted when the old covenant is read, because it is taken away only by means of Christ.
In fact, to this day whenever Moses is read, a veil lies upon their hearts.
But when one turns to Jehovah, the veil is taken away.
Now Jehovah is the Spirit, and where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.
And all of us, while we with unveiled faces reflect like mirrors the glory of Jehovah, are transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another, exactly as it is done by Jehovah the Spirit.
Now concerning the ministry that is for the holy ones, it is not really necessary for me to write you,
for I know your willingness about which I am boasting to the Mac·e·doʹni·ans, that A·chaʹia has been ready now for a year, and your zeal has stirred up the majority of them.
But I am sending the brothers, so that our boasting about you might not prove empty in this respect and that you may really be ready, just as I said you would be.
Otherwise, if the Mac·e·doʹni·ans should come with me and find you not ready, we—not to mention you—should be put to shame by our confidence in you.
So I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to come to you ahead of time and to get your promised bountiful gift ready in advance, so that this might be ready as a generous gift, and not as something extorted.
But as to this, whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
Moreover, God is able to cause all his undeserved kindness to abound toward you so that you are always completely self-sufficient in everything, as well as having plenty for every good work.
(Just as it is written: “He has distributed widely; he has given to the poor. His righteousness continues forever.”
Now the One who abundantly supplies seed to the sower and bread for eating will supply and multiply the seed for you to sow and will increase the harvest of your righteousness.)
In everything you are being enriched for every sort of generosity, which produces through us an expression of thanks to God;
because the ministry of this public service is not only to provide well for the needs of the holy ones but also to be rich in many expressions of thanks to God.
Through the proof that this relief ministry gives, they glorify God because you are submissive to the good news about the Christ, as you publicly declared, and because you are generous in your contribution to them and to all.
And with supplication for you, they express affection for you because of the surpassing undeserved kindness of God upon you.
Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.
For I have made up my mind not to come to you again in sadness.
For if I make you sad, who will be there to cheer me up except the one I saddened?
I wrote what I did, so that when I come I may not be saddened by those over whom I ought to rejoice, because I have confidence that what brings me joy brings all of you the same joy.
For out of much tribulation and anguish of heart I wrote you with many tears, not to sadden you, but to let you know the depth of love I have for you.
Now if anyone has caused sadness, he has saddened, not me, but all of you to an extent—not to be too harsh in what I say.
This rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man;
now you should instead kindly forgive and comfort him, so that he may not be overwhelmed by excessive sadness.
I therefore exhort you to confirm your love for him.
For this is also why I wrote to you: to determine whether you would give proof of your obedience in all things.
If you forgive anyone for anything, I do also. In fact, whatever I have forgiven (if I have forgiven anything) has been for your sake in Christ’s sight,
so that we may not be overreached by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his designs.
Now when I arrived in Troʹas to declare the good news about the Christ and a door was opened to me in the Lord,
my spirit felt no relief because of not finding Titus my brother. So I said good-bye to them and departed for Mac·e·doʹni·a.
But thanks be to God, who always leads us in a triumphal procession in company with the Christ and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of him in every place!
For to God we are a sweet fragrance of Christ among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing;
to the latter ones an odor of death leading to death, to the former ones a fragrance of life leading to life. And who is adequately qualified for these things?
We are, for we are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are, but we speak in all sincerity as sent from God, yes, in the sight of God and in company with Christ.
Now I myself, Paul, appeal to you by the mildness and kindness of the Christ, lowly though I am when among you face-to-face, but bold toward you when absent.
I beg that when present, I may not have to be bold and take the strong measures that I expect against some who view us as if we walked in a fleshly manner.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage warfare according to what we are in the flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things.
For we are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ;
and we are prepared to inflict punishment for every disobedience, as soon as your own obedience is complete.
You look at things according to their face value. If anyone is confident in himself that he belongs to Christ, let him reflect again on this fact: Just as he belongs to Christ, so do we also.
For even if I should boast a bit too much about the authority that the Lord gave us to build you up and not to tear you down, I would not be put to shame.
For I do not want to seem as though I were trying to terrify you by my letters.
For they say: “His letters are weighty and forceful, but his presence in person is weak and his speech contemptible.”
Let such a man consider that what we say by letters when absent, this we will also do when present.
For we do not dare to class ourselves or compare ourselves with some who recommend themselves. But when they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, they are without understanding.
However, we will not boast outside our assigned boundaries, but within the boundary of the territory that God measured out to us, making it reach even as far as you.
Really, we are not overextending ourselves as if we did not reach you, for we were the first to reach as far as you with the good news about the Christ.
No, we are not boasting outside our assigned boundaries about the labors of someone else, but we hope that as your faith continues to increase, what we have done may be made to increase, within our territory. Then we will abound still more,
so that we may declare the good news to the countries beyond you, so as not to boast in what has already been done in someone else’s territory.
“But the one who boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
For it is not the one who recommends himself who is approved, but the one whom Jehovah recommends.
For we know that if our earthly house, this tent, should be torn down, we are to have a building from God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.
For in this house we do indeed groan, earnestly desiring to put on the one for us from heaven,
so that when we do put it on, we will not be found naked.
In fact, we who are in this tent groan, being weighed down, because we do not want to put this one off, but we want to put the other on, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Now the one who prepared us for this very thing is God, who gave us the spirit as a token of what is to come.
So we are always of good courage and know that while we have our home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
for we are walking by faith, not by sight.
But we are of good courage and would prefer to be absent from the body and to make our home with the Lord.
So whether at home with him or absent from him, we make it our aim to be acceptable to him.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of the Christ, so that each one may be repaid according to the things he has practiced while in the body, whether good or bad.
Therefore, since we know the fear of the Lord, we keep persuading men, but we are well-known to God. However, I hope that we are well-known also to your consciences.
We are not recommending ourselves to you again but giving you an incentive to boast about us, so that you may be able to answer those who boast over the outward appearance but not over what is in the heart.
For if we were out of our mind, it was for God; if we are sound in mind, it is for you.
For the love the Christ has compels us, because this is what we have concluded, that one man died for all; so, then, all had died.
And he died for all so that those who live should live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them and was raised up.
So from now on we know no man from a fleshly viewpoint. Even if we once knew Christ according to the flesh, we certainly no longer know him in that way.
Therefore, if anyone is in union with Christ, he is a new creation; the old things passed away; look! new things have come into existence.
But all things are from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of the reconciliation,
namely, that God was by means of Christ reconciling a world to himself, not counting their offenses against them, and he entrusted to us the message of the reconciliation.
Therefore, we are ambassadors substituting for Christ, as though God were making an appeal through us. As substitutes for Christ, we beg: “Become reconciled to God.”
The one who did not know sin, he made to be sin for us, so that by means of him we might become God’s righteousness.
Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy that was shown us, we do not give up.
But we have renounced the shameful, underhanded things, not walking with cunning or adulterating the word of God; but by making the truth manifest, we recommend ourselves to every human conscience in the sight of God.
If, in fact, the good news we declare is veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing,
among whom the god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.
For we are preaching, not about ourselves, but about Jesus Christ as Lord and ourselves as your slaves for Jesus’ sake.
For God is the one who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.
However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not from us.
We are hard-pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement; we are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out;
we are persecuted, but not abandoned; we are knocked down, but not destroyed.
Always we endure in our body the death-dealing treatment that Jesus suffered, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our body.
For we who live are ever being brought face-to-face with death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
So death is at work in us, but life in you.
Now because we have the same spirit of faith as that of which it is written: “I exercised faith, therefore I spoke”; we too exercise faith and therefore we speak,
knowing that the One who raised Jesus up will raise us up also with Jesus and will present us together with you.
For all these things are for your sake, so that the increase of the undeserved kindness should abound even more because many more are offering thanksgiving to the glory of God.
Therefore, we do not give up, but even if the man we are outside is wasting away, certainly the man we are inside is being renewed from day to day.
For though the tribulation is momentary and light, it works out for us a glory that is of more and more surpassing greatness and is everlasting;
while we keep our eyes, not on the things seen, but on the things unseen. For the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are everlasting.
I have to boast. It is not beneficial, but I will move on to supernatural visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in union with Christ who, 14 years ago—whether in the body or out of the body, I do not know; God knows—was caught away to the third heaven.
Yes, I know such a man—whether in the body or apart from the body, I do not know; God knows—
who was caught away into paradise and heard words that cannot be spoken and that are not lawful for a man to say.
I will boast about such a man, but I will not boast about myself except of my weaknesses.
For even if I want to boast, I will not be unreasonable, for I would say the truth. But I refrain from doing so, in order that no one should give me more credit than what he sees in me or hears from me,
just because of receiving such extraordinary revelations. To keep me from becoming overly exalted, I was given a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan, to keep slapping me, so that I might not be overly exalted.
Three times I begged the Lord about this, that it would depart from me.
But he said to me: “My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you, for my power is being made perfect in weakness.” Most gladly, then, I will boast about my weaknesses, in order that the power of the Christ may remain over me like a tent.
So I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in times of need, in persecutions and difficulties, for Christ. For when I am weak, then I am powerful.
I have become unreasonable. You compelled me to, for I ought to have been recommended by you. For I did not prove to be inferior to your superfine apostles in a single thing, even if I am nothing.
Indeed, the signs of an apostle were produced among you with great endurance, and by signs and wonders and powerful works.
For how were you less favored than the rest of the congregations, except that I myself did not become a burden to you? Kindly forgive me for this wrong.
Look! This is the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not become a burden. For I am seeking, not your possessions, but you; for the children are not expected to save up for their parents, but the parents for their children.
For my part, I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for you. If I love you so much more, am I to be loved the less?
But be that as it may, I did not burden you. Nevertheless, you say I was “crafty” and I caught you “by trickery.”
I did not take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you, did I?
I urged Titus and I sent the brother with him. Titus did not take advantage of you at all, did he? We walked in the same spirit, did we not? In the same footsteps, did we not?
Have you been thinking all along that we have been making our defense to you? It is before God that we are speaking in union with Christ. But, beloved ones, all that we do is to build you up.
For I am afraid that somehow when I arrive, I may not find you as I wish and I may not be as you wish, but instead, there may be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, dissension, backbiting, whispering, being puffed up with pride, and disorder.
Perhaps when I come again, my God might humiliate me before you, and I may have to mourn over many of those who previously sinned but have not repented of their uncleanness and sexual immorality and brazen conduct that they have practiced.
Working together with him, we also urge you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.
For he says: “In an acceptable time I heard you, and in a day of salvation I helped you.” Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.
In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, so that no fault may be found with our ministry;
but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, by the endurance of much, by tribulations, by times of need, by difficulties,
by beatings, by imprisonments, by riots, by hard work, by sleepless nights, by times without food;
by purity, by knowledge, by patience, by kindness, by holy spirit, by love free from hypocrisy,
by truthful speech, by God’s power; through the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left,
through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report. We are regarded as deceivers and yet we are truthful,
as unknown and yet we are recognized, as dying and yet look! we live, as punished and yet not handed over to death,
as sorrowing but ever rejoicing, as poor but making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
We have opened our mouth to speak to you, Corinthians, and we have opened wide our heart.
We are not restricted in our affections for you, but you are restricted in your own tender affections for us.
So in response—I speak as to my children—you too open your hearts wide.
Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness?
Further, what harmony is there between Christ and Beʹli·al? Or what does a believer share in common with an unbeliever?
And what agreement does God’s temple have with idols? For we are a temple of a living God; just as God said: “I will reside among them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.”
“‘Therefore, get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing’”; “‘and I will take you in.’”
“‘And I will become a father to you, and you will become sons and daughters to me,’ says Jehovah, the Almighty.”
Now we want you to know, brothers, about the undeserved kindness of God that has been granted to the congregations of Mac·e·doʹni·a.
During a great test under affliction, their abundance of joy and their deep poverty made the riches of their generosity abound.
For it was according to their means, yes, I testify, it was even beyond their means,
while they on their own initiative kept earnestly begging us for the privilege of kindly giving, to have a share in the relief ministry for the holy ones.
And not merely as we had hoped, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through God’s will.
So we encouraged Titus that, just as he had initiated this work among you, he should also complete this same kind giving on your part.
Nevertheless, just as you abound in everything, in faith and word and knowledge and all earnestness and in our love for you, may you also abound in this kind giving.
I am saying this, not to command you, but to make you aware of the earnestness of others and to test the genuineness of your love.
For you know the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich, he became poor for your sake, so that you might become rich through his poverty.
And in this I give my opinion: This is for your benefit, seeing that already a year ago you not only initiated the action but also showed your desire to do it.
So now, also complete what you started to do, so that your readiness to act may be completed according to the means you have available.
For if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.
For I do not want to make it easy for others, but difficult for you;
but that by means of an equalizing, your surplus at the present time might offset their need, so that their surplus might also offset your deficiency, that there may be an equalizing.
Just as it is written: “The person with much did not have too much, and the person with little did not have too little.”
Now thanks be to God for putting the same earnest concern for you in the heart of Titus,
because he has indeed responded to the encouragement, but being very eager, he is coming to you on his own initiative.
But we are sending along with him the brother whose praise in connection with the good news has spread through all the congregations.
Not only that, but he was also appointed by the congregations to be our traveling companion as we administer this kind gift for the glory of the Lord and in proof of our readiness to assist.
Thus we are avoiding having any man find fault with us in connection with this liberal contribution that we are administering.
For we ‘care for everything honestly, not only in the sight of Jehovah but also in the sight of men.’
Moreover, we are sending with them our brother whom we have often tested and found to be diligent in many matters, but now much more diligent on account of his great confidence in you.
If, though, there is any question about Titus, he is my companion and a fellow worker for your interests; or if there are questions about our brothers, they are apostles of congregations and a glory of Christ.
So demonstrate the proof of your love to them, and show the congregations why we boasted about you.
Paul, an apostle, neither from men nor through a man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him up from the dead,
and all the brothers with me, to the congregations of Ga·laʹti·a:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
He gave himself for our sins so that he might rescue us from the present wicked system of things according to the will of our God and Father,
to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
I am amazed that you are so quickly turning away from the One who called you with Christ’s undeserved kindness to another sort of good news.
Not that there is another good news; but there are certain ones who are causing you trouble and wanting to distort the good news about the Christ.
However, even if we or an angel out of heaven were to declare to you as good news something beyond the good news we declared to you, let him be accursed.
As we have said before, I now say again, Whoever is declaring to you as good news something beyond what you accepted, let him be accursed.
Is it, in fact, men I am now trying to persuade or God? Or am I trying to please men? If I were still pleasing men, I would not be Christ’s slave.
For I want you to know, brothers, that the good news I declared to you is not of human origin;
for neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it was through a revelation by Jesus Christ.
Of course, you heard about my conduct formerly in Juʹda·ism, that I kept intensely persecuting the congregation of God and devastating it;
and I was making greater progress in Juʹda·ism than many of my own age in my nation, as I was far more zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
But when God, who separated me from my mother’s womb and called me through his undeserved kindness, thought good
to reveal his Son through me so that I might declare the good news about him to the nations, I did not immediately consult with any human;
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before I was, but I went to Arabia, and then I returned to Damascus.
Then three years later I went up to Jerusalem to visit Ceʹphas, and I stayed with him for 15 days.
But I did not see any of the other apostles, only James the brother of the Lord.
Now regarding the things I am writing you, I assure you before God that I am not lying.
After that I went into the regions of Syria and Ci·liʹcia.
But I was personally unknown to the congregations of Ju·deʹa that were in union with Christ.
They only used to hear: “The man who formerly persecuted us is now declaring the good news about the faith that he formerly devastated.”
So they began glorifying God because of me.
O senseless Ga·laʹtians! Who has brought you under this evil influence, you who had Jesus Christ openly portrayed before you as nailed to the stake?
This one thing I want to ask you: Did you receive the spirit through works of law or because of faith in what you heard?
Are you so senseless? After starting on a spiritual course, are you finishing on a fleshly course?
Did you undergo so many sufferings for nothing? If it really was for nothing.
Therefore, does the one who supplies you the spirit and performs powerful works among you do it because of your works of law or because of your faith in what you heard?
Just as Abraham “put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
Surely you know that it is those who adhere to faith who are sons of Abraham.
Now the scripture, foreseeing that God would declare people of the nations righteous through faith, declared the good news beforehand to Abraham, namely: “By means of you all the nations will be blessed.”
So those who adhere to faith are being blessed together with Abraham, who had faith.
All those who depend on works of law are under a curse, for it is written: “Cursed is everyone who does not remain in all the things written in the scroll of the Law by doing them.”
Moreover, it is evident that by law no one is declared righteous with God, because “the righteous one will live by reason of faith.”
Now the Law is not based on faith. Rather, “anyone who does these things will live by means of them.”
Christ purchased us, releasing us from the curse of the Law by becoming a curse instead of us, because it is written: “Accursed is every man hung upon a stake.”
This was so that the blessing of Abraham would come to the nations by means of Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promised spirit through our faith.
Brothers, I speak using a human illustration: Once a covenant is validated, even if only by a man, no one annuls it or attaches additions to it.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his offspring. It does not say, “and to your descendants,” in the sense of many. Rather, it says, “and to your offspring,” in the sense of one, who is Christ.
Further, I say this: The Law, which came into being 430 years later, does not invalidate the covenant previously made by God, so as to abolish the promise.
For if the inheritance is based on law, it is no longer based on a promise; but God has kindly given it to Abraham through a promise.
Why, then, the Law? It was added to make transgressions manifest, until the offspring should arrive to whom the promise had been made; and it was transmitted through angels by the hand of a mediator.
Now there is no mediator when just one person is involved, but God is only one.
Is the Law, therefore, against the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could give life, righteousness would actually have been by means of law.
But the Scripture handed all things over to the custody of sin, so that the promise resulting from faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those exercising faith.
However, before the faith arrived, we were being guarded under law, being handed over into custody, looking to the faith that was about to be revealed.
So the Law became our guardian leading to Christ, so that we might be declared righteous through faith.
But now that the faith has arrived, we are no longer under a guardian.
You are all, in fact, sons of God through your faith in Christ Jesus.
For all of you who were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor freeman, there is neither male nor female, for you are all one in union with Christ Jesus.
Moreover, if you belong to Christ, you are really Abraham’s offspring, heirs with reference to a promise.
Then after 14 years I again went up to Jerusalem with Barʹna·bas, also taking Titus along with me.
I went up as a result of a revelation, and I presented to them the good news that I am preaching among the nations. This was done privately, however, before the men who were highly regarded, to make sure that I was not running or had not run in vain.
Nevertheless, not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, although he was a Greek.
But that matter came up because of the false brothers brought in quietly, who slipped in to spy on the freedom we enjoy in union with Christ Jesus, so that they might completely enslave us;
we did not yield in submission to them, no, not for a moment, so that the truth of the good news might continue with you.
But regarding those who seemed to be important—whatever they were makes no difference to me, for God does not go by a man’s outward appearance—those highly regarded men imparted nothing new to me.
On the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the good news for those who are uncircumcised, just as Peter had been for those who are circumcised—
for the one who empowered Peter for an apostleship to those who are circumcised also empowered me for those who are of the nations—
and when they recognized the undeserved kindness that was given me, James and Ceʹphas and John, the ones who seemed to be pillars, gave Barʹna·bas and me the right hand of fellowship, so that we should go to the nations but they to those who are circumcised.
They asked only that we keep the poor in mind, and this I have also earnestly endeavored to do.
However, when Ceʹphas came to Antioch, I resisted him face-to-face, because he was clearly in the wrong.
For before certain men from James arrived, he used to eat with people of the nations; but when they arrived, he stopped doing this and separated himself, fearing those of the circumcised class.
The rest of the Jews also joined him in putting on this pretense, so that even Barʹna·bas was led along with them in their pretense.
But when I saw that they were not walking in step with the truth of the good news, I said to Ceʹphas before them all: “If you, though you are a Jew, live as the nations do and not as Jews do, how can you compel people of the nations to live according to Jewish practice?”
We who are Jews by birth, and not sinners from the nations,
recognize that a man is declared righteous, not by works of law, but only through faith in Jesus Christ. So we have put our faith in Christ Jesus, so that we may be declared righteous by faith in Christ and not by works of law, for no one will be declared righteous by works of law.
Now if we have also been found sinners while seeking to be declared righteous by means of Christ, is Christ then sin’s minister? Certainly not!
If the very things that I once tore down I build up again, I demonstrate that I am a transgressor.
For through law I died toward law, so that I might become alive toward God.
I am nailed to the stake along with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but it is Christ who is living in union with me. Indeed, the life that I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and handed himself over for me.
I do not reject the undeserved kindness of God, for if righteousness is through law, Christ actually died for nothing.
For such freedom Christ set us free. Therefore, stand firm, and do not let yourselves be confined again in a yoke of slavery.
See! I, Paul, am telling you that if you become circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to you.
Again I bear witness to every man who gets circumcised that he is under obligation to keep the whole Law.
You are separated from Christ, you who are trying to be declared righteous by means of law; you have fallen away from his undeserved kindness.
For our part, we are by spirit eagerly waiting for the hoped-for righteousness resulting from faith.
For in union with Christ Jesus, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any value, but faith operating through love is.
You were running well. Who hindered you from continuing to obey the truth?
This sort of persuasion does not come from the One calling you.
A little leaven ferments the whole batch of dough.
I am confident that you who are in union with the Lord will not come to think otherwise; but the one who is causing you trouble, whoever he may be, will receive the judgment he deserves.
As for me, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the stumbling block of the torture stake has been eliminated.
I wish the men who are trying to unsettle you would emasculate themselves.
You were called to freedom, brothers; only do not use this freedom as an opportunity to pursue fleshly desires, but through love slave for one another.
For the entire Law has been fulfilled in one commandment, namely: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
If, though, you keep on biting and devouring one another, look out that you do not get annihilated by one another.
But I say, Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all.
For the flesh is against the spirit in its desire, and the spirit against the flesh; these are opposed to each other, so that you do not do the very things you want to do.
Furthermore, if you are being led by spirit, you are not under law.
Now the works of the flesh are plainly seen, and they are sexual immorality, uncleanness, brazen conduct,
idolatry, spiritism, hostility, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, dissensions, divisions, sects,
envy, drunkenness, wild parties, and things like these. I am forewarning you about these things, the same way I already warned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,
mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
Moreover, those who belong to Christ Jesus have nailed to the stake the flesh together with its passions and desires.
If we are living by spirit, let us also go on walking orderly by spirit.
Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.
Now I say that as long as the heir is a young child, he is no different from a slave, although he is the lord of all things,
but he is under supervisors and stewards until the day set ahead of time by his father.
Likewise, we too, when we were children, were enslaved by the elementary things of the world.
But when the full limit of the time arrived, God sent his Son, who was born of a woman and who was under law,
that he might release by purchase those under law, so that we might receive the adoption as sons.
Now because you are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, and it cries out: “Abba, Father!”
So you are no longer a slave but a son; and if a son, then you are also an heir through God.
Nevertheless, when you did not know God, you were enslaved to those who are not really gods.
But now that you have come to know God or, rather, have come to be known by God, how is it that you are turning back again to the weak and beggarly elementary things and want to slave for them over again?
You are scrupulously observing days and months and seasons and years.
I fear for you, that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you.
Brothers, I beg you, become as I am, because I also used to be as you are. You did me no wrong.
But you know that it was because of a physical illness that I had my first opportunity to declare the good news to you.
And though my physical condition was a trial for you, you did not treat me with contempt or disgust; but you received me like an angel of God, like Christ Jesus.
Where is that happiness you had? For I bear you witness that, if it had been possible, you would have gouged out your eyes and given them to me.
So, then, have I become your enemy because I tell you the truth?
They are zealous to win you over, but not for a good purpose; they want to alienate you from me, so that you may be eager to follow them.
However, it is always fine for someone to seek zealously after you for a good purpose and not just when I am present with you,
my little children, for whom I am again experiencing birth pains until Christ is formed in you.
I wish I could be present with you just now and speak in a different way, because I am perplexed over you.
Tell me, you who want to be under law, Do you not hear the Law?
For example, it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the servant girl and one by the free woman;
but the one by the servant girl was actually born through natural descent and the other by the free woman through a promise.
These things may be taken as a symbolic drama; for these women mean two covenants, the one from Mount Siʹnai, which bears children for slavery and which is Haʹgar.
Now Haʹgar means Siʹnai, a mountain in Arabia, and she corresponds with the Jerusalem today, for she is in slavery with her children.
But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.
For it is written: “Be glad, you barren woman who does not give birth; break into joyful shouting, you woman who does not have birth pains; for the children of the desolate woman are more numerous than those of her who has the husband.”
Now you, brothers, are children of the promise the same as Isaac was.
But just as then the one born through natural descent began persecuting the one born through spirit, so also now.
Nevertheless, what does the scripture say? “Drive out the servant girl and her son, for the son of the servant girl will by no means be an heir with the son of the free woman.”
So, brothers, we are children, not of a servant girl, but of the free woman.
Brothers, even if a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness. But keep an eye on yourself, for fear you too may be tempted.
Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and in this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.
For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving himself.
But let each one examine his own actions, and then he will have cause for rejoicing in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.
For each one will carry his own load.
Moreover, let anyone who is being taught the word share in all good things with the one who gives such teaching.
Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a person is sowing, this he will also reap;
because the one sowing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh, but the one sowing with a view to the spirit will reap everlasting life from the spirit.
So let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out.
So, then, as long as we have the opportunity, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.
See with what large letters I have written you with my own hand.
All those who want to make a good impression in the flesh are the ones who try to compel you to get circumcised, doing so only to avoid being persecuted for the torture stake of the Christ.
For even those who are getting circumcised do not keep the Law themselves, but they want you to be circumcised so that they may have cause for boasting about your flesh.
But may I never boast, except in the torture stake of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been put to death with regard to me and I with regard to the world.
For neither is circumcision anything nor is uncircumcision, but a new creation is.
As for all those who walk orderly by this rule of conduct, peace and mercy be upon them, yes, upon the Israel of God.
From now on let no one make trouble for me, for I am bearing on my body the brand marks of a slave of Jesus.
The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show, brothers. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to the holy ones who are in Ephʹe·sus and are faithful in union with Christ Jesus:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in union with Christ,
as he chose us to be in union with him before the founding of the world, that we should be holy and unblemished before him in love.
For he foreordained us to be adopted as his own sons through Jesus Christ, according to his good pleasure and will,
in praise of his glorious undeserved kindness that he kindly bestowed on us by means of his beloved one.
By means of him we have the release by ransom through the blood of that one, yes, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his undeserved kindness.
This undeserved kindness he caused to abound toward us in all wisdom and understanding
by making known to us the sacred secret of his will. It is according to his good pleasure that he himself purposed
for an administration at the full limit of the appointed times, to gather all things together in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth. Yes, in him
with whom we are in union and were assigned as heirs, having been foreordained according to the purpose of the one who accomplishes all things as he decides according to his will,
so that we who have been first to hope in the Christ should serve for the praise of his glory.
But you also hoped in him after you heard the word of truth, the good news about your salvation. After you believed, you were sealed by means of him with the promised holy spirit,
which is a token in advance of our inheritance, for the purpose of releasing God’s own possession by a ransom, to his glorious praise.
That is why I also, since I have heard of the faith that you have in the Lord Jesus and the love that you demonstrate toward all the holy ones,
never stop giving thanks for you. I continue mentioning you in my prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the accurate knowledge of him.
He has enlightened the eyes of your heart, so that you may know to what hope he called you, what glorious riches he holds as an inheritance for the holy ones,
and how surpassing the greatness of his power is toward us believers. It is according to the operation of the mightiness of his strength,
which he exercised toward Christ when he raised him up from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places,
far above every government and authority and power and lordship and every name that is named, not only in this system of things but also in that to come.
He also subjected all things under his feet and made him head over all things with regard to the congregation,
which is his body, the fullness of him who fills up all things in all.
For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in behalf of you, the people of the nations—
if, really, you have heard about the stewardship of God’s undeserved kindness that was given to me for your sakes,
that by way of a revelation the sacred secret was made known to me, just as I wrote previously in brief.
So when you read this, you can realize my comprehension of the sacred secret of the Christ.
In other generations this secret was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by spirit,
namely, that people of the nations should, in union with Christ Jesus and through the good news, be joint heirs and fellow members of the body and partakers with us of the promise.
I became a minister of this according to the free gift of God’s undeserved kindness that was given me through the operation of his power.
To me, a man less than the least of all holy ones, this undeserved kindness was given, so that I should declare to the nations the good news about the unfathomable riches of the Christ
and should make everyone see the administration of the sacred secret that has been hidden through the ages in God, who created all things.
This was so that now, through the congregation, there might be made known to the governments and the authorities in the heavenly places the greatly diversified wisdom of God.
This is according to the eternal purpose that he formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord,
by means of whom we have this freeness of speech and free access with confidence through our faith in him.
So I ask you not to give up on account of my tribulations in your behalf, for these mean glory for you.
For this reason I bend my knees to the Father,
to whom every family in heaven and on earth owes its name.
I pray that he may grant you through the abundance of his glory to be made mighty in the man you are inside, with power through his spirit,
and that through your faith you may have the Christ dwell in your hearts with love. May you be rooted and established on the foundation,
in order that with all the holy ones you may be thoroughly able to comprehend fully what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
and to know the love of the Christ, which surpasses knowledge, so that you may be filled with all the fullness that God gives.
Now to the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive,
to him be the glory by means of the congregation and by means of Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.
Furthermore, God made you alive, though you were dead in your trespasses and sins,
in which you at one time walked according to the system of things of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
Yes, among them we all at one time conducted ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh, carrying out the will of the flesh and of our thoughts, and we were naturally children of wrath just as the rest.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us,
made us alive together with the Christ, even when we were dead in trespasses—by undeserved kindness you have been saved.
Moreover, he raised us up together and seated us together in the heavenly places in union with Christ Jesus,
so that in the coming systems of things he might demonstrate the surpassing riches of his undeserved kindness in his graciousness toward us in union with Christ Jesus.
By this undeserved kindness you have been saved through faith, and this is not of your own doing; rather, it is God’s gift.
No, it is not a result of works, so that no one should have grounds for boasting.
We are God’s handiwork and were created in union with Christ Jesus for good works, which God determined in advance for us to walk in them.
Therefore, remember that at one time you, people of the nations by fleshly descent, were the ones called “uncircumcision” by those called “circumcision,” which is made in the flesh by human hands.
At that time you were without Christ, alienated from the state of Israel, strangers to the covenants of the promise; you had no hope and were without God in the world.
But now in union with Christ Jesus, you who were once far off have come to be near by the blood of the Christ.
For he is our peace, the one who made the two groups one and destroyed the wall in between that fenced them off.
By means of his flesh he abolished the enmity, the Law of commandments consisting in decrees, in order to make the two groups in union with himself into one new man and to make peace,
and to reconcile fully both peoples in one body to God through the torture stake, because he had killed off the enmity by means of himself.
And he came and declared the good news of peace to you who were far off, and peace to those near,
because through him we, both peoples, have free access to the Father by one spirit.
So you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens of the holy ones and are members of the household of God,
and you have been built up on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, while Christ Jesus himself is the foundation cornerstone.
In union with him the whole building, being harmoniously joined together, is growing into a holy temple for Jehovah.
In union with him you too are being built up together into a place for God to inhabit by spirit.
Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children,
and go on walking in love, just as the Christ also loved us and gave himself for us as an offering and a sacrifice, a sweet fragrance to God.
Let sexual immorality and every sort of uncleanness or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as is proper for holy people;
neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting—things that are not befitting—but rather the giving of thanks.
For you know this, recognizing it for yourselves, that no sexually immoral person or unclean person or greedy person, which means being an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of the Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you with empty words, for because of such things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
Therefore, do not be sharers with them;
for you were once darkness, but you are now light in connection with the Lord. Go on walking as children of light,
for the fruitage of the light consists of every sort of goodness and righteousness and truth.
Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord;
and stop sharing in the unfruitful works that belong to the darkness; rather, expose them for what they are.
For the things they do in secret are shameful even to mention.
Now all the things that are being exposed are made evident by the light, for everything that is being made evident is light.
Therefore, it is said: “Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and the Christ will shine upon you.”
So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons,
making the best use of your time, because the days are wicked.
On this account stop being unreasonable, but keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
Also, do not get drunk with wine, in which there is debauchery, but keep getting filled with spirit.
Speak to one another with psalms, praises to God, and spiritual songs, singing and accompanying yourselves with music in your hearts to Jehovah,
always giving thanks to our God and Father for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Be in subjection to one another in fear of Christ.
Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord,
because a husband is head of his wife just as the Christ is head of the congregation, he being a savior of this body.
In fact, as the congregation is in subjection to the Christ, wives should also be to their husbands in everything.
Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it,
in order that he might sanctify it, cleansing it with the bath of water by means of the word,
so that he might present the congregation to himself in its splendor, without a spot or a wrinkle or any of such things, but holy and without blemish.
In the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. A man who loves his wife loves himself,
for no man ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cherishes it, just as the Christ does the congregation,
because we are members of his body.
“For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh.”
This sacred secret is great. Now I am speaking about Christ and the congregation.
Nevertheless, each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.
Therefore I, the prisoner in the Lord, appeal to you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love,
earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
One body there is, and one spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
Now undeserved kindness was given to each one of us according to how the Christ measured out the free gift.
For it says: “When he ascended on high he carried away captives; he gave gifts in men.”
Now what does the expression “he ascended” mean but that he also descended into the lower regions, that is, the earth?
The very one who descended is also the one who ascended far above all the heavens, so that he might give fullness to all things.
And he gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelizers, some as shepherds and teachers,
with a view to the readjustment of the holy ones, for ministerial work, to build up the body of the Christ,
until we all attain to the oneness of the faith and of the accurate knowledge of the Son of God, to being a full-grown man, attaining the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.
So we should no longer be children, tossed about as by waves and carried here and there by every wind of teaching by means of the trickery of men, by means of cunning in deceptive schemes.
But speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.
From him all the body is harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed. When each respective member functions properly, this contributes to the growth of the body as it builds itself up in love.
So this is what I say and bear witness to in the Lord, that you should no longer go on walking just as the nations also walk, in the futility of their minds.
They are in darkness mentally and alienated from the life that belongs to God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the insensitivity of their hearts.
Having gone past all moral sense, they gave themselves over to brazen conduct to practice every sort of uncleanness with greediness.
But you did not learn the Christ to be like this,
if, indeed, you heard him and were taught by means of him, just as truth is in Jesus.
You were taught to put away the old personality that conforms to your former course of conduct and that is being corrupted according to its deceptive desires.
And you should continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude,
and should put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.
Therefore, now that you have put away deceit, each one of you speak truth with his neighbor, because we are members belonging to one another.
Be wrathful, but do not sin; do not let the sun set while you are still angry;
do not give the Devil an opportunity.
Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may have something to share with someone in need.
Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth, but only what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.
Also, do not be grieving God’s holy spirit, with which you have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom.
Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious.
But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.
Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous.
“Honor your father and your mother” is the first command with a promise:
“That it may go well with you and you may remain a long time on the earth.”
And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.
Slaves, be obedient to your human masters, with fear and trembling in the sincerity of your hearts, as to the Christ,
not only when being watched, just to please men, but as Christ’s slaves doing the will of God whole-souled.
Slave with a good attitude, as to Jehovah and not to men,
for you know that whatever good each one does, he will receive this back from Jehovah, whether he is a slave or a freeman.
Also, you masters, keep treating them in the same way, not threatening, for you know that both their Master and yours is in the heavens, and there is no partiality with him.
Finally, go on acquiring power in the Lord and in the mightiness of his strength.
Put on the complete suit of armor from God so that you may be able to stand firm against the crafty acts of the Devil;
because we have a struggle, not against blood and flesh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.
For this reason take up the complete suit of armor from God, so that you may be able to resist in the wicked day and, after you have accomplished everything, to stand firm.
Stand firm, therefore, with the belt of truth fastened around your waist, wearing the breastplate of righteousness,
and having your feet shod in readiness to declare the good news of peace.
Besides all of this, take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the wicked one’s burning arrows.
Also, accept the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, that is, God’s word,
while with every form of prayer and supplication you carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit. And to that end stay awake, constantly making supplication in behalf of all the holy ones.
Pray also for me, that the words may be given to me when I open my mouth, so that I may be able to speak boldly in making known the sacred secret of the good news,
for which I am acting as an ambassador in chains, and that I may speak about it with boldness, as I ought to speak.
Now so that you may also know about me and how I am doing, Tychʹi·cus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, will make everything known to you.
I am sending him to you for this very purpose, so that you may know how we are and that he may comfort your hearts.
May the brothers have peace and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
May the undeserved kindness be with all those loving our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptness.
Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Phi·lipʹpi, along with overseers and ministerial servants:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always when I remember you
in every supplication of mine for all of you. I offer each supplication with joy,
because of the contribution you have made to the good news from the first day until this moment.
For I am confident of this very thing, that the one who started a good work in you will bring it to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
It is only right for me to think this regarding all of you, since I have you in my heart, you who are sharers with me in the undeserved kindness both in my prison bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.
For God is my witness of how I am longing for all of you with such tender affection as Christ Jesus has.
And this is what I continue praying, that your love may abound still more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment;
that you may make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of Christ;
and that you may be filled with righteous fruit, which is through Jesus Christ, to God’s glory and praise.
Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,
so that my prison bonds for the sake of Christ have become public knowledge among all the Prae·toʹri·an Guard and all the rest.
Now most of the brothers in the Lord have gained confidence because of my prison bonds, and they are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
True, some are preaching the Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.
The latter are proclaiming the Christ out of love, for they know that I have been appointed to defend the good news;
but the former do it out of contentiousness, not with a pure motive, for they are intending to create trouble for me in my prison bonds.
With what result? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being proclaimed, and I rejoice over this. In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing,
for I know that this will result in my salvation through your supplication and with the support of the spirit of Jesus Christ.
This is in harmony with my eager expectation and hope that I will not be ashamed in any respect, but that with all freeness of speech Christ will now, as always before, be magnified by means of my body, whether through life or through death.
For in my case, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
Now if I am to live on in the flesh, this is a fruitage of my work; yet what I would choose, I do not make known.
I am torn between these two things, for I do desire the releasing and the being with Christ, which is, to be sure, far better.
However, it is more necessary for me to remain in the flesh for your sakes.
So, being confident of this, I know I will remain and continue with all of you for your advancement and your joy in the faith,
so that your exultation may overflow in Christ Jesus because of me when I am again present with you.
Only behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ, so that whether I come and see you or I am absent, I may hear about you and learn that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul, striving side by side for the faith of the good news,
and in no way being frightened by your opponents. This very thing is a proof of destruction for them, but of salvation for you; and this is from God.
For you have been given the privilege in behalf of Christ, not only to put your faith in him but also to suffer in his behalf.
For you are facing the same struggle that you saw me face, which you now hear that I am still facing.
Finally, my brothers, continue rejoicing in the Lord. It is not troublesome for me to write the same things to you, and it is for your safety.
Look out for the dogs; look out for those who cause injury; look out for those who mutilate the flesh.
For we are those with the real circumcision, we who are rendering sacred service by God’s spirit and boasting in Christ Jesus and who do not base our confidence in the flesh,
though I, if anyone, do have grounds for confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I have more:
circumcised the eighth day, of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews; regarding law, a Pharisee;
regarding zeal, persecuting the congregation; regarding righteousness based on law, one who proved himself blameless.
Yet, the things that were gains to me, I have considered loss on account of the Christ.
What is more, I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse, that I may gain Christ
and be found in union with him, not because of my own righteousness from following the Law, but because of the righteousness that is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God based on faith.
My aim is to know him and the power of his resurrection and to share in his sufferings, submitting myself to a death like his,
to see if at all possible I may attain to the earlier resurrection from the dead.
Not that I have already received it or am already made perfect, but I am pressing on to see if I may also lay hold on that for which Christ Jesus selected me.
Brothers, I do not yet consider myself as having taken hold of it; but one thing is certain: Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead,
I am pressing on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.
Therefore, let those of us who are mature be of this mental attitude, and if you are mentally inclined otherwise in any respect, God will reveal the above attitude to you.
At any rate, to the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.
Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers, and keep your eye on those who are walking in a way that is in harmony with the example we set for you.
For there are many—I used to mention them often but now I mention them also with weeping—who are walking as enemies of the torture stake of the Christ.
Their end is destruction, and their god is their belly, and their glory is really their shame, and they have their minds on earthly things.
But our citizenship exists in the heavens, and we are eagerly waiting for a savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform our humble body to be like his glorious body by his great power that enables him to subject all things to himself.
If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any spiritual fellowship, if any tender affection and compassion,
make my joy full by being of the same mind and having the same love, being completely united, having the one thought in mind.
Do nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with humility consider others superior to you,
as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
Keep this mental attitude in you that was also in Christ Jesus,
who, although he was existing in God’s form, gave no consideration to a seizure, namely, that he should be equal to God.
No, but he emptied himself and took a slave’s form and became human.
More than that, when he came as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, yes, death on a torture stake.
For this very reason, God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name,
so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend—of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground—
and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
Consequently, my beloved ones, just as you have always obeyed, not only during my presence but now much more readily during my absence, keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For God is the one who for the sake of his good pleasure energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.
Keep doing all things free from murmuring and arguments,
so that you may come to be blameless and innocent, children of God without a blemish in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation, among whom you are shining as illuminators in the world,
keeping a tight grip on the word of life. Then I may have reason for rejoicing in Christ’s day, knowing that I did not run in vain or work hard in vain.
However, even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and the holy service to which your faith has led you, I am glad and I rejoice with all of you.
In the same way, you also should be glad and rejoice with me.
Now I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly, so that I may be encouraged when I receive news about you.
For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for your concerns.
For all the others are seeking their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
But you know the proof he gave of himself, that like a child with a father he slaved with me to advance the good news.
Therefore, he is the one I am hoping to send just as soon as I see how things turn out for me.
Indeed, I am confident in the Lord that I myself will also come soon.
But for now I consider it necessary to send to you E·paph·ro·diʹtus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your envoy and personal servant for my need,
since he is longing to see all of you and is depressed because you heard he had fallen sick.
Indeed, he did fall sick nearly to the point of death; but God had mercy on him, in fact, not only on him but also on me, so that I should not have one grief after another.
Therefore, I am sending him with the greatest urgency, so that when you see him you may again rejoice and I may also be less anxious.
So give him the customary welcome in the Lord with all joy, and keep holding men of that sort dear,
because he nearly died on account of the work of Christ, risking his life in order to make up for your not being here to render personal service to me.
Consequently, my brothers whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in this way in the Lord, my beloved ones.
I urge Eu·oʹdi·a and I urge Synʹty·che to be of the same mind in the Lord.
Yes, I request you also, as a true fellow worker, to keep assisting these women who have striven side by side with me for the good news, along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Always rejoice in the Lord. Again I will say, Rejoice!
Let your reasonableness become known to all men. The Lord is near.
Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God;
and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering these things.
The things that you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these, and the God of peace will be with you.
I rejoice greatly in the Lord that now at last you have renewed your concern for me. Though you were concerned about me, you lacked opportunity to show it.
Not that I am saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be self-sufficient regardless of my circumstances.
I know how to be low on provisions and how to have an abundance. In everything and in all circumstances I have learned the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to do without.
For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.
Nevertheless, you did well to share with me in my tribulation.
In fact, you Phi·lipʹpi·ans also know that after you first learned the good news, when I departed from Mac·e·doʹni·a, not a congregation shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you alone;
for while I was in Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, you sent something to me for my need not just once but twice.
Not that I am looking for a gift, but I want the fruitage that brings more credit to your account.
However, I have everything I need and even more. I am fully supplied, now that I have received from E·paph·ro·diʹtus what you sent, a sweet fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
In turn my God will fully supply all your need according to his riches in glory by means of Christ Jesus.
Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Give my greetings to every holy one in union with Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their greetings.
All the holy ones, but especially those of the household of Caesar, send you their greetings.
The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy our brother,
to the holy ones and faithful brothers in union with Christ at Co·losʹsae: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father.
We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and the love you have for all the holy ones
because of the hope that is being reserved for you in the heavens. You previously heard about this hope through the message of truth of the good news
that has come to you. Just as the good news is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world, so it is also doing among you from the day you heard and accurately knew the undeserved kindness of God in truth.
That is what you have learned from our beloved fellow slave Epʹa·phras, who is a faithful minister of the Christ on our behalf.
He also made known to us your love in a spiritual way.
That is also why from the day we heard of it, we have never stopped praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension,
so as to walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God;
and may you be strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may endure fully with patience and joy,
as you thank the Father, who made you qualify to share in the inheritance of the holy ones in the light.
He rescued us from the authority of the darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of his beloved Son,
by means of whom we have our release by ransom, the forgiveness of our sins.
He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation;
because by means of him all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All other things have been created through him and for him.
Also, he is before all other things, and by means of him all other things were made to exist,
and he is the head of the body, the congregation. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he might become the one who is first in all things;
because God was pleased to have all fullness to dwell in him,
and through him to reconcile to himself all other things by making peace through the blood he shed on the torture stake, whether the things on the earth or the things in the heavens.
Indeed, you who were once alienated and enemies because your minds were on the works that were wicked,
he has now reconciled by means of that one’s fleshly body through his death, in order to present you holy and unblemished and open to no accusation before him—
provided, of course, that you continue in the faith, established on the foundation and steadfast, not being shifted away from the hope of that good news that you heard and that was preached in all creation under heaven. Of this good news I, Paul, became a minister.
I am now rejoicing in my sufferings for your sake, and I am undergoing the tribulations of the Christ that are yet lacking in my flesh in behalf of his body, which is the congregation.
I became a minister of this congregation in accord with the stewardship from God that was given to me in your behalf to preach the word of God fully,
the sacred secret that was hidden from the past systems of things and from the past generations. But now it has been revealed to his holy ones,
to whom God has been pleased to make known among the nations the glorious riches of this sacred secret, which is Christ in union with you, the hope of his glory.
He is the one we are proclaiming, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone in all wisdom, so that we may present every person complete in union with Christ.
To this end I am indeed working hard, exerting myself with his strength that is operating powerfully within me.
If, however, you were raised up with the Christ, go on seeking the things above, where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
Keep your minds fixed on the things above, not on the things on the earth.
For you died, and your life has been hidden with the Christ in union with God.
When the Christ, our life, is made manifest, then you also will be made manifest with him in glory.
Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion, hurtful desire, and greediness, which is idolatry.
On account of those things the wrath of God is coming.
That is how you too used to conduct yourselves in your former way of life.
But now you must put them all away from you: wrath, anger, badness, abusive speech, and obscene talk out of your mouth.
Do not lie to one another. Strip off the old personality with its practices,
and clothe yourselves with the new personality, which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it,
where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythʹi·an, slave, or freeman; but Christ is all things and in all.
Accordingly, as God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience.
Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.
But besides all these things, clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.
Also, let the peace of the Christ rule in your hearts, for you were called to that peace in one body. And show yourselves thankful.
Let the word of the Christ reside in you richly in all wisdom. Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs sung with gratitude, singing in your hearts to Jehovah.
Whatever it is that you do in word or in deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, thanking God the Father through him.
You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as it is becoming in the Lord.
You husbands, keep on loving your wives and do not be bitterly angry with them.
You children, be obedient to your parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.
You fathers, do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.
You slaves, be obedient in everything to those who are your human masters, not only when they are watching, just to please men, but with sincerity of heart, with fear of Jehovah.
Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as for Jehovah, and not for men,
for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the inheritance as a reward. Slave for the Master, Christ.
Certainly the one who does wrong will be repaid for the wrong he has done, and there is no partiality.
For I want you to realize how great a struggle I am having in your behalf and in behalf of those at La·o·di·ceʹa and in behalf of all those who have not personally seen me.
This is so that their hearts may be comforted and that they may be harmoniously joined together in love and may have all the riches that result from the full assurance of their understanding, in order to gain an accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.
Carefully concealed in him are all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
I am saying this so that no one may delude you with persuasive arguments.
Though I am absent in body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and the firmness of your faith in Christ.
Therefore, just as you have accepted Christ Jesus the Lord, go on walking in union with him,
being rooted and built up in him and being stabilized in the faith, just as you were taught, and overflowing with thanksgiving.
Look out that no one takes you captive by means of the philosophy and empty deception according to human tradition, according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ;
because it is in him that all the fullness of the divine quality dwells bodily.
So you have acquired a fullness by means of him, the one who is the head of all government and authority.
By your relationship with him, you were also circumcised with a circumcision performed without hands by stripping off the fleshly body, by the circumcision that belongs to the Christ.
For you were buried with him in his baptism, and by your relationship with him you were also raised up together through your faith in the powerful work of God, who raised him up from the dead.
Furthermore, though you were dead in your trespasses and in the uncircumcised state of your flesh, God made you alive together with him. He kindly forgave us all our trespasses
and erased the handwritten document that consisted of decrees and was in opposition to us. He has taken it out of the way by nailing it to the torture stake.
He has stripped the governments and the authorities bare and has publicly exhibited them as conquered, leading them in a triumphal procession by means of it.
Therefore, do not let anyone judge you about what you eat and drink or about the observance of a festival or of the new moon or of a sabbath.
Those things are a shadow of the things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.
Let no man deprive you of the prize who takes delight in a false humility and a form of worship of the angels, “taking his stand on” the things he has seen. He is actually puffed up without proper cause by his fleshly frame of mind,
and he is not holding fast to the head, to the one through whom the whole body is supplied and harmoniously joined together by means of its joints and ligaments and made to grow with the growth that is from God.
If you died together with Christ with respect to the elementary things of the world, why do you live as if still part of the world by further subjecting yourselves to the decrees:
“Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch,”
referring to things that all perish with their use, according to the commands and teachings of men?
Although those things have an appearance of wisdom in a self-imposed form of worship and a false humility, a harsh treatment of the body, they are of no value in combating the satisfying of the flesh.
You masters, treat your slaves in a righteous and fair way, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
Persevere in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving.
At the same time, pray also for us, that God may open a door for the word so that we can declare the sacred secret about the Christ, for which I am in prison bonds,
and that I may proclaim it as clearly as I ought to.
Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, making the best use of your time.
Let your words always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you will know how you should answer each person.
Tychʹi·cus, my beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow slave in the Lord, will tell you all the news about me.
I am sending him to you so that you will know how we are and that he may comfort your hearts.
He is coming along with O·nesʹi·mus, my faithful and beloved brother, who is from among you; they will tell you all the things happening here.
Ar·is·tarʹchus, my fellow captive, sends you his greetings, and so does Mark, the cousin of Barʹna·bas (concerning whom you received instructions to welcome him if he comes to you),
and Jesus who is called Justus, who are of those circumcised. Only these are my fellow workers for the Kingdom of God, and they have become a source of great comfort to me.
Epʹa·phras, a slave of Christ Jesus who is from among you, sends you his greetings. He is always exerting himself in your behalf in his prayers, so that you may finally stand complete and with firm conviction in all the will of God.
For I bear him witness that he makes great efforts in your behalf and in behalf of those in La·o·di·ceʹa and Hi·e·rapʹo·lis.
Luke, the beloved physician, sends you his greetings, and so does Deʹmas.
Give my greetings to the brothers in La·o·di·ceʹa and to Nymʹpha and to the congregation at her house.
And when this letter has been read among you, arrange for it also to be read in the congregation of the La·o·di·ceʹans and for you also to read the one from La·o·di·ceʹa.
Also, tell Ar·chipʹpus: “Pay attention to the ministry that you accepted in the Lord, in order to fulfill it.”
Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand. Keep my prison bonds in mind. The undeserved kindness be with you.
Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: May you have undeserved kindness and peace.
We always thank God when we mention all of you in our prayers,
for we continually remember your faithful work, your loving labor, and your endurance because of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the presence of our God and Father.
For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of you,
because the good news we preach did not come to you with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and with strong conviction, just as you know what sort of men we became among you for your sakes.
And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, seeing that you accepted the word under much tribulation with joy of holy spirit,
so that you became an example to all the believers in Mac·e·doʹni·a and in A·chaʹia.
The fact is, not only has the word of Jehovah sounded out from you in Mac·e·doʹni·a and A·chaʹia but your faith in God has spread abroad in every place, so that we do not need to say anything.
For they themselves keep reporting about our first contact with you and how you turned to God from your idols to slave for a living and true God,
and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom he raised up from the dead, namely, Jesus, who rescues us from the wrath that is coming.
So when we could bear it no longer, we thought it best to stay on alone in Athens;
and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, to make you firm and comfort you regarding your faith,
so that no one might be shaken by these tribulations. For you yourselves know that we cannot avoid suffering such things.
For when we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened, just as you know.
That is why, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn of your faithfulness, in case somehow the Tempter might have tempted you, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has given us the good news about your faithfulness and love, that you always continue to remember us fondly and that you long to see us in the same way as we also do you.
That is why, brothers, in all our distress and tribulation, we have been comforted because of you and the faithfulness you demonstrate.
Because we are revitalized if you are standing firm in the Lord.
For how can we show our thanks to God concerning you in return for the great joy we feel before our God on your account?
Night and day we make supplications as earnestly as we can to see you in person and to supply what is lacking in your faith.
Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus make a way for us to come to you.
Moreover, may the Lord cause you to increase, yes, to abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you,
so that he may make your hearts firm, blameless in holiness before our God and Father at the presence of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.
You yourselves surely know, brothers, that our visit to you has not been without results.
For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.
For the exhortation we give does not spring from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak to please, not men, but God, who examines our hearts.
In fact, you know that we never used flattering speech or put on any false front with greedy motives; God is witness!
Nor have we been seeking glory from men, either from you or from others, though we could be an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.
On the contrary, we became gentle in your midst, as when a nursing mother tenderly cares for her own children.
So having tender affection for you, we were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves, because you became so beloved to us.
Surely you remember, brothers, our labor and toil. We were working night and day, so that we would not put an expensive burden on any one of you, when we preached the good news of God to you.
You are witnesses, God is also, of how loyal and righteous and blameless we behaved toward you believers.
You well know that we kept exhorting and consoling you and bearing witness to each one of you, just as a father does his children,
so that you would go on walking worthily of God, who is calling you to his Kingdom and glory.
Indeed, that is why we also thank God unceasingly, because when you received God’s word, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in you believers.
For you, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God in union with Christ Jesus that are in Ju·deʹa, because you suffered at the hands of your own countrymen the same things that they also are suffering at the hands of the Jews,
who even killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us. Furthermore, they are not pleasing God, but are against the interests of all men,
as they try to prevent us from speaking to people of the nations so that these might be saved. In this way they always fill up the measure of their sins. But his wrath has at last come upon them.
But when we were separated from you, brothers, for just a short time (in person, not in our hearts), because of our strong desire, we made every effort to see you in person.
For this reason we wanted to come to you, yes I, Paul, tried not just once but twice; yet Satan cut across our path.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation before our Lord Jesus at his presence? Is it not in fact you?
You certainly are our glory and joy.
Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, you need nothing to be written to you.
For you yourselves know very well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
Whenever it is that they are saying, “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly on them, just like birth pains on a pregnant woman, and they will by no means escape.
But you, brothers, you are not in darkness, so that the day should overtake you as it would thieves,
for you are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
So, then, let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.
For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk are drunk at night.
But as for us who belong to the day, let us keep our senses and put on the breastplate of faith and love and the hope of salvation as a helmet
because God assigned us, not to wrath, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
He died for us, so that whether we stay awake or are asleep, we should live together with him.
Therefore, keep encouraging one another and building one another up, just as you are in fact doing.
Now we request you, brothers, to show respect for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you;
and to give them extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.
On the other hand, we urge you, brothers, to warn the disorderly, speak consolingly to those who are depressed, support the weak, be patient toward all.
See that no one repays injury for injury to anyone, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
Always be rejoicing.
Pray constantly.
Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
Do not put out the fire of the spirit.
Do not treat prophecies with contempt.
Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.
Abstain from every form of wickedness.
May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. And may the spirit and soul and body of you brothers, sound in every respect, be preserved blameless at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The one who is calling you is faithful, and he will surely do so.
Brothers, keep praying for us.
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
I am putting you under the solemn obligation by the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.
The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Finally, brothers, just as you received instruction from us on how you should walk in order to please God, just as you are in fact walking, we request you and appeal to you by the Lord Jesus to keep doing it more fully.
For you know the instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.
Each one of you should know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
not with greedy, uncontrolled sexual passion like the nations have that do not know God.
No one should go beyond proper limits and take advantage of his brother in this matter, because Jehovah exacts punishment for all these things, just as we told you previously and also strongly warned you.
For God has called us, not for uncleanness, but for holiness.
So, then, the man who disregards this is disregarding, not man, but God, who gives you his holy spirit.
However, concerning brotherly love, you do not need us to write to you, for you yourselves are taught by God to love one another.
In fact, you are doing so toward all the brothers in all of Mac·e·doʹni·a. But we urge you, brothers, to go on doing so in fuller measure.
Make it your aim to live quietly and to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we instructed you,
so that you may walk decently in the eyes of people outside and not need anything.
Moreover, brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who are sleeping in death, so that you may not sorrow as the rest do who have no hope.
For if we have faith that Jesus died and rose again, so too God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in death through Jesus.
For this is what we tell you by Jehovah’s word, that we the living who survive to the presence of the Lord will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death;
because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first.
Afterward we the living who are surviving will, together with them, be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and thus we will always be with the Lord.
So keep comforting one another with these words.
Paul, Sil·vaʹnus, and Timothy, to the congregation of the Thes·sa·loʹni·ans in union with God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are obligated always to give thanks to God for you, brothers. This is fitting, because your faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.
As a result we ourselves take pride in you among the congregations of God because of your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and the hardships that you are suffering.
This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to your being counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you are indeed suffering.
This takes into account that it is righteous on God’s part to repay tribulation to those who make tribulation for you.
But you who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels
in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.
These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
at the time when he comes to be glorified in connection with his holy ones and to be regarded in that day with wonder among all those who exercised faith, because the witness we gave met with faith among you.
To that very end we always pray for you, that our God may count you worthy of his calling and with his power perform completely all the good that he pleases and every work of faith.
This is so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you and you in union with him, according to the undeserved kindness of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Finally, brothers, carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep spreading rapidly and being glorified, just as it is with you,
and that we may be rescued from harmful and wicked men, for faith is not a possession of all people.
But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the wicked one.
Moreover, we have confidence in the Lord regarding you, that you are carrying out and will go on carrying out our instructions.
May the Lord continue to guide your hearts successfully to the love of God and to the endurance for the Christ.
Now we are giving you instructions, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from every brother who is walking disorderly and not according to the tradition that you received from us.
For you yourselves know how you should imitate us, because we did not behave in a disorderly way among you,
nor did we eat anyone’s food free. On the contrary, by labor and toil we were working night and day so as not to impose an expensive burden on any one of you.
Not that we do not have authority, but we wanted to offer ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
In fact, when we were with you, we used to give you this order: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”
For we hear that some are walking disorderly among you, not working at all, but meddling with what does not concern them.
To such people we give the order and exhortation in the Lord Jesus Christ that they should work quietly and eat food they themselves earn.
For your part, brothers, do not give up in doing good.
But if anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked and stop associating with him, so that he may become ashamed.
And yet do not consider him an enemy, but continue admonishing him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace constantly in every way. May the Lord be with all of you.
Here is my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand, which is a sign in every letter; this is the way I write.
The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.
However, brothers, concerning the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we ask you
not to be quickly shaken from your reason nor to be alarmed either by an inspired statement or by a spoken message or by a letter appearing to be from us, to the effect that the day of Jehovah is here.
Let no one lead you astray in any way, because it will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed, the son of destruction.
He stands in opposition and exalts himself above every so-called god or object of worship, so that he sits down in the temple of God, publicly showing himself to be a god.
Do you not remember that when I was still with you, I used to tell you these things?
And now you know what is acting as a restraint, so that he will be revealed in his own due time.
True, the mystery of this lawlessness is already at work, but only until the one who is right now acting as a restraint is out of the way.
Then, indeed, the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will do away with by the spirit of his mouth and bring to nothing by the manifestation of his presence.
But the lawless one’s presence is by the operation of Satan with every powerful work and lying signs and wonders
and every unrighteous deception for those who are perishing, as a retribution because they did not accept the love of the truth in order that they might be saved.
That is why God lets a deluding influence mislead them so that they may come to believe the lie,
in order that they all may be judged because they did not believe the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness.
However, we are obligated always to thank God for you, brothers loved by Jehovah, because from the beginning God selected you for salvation by sanctifying you with his spirit and by your faith in the truth.
He called you to this through the good news we declare, so that you may acquire the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So, then, brothers, stand firm and maintain your hold on the traditions that you were taught, whether it was by a spoken message or by a letter from us.
Moreover, may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and gave everlasting comfort and good hope by means of undeserved kindness,
comfort your hearts and make you firm in every good deed and word.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, our hope,
to Timothy, a genuine child in the faith: May you have undeserved kindness and mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephʹe·sus when I was about to go to Mac·e·doʹni·a, so I do now, in order for you to command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,
nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies. Such things end up in nothing useful but merely give rise to speculations rather than providing anything from God in connection with faith.
Really, the objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
By deviating from these things, some have been turned aside to meaningless talk.
They want to be teachers of law, but they do not understand either the things they are saying or the things they insist on so strongly.
Now we know that the Law is fine if one applies it properly,
recognizing that law is made, not for a righteous man, but for those who are lawless and rebellious, ungodly and sinners, disloyal and profane, murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, manslayers,
sexually immoral people, men who practice homosexuality, kidnappers, liars, perjurers, and everything else that is in opposition to the wholesome teaching
according to the glorious good news of the happy God, with which I was entrusted.
I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry,
although formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and with a lack of faith.
But the undeserved kindness of our Lord abounded exceedingly along with faith and the love that is in Christ Jesus.
This saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Of these, I am foremost.
Nevertheless, I was shown mercy so that by means of me as the foremost case, Christ Jesus might demonstrate all his patience, making me an example to those who are going to rest their faith on him for everlasting life.
Now to the King of eternity, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
This instruction I entrust to you, my child Timothy, in harmony with the prophecies that were made about you, that by these you may go on waging the fine warfare,
holding faith and a good conscience, which some have thrust aside, resulting in the shipwreck of their faith.
Hy·me·naeʹus and Alexander are among these, and I have handed them over to Satan so that they may be taught by discipline not to blaspheme.
This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.
The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind, orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,
not a drunkard, not violent, but reasonable, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money,
a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having his children in subjection with all seriousness
(for if any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he care for the congregation of God?),
not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.
Moreover, he should also have a fine testimony from outsiders so that he does not fall into reproach and a snare of the Devil.
Ministerial servants should likewise be serious, not double-tongued, not indulging in a lot of wine, not greedy of dishonest gain,
holding the sacred secret of the faith with a clean conscience.
Also, let these be tested as to fitness first; then let them serve as ministers, as they are free from accusation.
Women should likewise be serious, not slanderous, moderate in habits, faithful in all things.
Let ministerial servants be husbands of one wife, presiding in a fine manner over their children and their own households.
For the men who minister in a fine manner are acquiring for themselves a fine standing and great freeness of speech in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
I am writing you these things, though I am hoping to come to you shortly,
but in case I am delayed, so that you may know how you ought to conduct yourself in God’s household, which is the congregation of the living God, a pillar and support of the truth.
Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in the world, was received up in glory.’
First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be made concerning all sorts of men,
concerning kings and all those who are in high positions, so that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete godly devotion and seriousness.
This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God,
whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a corresponding ransom for all—this is what is to be witnessed to in its own due time.
For the purpose of this witness I was appointed a preacher and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—a teacher of nations in the matter of faith and truth.
So I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer, lifting up loyal hands, without anger and debates.
Likewise, the women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive clothing,
but in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God, namely, through good works.
Let a woman learn in silence with full submissiveness.
I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man, but she is to remain silent.
For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
Also, Adam was not deceived, but the woman was thoroughly deceived and became a transgressor.
However, she will be kept safe through childbearing, provided she continues in faith and love and holiness along with soundness of mind.
Do not severely criticize an older man. On the contrary, appeal to him as a father, to younger men as brothers,
to older women as mothers, to younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.
Give consideration to widows who are truly widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household and to repay their parents and grandparents what is due them, for this is acceptable in God’s sight.
Now the woman who is truly a widow and left destitute has put her hope in God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
But the one who gives herself to sensual gratification is dead though she is living.
So keep on giving these instructions, so that they may be irreprehensible.
Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.
A widow is to be put on the list if she is not less than 60 years old, was the wife of one husband,
having a reputation for fine works, if she raised children, if she practiced hospitality, if she washed the feet of holy ones, if she assisted the afflicted, if she devoted herself to every good work.
On the other hand, do not put younger widows on the list, for when their sexual desires come between them and the Christ, they want to marry.
And they will incur judgment because they have abandoned their first expression of faith.
At the same time they also learn to be unoccupied, going around from one house to another; yes, not only unoccupied but also gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking about things they should not.
Therefore, I desire the younger widows to marry, to bear children, to manage a household, to give no opportunity to the opposer to criticize.
In fact, some have already been turned aside to follow Satan.
If any believing woman has relatives who are widows, let her assist them so that the congregation is not burdened. Then it can assist those who are truly widows.
Let the elders who preside in a fine way be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.
For the scripture says, “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain,” also, “The worker is worthy of his wages.”
Do not accept an accusation against an older man except on the evidence of two or three witnesses.
Reprove before all onlookers those who practice sin, as a warning to the rest.
I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels to observe these instructions without any prejudice or partiality.
Never lay your hands hastily on any man; neither become a sharer in the sins of others; keep yourself chaste.
Do not drink water any longer, but take a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent cases of sickness.
The sins of some men are publicly known, leading directly to judgment, but those of other men become evident later.
In the same way also, the fine works are publicly known and those that are otherwise cannot be kept hidden.
However, the inspired word clearly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired statements and teachings of demons,
by means of the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, whose conscience is seared as with a branding iron.
They forbid marriage and command people to abstain from foods that God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those who have faith and accurately know the truth.
For every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
for it is sanctified through God’s word and prayer over it.
By giving this counsel to the brothers, you will be a fine minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching that you have followed closely.
But reject irreverent false stories, like those told by old women. On the other hand, train yourself with godly devotion as your aim.
For physical training is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.
That statement is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance.
This is why we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.
Keep on giving these commands and teaching them.
Never let anyone look down on your youth. Instead, become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.
Until I come, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Do not neglect the gift in you that was given you through a prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.
Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
Let those who are under the yoke of slavery keep on considering their owners worthy of full honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may never be spoken of injuriously.
Moreover, let those having believing owners not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers. Rather, they should serve more readily, because those receiving the benefit of their good service are believers and beloved. Keep on teaching these things and giving these exhortations.
If any man teaches another doctrine and does not agree with the wholesome instruction, which is from our Lord Jesus Christ, nor with the teaching that is in harmony with godly devotion,
he is puffed up with pride and does not understand anything. He is obsessed with arguments and debates about words. These things give rise to envy, strife, slander, wicked suspicions,
constant disputes about minor matters by men who are corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth, thinking that godly devotion is a means of gain.
To be sure, there is great gain in godly devotion along with contentment.
For we have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out.
So, having food and clothing, we will be content with these things.
But those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge men into destruction and ruin.
For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.
However, you, O man of God, flee from these things. But pursue righteousness, godly devotion, faith, love, endurance, and mildness.
Fight the fine fight of the faith; get a firm hold on the everlasting life for which you were called and you offered the fine public declaration in front of many witnesses.
Before God, who preserves all things alive, and Christ Jesus, who as a witness made the fine public declaration before Pontius Pilate, I give you orders
to observe the commandment in a spotless and irreprehensible way until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which the happy and only Potentate will show in its own appointed times. He is the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords,
the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal might. Amen.
Instruct those who are rich in the present system of things not to be arrogant, and to place their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who richly provides us with all the things we enjoy.
Tell them to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be generous, ready to share,
safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, so that they may get a firm hold on the real life.
Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you, turning away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy and from the contradictions of the falsely called “knowledge.”
By making a show of such knowledge, some have deviated from the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with you.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God’s will according to the promise of the life that is through Christ Jesus,
to Timothy, a beloved child: May you have undeserved kindness, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I am grateful to God, to whom I am rendering sacred service as my forefathers did, and with a clean conscience, never ceasing to remember you in my supplications night and day.
As I remember your tears, I am longing to see you, so that I may get filled with joy.
For I recall your unhypocritical faith, which dwelled first in your grandmother Loʹis and your mother Euʹnice, but which I am confident is also in you.
For this reason I remind you to stir up like a fire the gift of God that is in you through the laying of my hands on you.
For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but one of power and of love and of soundness of mind.
So do not become ashamed either of the witness about our Lord or of me, a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering adversity for the good news by relying on the power of God.
He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not because of our works, but because of his own purpose and undeserved kindness. This was given to us in connection with Christ Jesus before times long ago,
but now it has been made clearly evident through the manifestation of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has abolished death and has shed light on life and incorruption through the good news,
for which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle and a teacher.
This is why I am also suffering these things, but I am not ashamed. For I know the One whom I have believed, and I am confident that he is able to guard what I have laid up in trust with him until that day.
Keep holding to the standard of wholesome words that you heard from me with the faith and love that result from union with Christ Jesus.
Guard this fine trust by means of the holy spirit, which is dwelling in us.
You know this, that all the men in the province of Asia have turned away from me, including Phy·gelʹus and Her·mogʹe·nes.
May the Lord grant mercy to the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus, for he often refreshed me, and he did not become ashamed of my prison chains.
On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he diligently looked for me and found me.
May the Lord grant him to find mercy from Jehovah in that day. And you well know all the services he rendered in Ephʹe·sus.
But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,
having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness,
betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God,
having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.
From among these arise men who slyly work their way into households and captivate weak women loaded down with sins, led by various desires,
always learning and yet never able to come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
Now in the way that Janʹnes and Jamʹbres opposed Moses, so these also go on opposing the truth. Such men are completely corrupted in mind, disapproved as regards the faith.
Nevertheless, they will make no further progress, for their folly will be very plain to all, as it was with those two men.
But you have closely followed my teaching, my course of life, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my endurance,
the persecutions and sufferings such as I experienced in Antioch, in I·coʹni·um, in Lysʹtra. I endured these persecutions, and the Lord rescued me from them all.
In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.
But wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.
You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from whom you learned them
and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.
You, therefore, my child, keep on acquiring power in the undeserved kindness that is in Christ Jesus;
and the things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
As a fine soldier of Christ Jesus, take your part in suffering adversity.
No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life, in order to gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
And even in the games, anyone who competes is not crowned unless he has competed according to the rules.
The hardworking farmer must be the first to partake of the fruits.
Give constant thought to what I am saying; the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
Remember that Jesus Christ was raised up from the dead and was David’s offspring, according to the good news I preach,
for which I am suffering and being imprisoned as a criminal. Nevertheless, the word of God is not bound.
For this reason I go on enduring all things for the sake of the chosen ones, so that they too may obtain the salvation that is through Christ Jesus, along with everlasting glory.
This saying is trustworthy: Certainly if we died together, we will also live together;
if we go on enduring, we will also rule together as kings; if we deny, he will also deny us;
if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, for he cannot deny himself.
Keep reminding them of these things, instructing them before God not to fight about words, something of no usefulness at all because it harms those listening.
Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.
But reject empty speeches that violate what is holy, for they will lead to more and more ungodliness,
and their word will spread like gangrene. Hy·me·naeʹus and Phi·leʹtus are among them.
These men have deviated from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already occurred, and they are subverting the faith of some.
Despite that, the solid foundation of God remains standing, having this seal, “Jehovah knows those who belong to him,” and, “Let everyone calling on the name of Jehovah renounce unrighteousness.”
Now in a large house there are utensils not only of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for an honorable use but others for a use lacking honor.
So if anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be an instrument for an honorable use, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.
So flee from youthful desires, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call on the Lord out of a clean heart.
Further, reject foolish and ignorant debates, knowing that they produce fights.
For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach, showing restraint when wronged,
instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed. Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth,
and they may come to their senses and escape from the snare of the Devil, seeing that they have been caught alive by him to do his will.
I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his manifestation and his Kingdom:
Preach the word; be at it urgently in favorable times and difficult times; reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.
For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the wholesome teaching, but according to their own desires, they will surround themselves with teachers to have their ears tickled.
They will turn away from listening to the truth and give attention to false stories.
You, though, keep your senses in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my releasing is imminent.
I have fought the fine fight, I have run the race to the finish, I have observed the faith.
From this time on, there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward in that day, yet not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his manifestation.
Do your utmost to come to me shortly.
For Deʹmas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things, and he has gone to Thes·sa·lo·niʹca, Cresʹcens to Ga·laʹti·a, Titus to Dal·maʹtia.
Only Luke is with me. Bring Mark along with you, for he is helpful to me in the ministry.
But I have sent Tychʹi·cus off to Ephʹe·sus.
When you come, bring the cloak I left at Troʹas with Carpus, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me a great deal of harm. Jehovah will repay him according to his deeds.
You too should be on guard against him, for he opposed our message to an excessive degree.
In my first defense no one came to my side, but they all forsook me—may they not be held accountable.
But the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, so that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished and all the nations might hear it; and I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.
The Lord will rescue me from every wicked work and will save me for his heavenly Kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Give my greetings to Prisʹca and Aqʹui·la and the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus.
E·rasʹtus stayed in Corinth, but I left Trophʹi·mus sick at Mi·leʹtus.
Do your utmost to arrive before winter. Eu·buʹlus sends you his greetings, and so do Puʹdens and Liʹnus and Clauʹdi·a and all the brothers.
The Lord be with the spirit you show. His undeserved kindness be with you.
Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God’s chosen ones and the accurate knowledge of the truth that is according to godly devotion
and is based on a hope of the everlasting life that God, who cannot lie, promised long ago;
but in his own due time, he made his word known through the preaching entrusted to me according to the command of our Savior, God;
to Titus, a genuine child according to the faith we share: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
I left you in Crete so that you would correct the things that were defective and make appointments of elders in city after city, as I instructed you:
if there is any man free from accusation, a husband of one wife, having believing children who are not accused of debauchery or rebelliousness.
For as God’s steward, an overseer must be free from accusation, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not a drunkard, not violent, not greedy of dishonest gain,
but hospitable, a lover of goodness, sound in mind, righteous, loyal, self-controlled,
holding firmly to the faithful word as respects his art of teaching, so that he may be able both to encourage by the teaching that is wholesome and to reprove those who contradict.
For there are many rebellious men, profitless talkers, and deceivers, especially those who adhere to the circumcision.
It is necessary to shut their mouths, because these very men keep on subverting entire households by teaching things they should not for the sake of dishonest gain.
A certain one of them, their own prophet, said: “Creʹtans are always liars, injurious wild beasts, idle gluttons.”
This witness is true. For this very reason, keep on reproving them with severity so that they may be healthy in the faith,
paying no attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
All things are clean to clean people; but to those who are defiled and faithless, nothing is clean, for both their minds and their consciences are defiled.
They publicly declare that they know God, but they disown him by their works, because they are detestable and disobedient and not approved for good work of any sort.
Continue reminding them to be in subjection and to be obedient to governments and authorities, to be ready for every good work,
to speak injuriously of no one, not to be quarrelsome, but to be reasonable, displaying all mildness toward all men.
For we too were once senseless, disobedient, led astray, being slaves to various desires and pleasures, carrying on in badness and envy, detestable, hating one another.
However, when the kindness of our Savior, God, and his love for mankind were manifested
(not because of any righteous works we had done, but because of his own mercy), he saved us by means of the bath that brought us to life and by making us new by holy spirit.
He poured this spirit out richly on us through Jesus Christ our Savior,
so that after being declared righteous through the undeserved kindness of that one, we might become heirs according to a hope of everlasting life.
These words are trustworthy, and I want you to keep stressing these matters, so that those who have believed God may keep their minds focused on maintaining fine works. These things are fine and beneficial to men.
But have nothing to do with foolish arguments and genealogies and disputes and fights over the Law, for they are unprofitable and futile.
As for a man who promotes a sect, reject him after a first and a second admonition,
knowing that such a man has deviated from the way and is sinning and is self-condemned.
When I send Arʹte·mas or Tychʹi·cus to you, do your utmost to come to me at Ni·copʹo·lis, for that is where I have decided to spend the winter.
Carefully supply Zeʹnas, who is versed in the Law, and A·polʹlos so that they may lack nothing for their trip.
But let our people also learn to maintain fine works so as to help in cases of urgent need, so that they may not be unproductive.
All those with me send you their greetings. Give my greetings to those who have affection for us in the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with all of you.
You, however, keep on speaking what is consistent with wholesome teaching.
Let the older men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance.
Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good,
so that they may advise the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children,
to be sound in mind, chaste, working at home, good, subjecting themselves to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be spoken of abusively.
Likewise, keep on urging the younger men to be sound in mind,
showing yourself to be an example of fine works in every way. Teach what is pure with all seriousness,
using wholesome speech that cannot be criticized, so that those who oppose may be put to shame, having nothing negative to say about us.
Let slaves be in subjection to their owners in all things, trying to please them, not talking back,
not stealing from them, but showing complete trustworthiness, so that in every way they may adorn the teaching of our Savior, God.
For the undeserved kindness of God has been manifested, bringing salvation to all sorts of people.
It trains us to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things,
while we wait for the happy hope and glorious manifestation of the great God and of our Savior, Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for us to set us free from every sort of lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people who are his own special possession, zealous for fine works.
Keep on speaking these things and exhorting and reproving with full authority. Do not let anyone look down on you.
Paul, a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Phi·leʹmon our beloved fellow worker,
and to Apʹphi·a our sister, and to Ar·chipʹpus our fellow soldier, and to the congregation that is in your house:
May you have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I always thank my God when I mention you in my prayers,
as I keep hearing of your faith and the love that you have for the Lord Jesus and for all the holy ones.
I pray that your sharing in the faith may move you to acknowledge every good thing that we have through Christ.
For I received much joy and comfort on hearing of your love, because the hearts of the holy ones have been refreshed through you, brother.
For this very reason, though I have great freeness of speech in connection with Christ to order you to do what is proper,
I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love, seeing that I am Paul an older man, yes, now also a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus.
I am appealing to you for my child, whose father I became while in prison, O·nesʹi·mus.
He was formerly useless to you, but now he is useful to you and to me.
I am sending him back to you, yes him, my very own heart.
I would like to keep him here for myself so that he might take your place in ministering to me during my imprisonment for the sake of the good news.
But I do not want to do anything without your consent, so that your good deed may be done, not under compulsion, but of your own free will.
Perhaps this is really why he broke away for a short while, so that you may have him back forever,
no longer as a slave, but as more than a slave, as a brother who is beloved, especially so to me, but how much more so to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
So if you consider me a friend, receive him kindly the same way you would me.
Moreover, if he did you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to my account.
I, Paul, am writing with my own hand: I will pay it back—not to mention that you owe me even your own self.
Yes, brother, may I receive this assistance from you in connection with the Lord; refresh my heart in connection with Christ.
I am confident that you will comply, so I am writing you, knowing that you will do even more than what I say.
But along with that, also prepare a place for me to stay, for I am hoping that through your prayers I will be given back to you.
Sending you greetings is Epʹa·phras, my fellow captive in union with Christ Jesus,
also Mark, Ar·is·tarʹchus, Deʹmas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ be with the spirit you show.
Faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities that are not seen.
For by means of it, the men of ancient times had witness borne to them.
By faith we perceive that the systems of things were put in order by God’s word, so that what is seen has come into existence from things that are not visible.
By faith Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than that of Cain, and through that faith he received the witness that he was righteous, for God approved his gifts, and although he died, he still speaks through his faith.
By faith Eʹnoch was transferred so as not to see death, and he was nowhere to be found because God had transferred him; for before he was transferred he received the witness that he had pleased God well.
Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please God well, for whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.
By faith Noah, after receiving divine warning of things not yet seen, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household; and through this faith he condemned the world, and he became an heir of the righteousness that results from faith.
By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed by going out to a place he was to receive as an inheritance; he went out, although not knowing where he was going.
By faith he lived as a foreigner in the land of the promise as in a foreign land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the very same promise.
For he was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.
By faith also Sarah received power to conceive offspring, even when she was past the age, since she considered Him faithful who made the promise.
For this reason, from one man who was as good as dead, there were born children, as many as the stars of heaven in number and as innumerable as the sands by the seaside.
In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them and publicly declared that they were strangers and temporary residents in the land.
For those who speak in such a way make it evident that they are earnestly seeking a place of their own.
And yet, if they had kept remembering the place from which they had departed, they would have had opportunity to return.
But now they are reaching out for a better place, that is, one belonging to heaven. Therefore, God is not ashamed of them, to be called on as their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac—the man who had gladly received the promises attempted to offer up his only-begotten son—
although it had been said to him: “What will be called your offspring will be through Isaac.”
But he reasoned that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, and he did receive him from there in an illustrative way.
By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Eʹsau concerning things to come.
By faith Jacob, when about to die, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshipped while leaning on the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, nearing his end, spoke of the exodus of the sons of Israel, and he gave instructions concerning his bones.
By faith Moses was hid by his parents for three months after his birth, because they saw that the young child was beautiful and they did not fear the order of the king.
By faith Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharʹaoh’s daughter,
choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin,
because he considered the reproach of the Christ to be riches greater than the treasures of Egypt, for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.
By faith he left Egypt, but not fearing the anger of the king, for he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.
By faith he observed the Passover and the splashing of the blood, so that the destroyer might not harm their firstborn.
By faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land, but when the Egyptians attempted it, they were swallowed up.
By faith the walls of Jerʹi·cho fell down after the people had marched around them for seven days.
By faith Raʹhab the prostitute did not perish with those who acted disobediently, because she received the spies in a peaceable way.
And what more will I say? For time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gidʹe·on, Baʹrak, Samson, Jephʹthah, David, as well as Samuel and the other prophets.
Through faith they defeated kingdoms, brought about righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, from a weak state were made powerful, became mighty in war, routed invading armies.
Women received their dead by resurrection, but other men were tortured because they would not accept release by some ransom, in order that they might attain a better resurrection.
Yes, others received their trial by mockings and scourgings, indeed, more than that, by chains and prisons.
They were stoned, they were tried, they were sawn in two, they were slaughtered by the sword, they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, while they were in need, in tribulation, mistreated;
and the world was not worthy of them. They wandered about in deserts and mountains and caves and dens of the earth.
And yet all of these, although they received a favorable witness because of their faith, did not obtain the fulfillment of the promise,
because God had foreseen something better for us, so that they might not be made perfect apart from us.
Long ago God spoke to our forefathers by means of the prophets on many occasions and in many ways.
Now at the end of these days he has spoken to us by means of a Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he made the systems of things.
He is the reflection of God’s glory and the exact representation of his very being, and he sustains all things by the word of his power. And after he had made a purification for our sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
So he has become better than the angels to the extent that he has inherited a name more excellent than theirs.
For example, to which one of the angels did God ever say: “You are my son; today I have become your father”? And again: “I will become his father, and he will become my son”?
But when he again brings his Firstborn into the inhabited earth, he says: “And let all of God’s angels do obeisance to him.”
Also, he says about the angels: “He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.”
But about the Son, he says: “God is your throne forever and ever, and the scepter of your Kingdom is the scepter of uprightness.
You loved righteousness, and you hated lawlessness. That is why God, your God, anointed you with the oil of exultation more than your companions.”
And: “At the beginning, O Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of your hands.
They will perish, but you will remain; and just like a garment, they will all wear out,
and you will wrap them up just as a cloak, as a garment, and they will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will never come to an end.”
But about which of the angels has he ever said: “Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet”?
Are they not all spirits for holy service, sent out to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation?
For this Mel·chizʹe·dek, king of Saʹlem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
and Abraham gave him a tenth of everything. First, his name is translated “King of Righteousness,” and then also king of Saʹlem, that is, “King of Peace.”
In being fatherless, motherless, without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an end of life, but being made like the Son of God, he remains a priest for all time.
See how great this man was to whom Abraham, the family head, gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
True, according to the Law, those of the sons of Leʹvi who receive their priestly office have a commandment to collect tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, even though these are descendants of Abraham.
But this man who did not trace his genealogy from them took tithes from Abraham and blessed the one who had the promises.
Now it is undeniable that the lesser one is blessed by the greater.
And in the one case, it is men who are dying who receive tithes, but in the other case, it is someone of whom witness is given that he lives.
And it could be said that even Leʹvi, who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham,
for he was still a future descendant of his forefather when Mel·chizʹe·dek met him.
If, then, perfection was attainable through the Levitical priesthood (for it was a feature of the Law that was given to the people), what further need would there be for another priest to arise who is said to be in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek and not in the manner of Aaron?
For since the priesthood is being changed, it becomes necessary to change the Law as well.
For the man about whom these things are said came from another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
For it is clear that our Lord has descended from Judah, yet Moses said nothing about priests coming from that tribe.
And this becomes even clearer when another priest arises who is like Mel·chizʹe·dek,
who has become such, not by the legal requirement that depends on fleshly descent, but by the power of an indestructible life.
For it is said in witness of him: “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”
So, then, the former commandment is set aside because it is weak and ineffective.
For the Law made nothing perfect, but the introduction of a better hope did, through which we are drawing near to God.
Also, inasmuch as this was not done without an oath being sworn
(for, indeed, there are men who have become priests without a sworn oath, but this one has become so through an oath sworn respecting him by the One who said: “Jehovah has sworn, and he will not change his mind, ‘You are a priest forever’”),
Jesus has accordingly become the guarantee of a better covenant.
Furthermore, many had to become priests in succession because death prevented them from continuing as such,
but because he continues alive forever, his priesthood has no successors.
So he is able also to save completely those who are approaching God through him, because he is always alive to plead for them.
For it is fitting for us to have such a high priest who is loyal, innocent, undefiled, separated from the sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
Unlike those high priests, he does not need to offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins and then for those of the people, because he did this once for all time when he offered himself up.
For the Law appoints as high priests men who have weaknesses, but the word of the oath sworn after the Law appoints a son, who has been made perfect forever.
Let your brotherly love continue.
Do not forget hospitality, for through it some unknowingly entertained angels.
Keep in mind those in prison, as though you were imprisoned with them, and those being mistreated, since you yourselves also are in the body.
Let marriage be honorable among all, and let the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge sexually immoral people and adulterers.
Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.”
So that we may be of good courage and say: “Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”
Remember those who are taking the lead among you, who have spoken the word of God to you, and as you contemplate how their conduct turns out, imitate their faith.
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.
Do not be led astray by various and strange teachings, for it is better for the heart to be strengthened by undeserved kindness than by foods, which do not benefit those occupied with them.
We have an altar from which those who offer sacred service at the tent have no authority to eat.
For the bodies of those animals whose blood is taken into the holy place as a sin offering by the high priest are burned up outside the camp.
Therefore, Jesus also suffered outside the city gate in order to sanctify the people with his own blood.
Let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the reproach he bore,
for we do not have here a city that remains, but we are earnestly seeking the one to come.
Through him let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his name.
Moreover, do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.
Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over you as those who will render an account, so that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.
Keep praying for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.
But I especially urge you to pray so that I may be restored to you the sooner.
Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus, with the blood of an everlasting covenant,
equip you with every good thing to do his will, working in us through Jesus Christ what is well-pleasing in his sight, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Now I urge you, brothers, to listen patiently to this word of encouragement, for I have written you a short letter.
I want you to know that our brother Timothy has been released. If he comes soon, I will be with him when I see you.
Give my greetings to all those who are taking the lead among you and to all the holy ones. Those in Italy send you their greetings.
The undeserved kindness be with all of you.
Consequently, holy brothers, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the apostle and high priest whom we acknowledge—Jesus.
He was faithful to the One who appointed him, just as Moses also was in all the house of that One.
For he is counted worthy of more glory than Moses, since the one who constructs a house has more honor than the house itself.
Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but the one who constructed all things is God.
Now Moses was faithful as an attendant in all the house of that One as a testimony of the things that were to be spoken afterward,
but Christ was faithful as a son over God’s house. We are His house if, indeed, we hold on firmly to our freeness of speech and the hope of which we boast down to the end.
Therefore, just as the holy spirit says, “Today if you listen to his voice,
do not harden your hearts as on the occasion of provoking to bitter anger, as in the day of testing in the wilderness,
where your forefathers put me to the test and tried me, despite seeing my works for 40 years.
This is why I became disgusted with this generation and said: ‘They always go astray in their hearts, and they have not come to know my ways.’
So I swore in my anger: ‘They will not enter into my rest.’”
Beware, brothers, for fear there should ever develop in any one of you a wicked heart lacking faith by drawing away from the living God;
but keep on encouraging one another each day, as long as it is called “Today,” so that none of you should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.
For we actually become partakers of the Christ only if we hold firmly down to the end the confidence we had at the beginning.
As it is said, “Today if you listen to his voice, do not harden your hearts as on the occasion of provoking to bitter anger.”
For who heard and yet provoked him to bitter anger? Was it not, in fact, all those who went out of Egypt under Moses?
Moreover, with whom did God become disgusted for 40 years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose dead bodies fell in the wilderness?
And to whom did he swear that they would not enter into his rest? Was it not to those who acted disobediently?
So we see that they could not enter in because of lack of faith.
For its part, the former covenant used to have legal requirements for sacred service and its holy place on earth.
For a first tent compartment was constructed, in which were the lampstand and the table and the display of the loaves of presentation; and it is called the Holy Place.
But behind the second curtain was the tent compartment called the Most Holy.
This had a golden censer and the ark of the covenant completely overlaid with gold, in which were the golden jar containing the manna and Aaron’s rod that budded and the tablets of the covenant;
and above it were the glorious cherubs overshadowing the propitiatory cover. But now is not the time to speak of these things in detail.
After these things were constructed this way, the priests enter the first tent compartment regularly to perform the sacred services;
but the high priest enters alone into the second compartment once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins that the people committed in ignorance.
Thus the holy spirit makes it clear that the way into the holy place had not yet been revealed while the first tent was standing.
This tent is an illustration for the present time, and according to this arrangement, both gifts and sacrifices are offered. However, these are not able to make the conscience of the man doing sacred service perfect.
They have to do only with foods and drinks and various ceremonial washings. They were legal requirements concerning the body and were imposed until the appointed time to set things straight.
However, when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that have already taken place, he passed through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation.
He entered into the holy place, not with the blood of goats and of young bulls, but with his own blood, once for all time, and obtained an everlasting deliverance for us.
For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who have been defiled sanctifies for the cleansing of the flesh,
how much more will the blood of the Christ, who through an everlasting spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works so that we may render sacred service to the living God?
That is why he is a mediator of a new covenant, in order that because a death has occurred for their release by ransom from the transgressions under the former covenant, those who have been called may receive the promise of the everlasting inheritance.
For where there is a covenant, the death of the human covenanter needs to be established,
because a covenant is valid at death, since it is not in force as long as the human covenanter is living.
Consequently, neither was the former covenant put into effect without blood.
For when Moses had spoken every commandment of the Law to all the people, he took the blood of the young bulls and of the goats, with water, scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled the book and all the people,
saying: “This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded you to keep.”
He likewise sprinkled the tent and all the vessels of the holy service with the blood.
Yes, according to the Law nearly all things are cleansed with blood, and unless blood is poured out no forgiveness takes place.
Therefore, it was necessary for the typical representations of the things in the heavens to be cleansed by these means, but the heavenly things require far better sacrifices.
For Christ did not enter into a holy place made with hands, which is a copy of the reality, but into heaven itself, so that he now appears before God on our behalf.
This was not done to offer himself often, as when the high priest enters into the holy place from year to year with blood that is not his own.
Otherwise, he would have to suffer often from the founding of the world. But now he has manifested himself once for all time at the conclusion of the systems of things to do away with sin through the sacrifice of himself.
And just as it is reserved for men to die once for all time, but after this to receive a judgment,
so also the Christ was offered once for all time to bear the sins of many; and the second time that he appears it will be apart from sin, and he will be seen by those earnestly looking for him for their salvation.
That is why it is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things we have heard, so that we never drift away.
For if the word spoken through angels proved to be sure, and every transgression and disobedient act received a punishment in harmony with justice,
how will we escape if we have neglected so great a salvation? For it began to be spoken through our Lord and was verified for us by those who heard him,
while God joined in bearing witness with signs and wonders and various powerful works and with the holy spirit distributed according to his will.
For it is not to angels that he has subjected the inhabited earth to come, about which we are speaking.
But in one place a certain witness said: “What is man that you keep him in mind, or a son of man that you take care of him?
You made him a little lower than angels; you crowned him with glory and honor, and appointed him over the works of your hands.
All things you subjected under his feet.” By subjecting all things to him, God left nothing that is not subject to him. Now, though, we do not yet see all things in subjection to him.
But we do see Jesus, who was made a little lower than angels, now crowned with glory and honor for having suffered death, so that by God’s undeserved kindness he might taste death for everyone.
For it was fitting that the one for whom and through whom all things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, should make the Chief Agent of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
For both the one who is sanctifying and those who are being sanctified all stem from one, and for this reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
as he says: “I will declare your name to my brothers; in the midst of the congregation I will praise you with song.”
And again: “I will put my trust in him.” And again: “Look! I and the young children, whom Jehovah gave me.”
Therefore, since the “young children” are sharers of blood and flesh, he also similarly shared in the same things, so that through his death he might bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil,
and that he might set free all those who were held in slavery all their lives by their fear of death.
For it is not really angels he is assisting, but he is assisting Abraham’s offspring.
Consequently, he had to become like his “brothers” in all respects, so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest in things relating to God, in order to offer a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the people.
Since he himself has suffered when being put to the test, he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test.
For since the Law has a shadow of the good things to come, but not the very substance of the things, it can never, by the same sacrifices that are continually offered year after year, make those who approach perfect.
Otherwise, would not the sacrifices have stopped being offered, because those rendering sacred service once cleansed would have no consciousness of sins anymore?
On the contrary, these sacrifices are a reminder of sins year after year,
for it is not possible for the blood of bulls and of goats to take sins away.
So when he comes into the world, he says: “‘Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but you prepared a body for me.
You did not approve of whole burnt offerings and sin offerings.’
Then I said: ‘Look! I have come (in the scroll it is written about me) to do your will, O God.’”
After first saying: “You did not want nor did you approve of sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sin offerings”—sacrifices that are offered according to the Law—
then he says: “Look! I have come to do your will.” He does away with what is first in order to establish what is second.
By this “will” we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all time.
Also, every priest takes his station day after day to offer holy service and to make the same sacrifices often, which can never take sins away completely.
But this man offered one sacrifice for sins for all time and sat down at the right hand of God,
from then on waiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.
For it is by one sacrificial offering that he has made those who are being sanctified perfect for all time.
Moreover, the holy spirit also bears witness to us, for after it has said:
“‘This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds I will write them.’”
Then it says: “And I will no longer call their sins and their lawless deeds to mind.”
Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer an offering for sin.
Therefore, brothers, since we have boldness for the way of entry into the holy place by the blood of Jesus,
which he opened up for us as a new and living way through the curtain, that is, his flesh,
and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
let us approach with sincere hearts and complete faith, having had our hearts sprinkled clean from a wicked conscience and our bodies bathed with clean water.
Let us hold firmly the public declaration of our hope without wavering, for the one who promised is faithful.
And let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works,
not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.
For if we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth, there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left,
but there is a certain fearful expectation of judgment and a burning indignation that is going to consume those in opposition.
Anyone who has disregarded the Law of Moses dies without compassion on the testimony of two or three.
How much greater punishment do you think a person will deserve who has trampled on the Son of God and who has regarded as of ordinary value the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and who has outraged the spirit of undeserved kindness with contempt?
For we know the One who said: “Vengeance is mine; I will repay.” And again: “Jehovah will judge his people.”
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
However, keep remembering the former days in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great struggle along with sufferings.
At times you were publicly exposed both to reproaches and to tribulations, and at times you shared with those who were having such an experience.
For you expressed sympathy for those in prison and you accepted joyfully the plundering of your belongings, knowing that you yourselves have a better and an enduring possession.
Therefore, do not throw away your boldness, which will be richly rewarded.
For you need endurance, so that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the fulfillment of the promise.
For yet “a very little while,” and “the one who is coming will arrive and will not delay.”
“But my righteous one will live by reason of faith,” and “if he shrinks back, I have no pleasure in him.”
Now we are not the sort who shrink back to destruction, but the sort who have faith for the preserving of our lives.
For every high priest taken from among men is appointed in their behalf over the things relating to God, so that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
He is able to deal compassionately with the ignorant and erring ones, since he too is confronted with his own weakness,
and because of that he must make offerings for his own sins just as he does for those of the people.
A man does not take this honor of his own accord, but he receives it only when he is called by God, just as Aaron was.
So, too, the Christ did not glorify himself by becoming a high priest, but was glorified by the One who said to him: “You are my son; today I have become your father.”
As he also says in another place, “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”
During his life on earth, Christ offered up supplications and also petitions, with strong outcries and tears, to the One who was able to save him out of death, and he was favorably heard for his godly fear.
Although he was a son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered.
And after he had been made perfect, he became responsible for everlasting salvation to all those obeying him,
because he has been designated by God a high priest in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.
We have much to say about him, and it is difficult to explain, because you have become dull in your hearing.
For although by now you should be teachers, you again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God, and you have gone back to needing milk, not solid food.
For everyone who continues to feed on milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is a young child.
But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
Therefore, since a promise of entering into his rest remains, let us be on guard for fear someone among you seems to fall short of it.
For we have also had the good news declared to us, just as they had; but the word that they heard did not benefit them, because they were not united by faith with those who listened.
For we who have exercised faith do enter into the rest, just as he has said: “So I swore in my anger, ‘They will not enter into my rest,’” although his works were finished from the founding of the world.
For in one place he has said of the seventh day as follows: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”
and here again he says: “They will not enter into my rest.”
Therefore, since it remains for some to enter into it, and those to whom the good news was first declared did not enter in because of disobedience,
he again marks off a certain day by saying long afterward in David’s psalm, “Today”; just as it has been said above, “Today if you listen to his voice, do not harden your hearts.”
For if Joshua had led them into a place of rest, God would not afterward have spoken of another day.
So there remains a sabbath-rest for the people of God.
For the man who has entered into God’s rest has also rested from his own works, just as God did from his own.
Let us therefore do our utmost to enter into that rest, so that no one may fall into the same pattern of disobedience.
For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.
And there is not a creation that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.
Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold on to our public declaration of him.
For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tested in all respects as we have, but without sin.
Let us, then, approach the throne of undeserved kindness with freeness of speech, so that we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time.
So, then, because we have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also throw off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,
as we look intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith, Jesus. For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Indeed, consider closely the one who has endured such hostile speech from sinners against their own interests, so that you may not get tired and give up.
In your struggle against that sin, you have never yet resisted to the point of having your blood shed.
And you have entirely forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons: “My son, do not belittle the discipline from Jehovah, nor give up when you are corrected by him;
for those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son.”
You need to endure as part of your discipline. God is treating you as sons. For what son is not disciplined by his father?
But if you have not all shared in receiving this discipline, you are really illegitimate children, and not sons.
Furthermore, our human fathers used to discipline us, and we gave them respect. Should we not more readily submit ourselves to the Father of our spiritual life and live?
For they disciplined us for a short time according to what seemed good to them, but he does so for our benefit so that we may partake of his holiness.
True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but it is painful; yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
Therefore, strengthen the hands that hang down and the feeble knees,
and keep making straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint but, rather, may be healed.
Pursue peace with all people and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord.
Carefully watch that no one fails to obtain the undeserved kindness of God, so that no poisonous root springs up to cause trouble and many are defiled by it;
and watch that among you there is no one who is sexually immoral nor anyone who does not appreciate sacred things, like Eʹsau, who gave up his rights as firstborn in exchange for one meal.
For you know that afterward when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected; for although he earnestly tried to bring about a change of mind with tears, it was to no avail.
For you have not approached something that can be felt and that has been set aflame with fire, and a dark cloud and thick darkness and a storm,
and the blast of a trumpet and the voice speaking words, which on hearing, the people begged that nothing further should be spoken to them.
For they could not bear the command: “If even a beast touches the mountain, it must be stoned.”
Also, the display was so terrifying that Moses said: “I am afraid and trembling.”
But you have approached a Mount Zion and a city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and myriads of angels
in general assembly, and the congregation of the firstborn who have been enrolled in the heavens, and God the Judge of all, and the spiritual lives of righteous ones who have been made perfect,
and Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and the sprinkled blood, which speaks in a better way than Abel’s blood.
See that you do not refuse to listen to the one who is speaking. For if those who refused to listen to the one giving divine warning on earth did not escape, how much more will we not escape if we turn away from him who speaks from the heavens!
At that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised: “Yet once more I will shake not only the earth but also the heaven.”
Now the expression “yet once more” indicates the removal of the things that are shaken, things that have been made, in order that the things not shaken may remain.
Therefore, seeing that we are to receive a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us continue to receive undeserved kindness, through which we may acceptably offer God sacred service with godly fear and awe.
For our God is a consuming fire.
Therefore, now that we have moved beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying a foundation again, namely, repentance from dead works and faith in God,
the teaching on baptisms and the laying on of the hands, the resurrection of the dead and everlasting judgment.
And this we will do, if God indeed permits.
For as regards those who were once enlightened and who have tasted the heavenly free gift and who have become partakers of holy spirit
and who have tasted the fine word of God and powers of the coming system of things,
but have fallen away, it is impossible to revive them again to repentance, because they nail the Son of God to the stake again for themselves and expose him to public shame.
For the ground receives a blessing from God when it drinks in the rain that frequently falls on it and then produces vegetation useful to those for whom it is cultivated.
But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is rejected and is near to being cursed, and in the end it will be burned.
But in your case, beloved ones, we are convinced of better things, things related to salvation, even though we are speaking in this way.
For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.
But we desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end,
so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
For when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could not swear by anyone greater, he swore by himself,
saying: “I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply you.”
So after Abraham had shown patience, he obtained this promise.
For men swear by someone greater, and their oath is the end of every dispute, since it is a legal guarantee to them.
In this same way, when God decided to demonstrate more clearly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his purpose, he guaranteed it with an oath,
in order that through two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to the refuge may have strong encouragement to take firm hold of the hope set before us.
We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm, and it enters in within the curtain,
where a forerunner has entered in our behalf, Jesus, who has become a high priest in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek forever.
Now this is the main point of what we are saying: We have such a high priest as this, and he has sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a minister of the holy place and of the true tent, which Jehovah set up, and not man.
For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices; so it was necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, since there are already men who offer the gifts according to the Law.
These men are offering sacred service in a typical representation and a shadow of the heavenly things; just as Moses, when about to construct the tent, was given the divine command: For He says: “See that you make all things after their pattern that was shown to you in the mountain.”
But now Jesus has obtained a more excellent ministry because he is also the mediator of a correspondingly better covenant, which has been legally established on better promises.
If that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no need for a second.
For he does find fault with the people when he says: “‘Look! The days are coming,’ says Jehovah, ‘when I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant.
It will not be like the covenant that I made with their forefathers on the day I took hold of their hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not remain in my covenant, so I stopped caring for them,’ says Jehovah.
“‘For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their mind, and in their hearts I will write them. And I will become their God, and they will become my people.
“‘And they will no longer teach each one his fellow citizen and each one his brother, saying: “Know Jehovah!” For they will all know me, from the least to the greatest of them.
For I will be merciful toward their unrighteous deeds, and I will no longer call their sins to mind.’”
In his saying “a new covenant,” he has made the former one obsolete. Now what is obsolete and growing old is near to vanishing away.
James, a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the 12 tribes that are scattered about: Greetings!
Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials,
knowing as you do that this tested quality of your faith produces endurance.
But let endurance complete its work, so that you may be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.
So if any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching, and it will be given him.
But let him keep asking in faith, not doubting at all, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and blown about.
In fact, that man should not expect to receive anything from Jehovah;
he is an indecisive man, unsteady in all his ways.
But let the lowly brother rejoice over his exaltation,
and the rich one over his humiliation, because like a flower of the field he will pass away.
For just as the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the plant, and its flower falls off and its outward beauty perishes, so too the rich man will fade away in the midst of his pursuits.
Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life, which Jehovah promised to those who continue loving Him.
When under trial, let no one say: “I am being tried by God.” For with evil things God cannot be tried, nor does he himself try anyone.
But each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire.
Then the desire, when it has become fertile, gives birth to sin; in turn sin, when it has been carried out, brings forth death.
Do not be misled, my beloved brothers.
Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the Father of the celestial lights, who does not vary or change like the shifting shadows.
It was his will to bring us forth by the word of truth, so that we would become a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
Know this, my beloved brothers: Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger,
for man’s anger does not bring about God’s righteousness.
Therefore, put away all filthiness and every trace of badness, and accept with mildness the implanting of the word that is able to save you.
However, become doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves with false reasoning.
For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, this one is like a man looking at his own face in a mirror.
For he looks at himself, and he goes away and immediately forgets what sort of person he is.
But the one who peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and continues in it has become, not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work; and he will be happy in what he does.
If any man thinks he is a worshipper of God but does not keep a tight rein on his tongue, he is deceiving his own heart, and his worship is futile.
The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.
Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.
For we all stumble many times. If anyone does not stumble in word, he is a perfect man, able to bridle also his whole body.
If we put bridles in the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we guide also their whole body.
Look also at ships: Although they are so big and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the man at the helm is inclined to go.
So, too, the tongue is a small part of the body, and yet it makes great brags. See how small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze!
The tongue is also a fire. The tongue represents a world of unrighteousness among our body members, for it defiles all the body and sets the whole course of life on fire, and it is set on fire by Ge·henʹna.
For every kind of wild animal and bird and reptile and sea creature is to be tamed and has been tamed by humans.
But no human can tame the tongue. It is unruly and injurious, full of deadly poison.
With it we praise Jehovah, the Father, and yet with it we curse men who have come into existence “in the likeness of God.”
Out of the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, it is not right for things to happen this way.
A spring does not cause the fresh water and the bitter water to bubble out of the same opening, does it?
My brothers, a fig tree cannot produce olives, or a grapevine figs, can it? Neither can salt water produce fresh water.
Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him by his fine conduct demonstrate works performed with a mildness that comes from wisdom.
But if you have bitter jealousy and contentiousness in your hearts, do not be bragging and lying against the truth.
This is not the wisdom that comes down from above; it is earthly, animalistic, demonic.
For wherever there are jealousy and contentiousness, there will also be disorder and every vile thing.
But the wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial, not hypocritical.
Moreover, the fruit of righteousness is sown in peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.
My brothers, you are not holding to the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ while showing favoritism, are you?
For if a man with gold rings on his fingers and in splendid clothing comes into your meeting, but a poor man in filthy clothing also enters,
do you look with favor on the one wearing the splendid clothing and say, “You take this seat here in a fine place,” and do you say to the poor one, “You keep standing” or, “Take that seat there under my footstool”?
If so, do you not have class distinctions among yourselves, and have you not become judges rendering wicked decisions?
Listen, my beloved brothers. Did not God choose those who are poor from the world’s standpoint to be rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom, which he promised to those who love him?
But you have dishonored the poor. Is it not the rich who oppress you and drag you before law courts?
Do they not blaspheme the fine name by which you were called?
If, now, you carry out the royal law according to the scripture, “You must love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing quite well.
But if you continue showing favoritism, you are committing sin, and you are convicted by the law as transgressors.
For if anyone obeys all the Law but makes a false step in one point, he has become an offender against all of it.
For the one who said, “You must not commit adultery,” also said, “You must not murder.” If, now, you do not commit adultery but you do murder, you have become a transgressor of law.
Keep on speaking and behaving in such a way as those do who are going to be judged by the law of a free people.
For the one who does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
Of what benefit is it, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but he does not have works? That faith cannot save him, can it?
If a brother or a sister is lacking clothing and enough food for the day,
yet one of you says to them, “Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,” but you do not give them what they need for their body, of what benefit is it?
So, too, faith by itself, without works, is dead.
Nevertheless, someone will say: “You have faith, and I have works. Show me your faith without the works, and I will show you my faith by my works.”
You believe that there is one God, do you? You are doing quite well. And yet the demons believe and shudder.
But do you care to know, O empty man, that faith without works is useless?
Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works after he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
You see that his faith was active along with his works and his faith was perfected by his works,
and the scripture was fulfilled that says: “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness,” and he came to be called Jehovah’s friend.
You see that a man is to be declared righteous by works and not by faith alone.
In the same manner, was not Raʹhab the prostitute also declared righteous by works after she received the messengers hospitably and sent them out by another way?
Indeed, just as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
Come, now, you rich men, weep and wail over the miseries that are coming upon you.
Your riches have rotted, and your clothing has become moth-eaten.
Your gold and silver have rusted away, and their rust will be a witness against you and will consume your flesh. What you have stored up will be like a fire in the last days.
Look! The wages you have withheld from the workers who harvested your fields keep crying out, and the cries for help of the reapers have reached the ears of Jehovah of armies.
You have lived in luxury and for self-gratification on the earth. You have fattened your hearts on the day of slaughter.
You have condemned; you have murdered the righteous one. Is he not opposing you?
Be patient then, brothers, until the presence of the Lord. Look! The farmer keeps waiting for the precious fruit of the earth, exercising patience over it until the early rain and the late rain arrive.
You too exercise patience; make your hearts firm, because the presence of the Lord has drawn close.
Do not grumble against one another, brothers, so that you do not get judged. Look! The Judge is standing before the doors.
Brothers, take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets who spoke in the name of Jehovah.
Look! We consider happy those who have endured. You have heard of the endurance of Job and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave, that Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful.
Above all, my brothers, stop swearing, either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath. But let your “Yes” mean yes and your “No,” no, so that you do not become liable to judgment.
Is there anyone suffering hardship among you? Let him carry on prayer. Is there anyone in good spirits? Let him sing psalms.
Is there anyone sick among you? Let him call the elders of the congregation to him, and let them pray over him, applying oil to him in the name of Jehovah.
And the prayer of faith will make the sick one well, and Jehovah will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
Therefore, openly confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, so that you may be healed. A righteous man’s supplication has a powerful effect.
E·liʹjah was a man with feelings like ours, and yet when he prayed earnestly for it not to rain, it did not rain on the land for three years and six months.
Then he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain and the land produced fruit.
My brothers, if anyone among you is led astray from the truth and another turns him back,
know that whoever turns a sinner back from the error of his way will save him from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
What is the source of the wars and fights among you? Do they not originate from your fleshly desires that carry on a conflict within you?
You desire, and yet you do not have. You go on murdering and coveting, and yet you are not able to obtain. You go on fighting and waging war. You do not have because of your not asking.
When you do ask, you do not receive because you are asking for a wrong purpose, so that you may spend it on your fleshly desires.
Adulteresses, do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is making himself an enemy of God.
Or do you think that for no reason the scripture says: “The spirit that has taken up residence within us keeps enviously longing”?
However, the undeserved kindness that He gives is greater. So it says: “God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”
Therefore, subject yourselves to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.
Give way to misery and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into despair.
Humble yourselves in the eyes of Jehovah, and he will exalt you.
Stop speaking against one another, brothers. Whoever speaks against a brother or judges his brother speaks against law and judges law. Now if you judge law, you are not a doer of law but a judge.
There is only one who is Lawgiver and Judge, the one who is able to save and to destroy. But you, who are you to be judging your neighbor?
Come, now, you who say: “Today or tomorrow we will travel to this city and will spend a year there, and we will do business and make some profit,”
whereas you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. For you are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears.
Instead, you should say: “If Jehovah wills, we will live and do this or that.”
But now you take pride in your arrogant boasting. All such boasting is wicked.
Therefore, if someone knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the temporary residents scattered about in Ponʹtus, Ga·laʹti·a, Cap·pa·doʹci·a, Asia, and Bi·thynʹi·a, to those chosen
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, with sanctification by the spirit, for the purpose of being obedient and sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ: May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to you.
Praised be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. It is reserved in the heavens for you,
who are being safeguarded by God’s power through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last period of time.
Because of this you are greatly rejoicing, though for a short time, if it must be, you have been distressed by various trials,
in order that the tested quality of your faith, of much greater value than gold that perishes despite its being tested by fire, may be found a cause for praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
Though you never saw him, you love him. Though you do not see him now, yet you exercise faith in him and are greatly rejoicing with an indescribable and glorious joy,
as you attain the goal of your faith, your salvation.
Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied about the undeserved kindness meant for you made a diligent inquiry and a careful search.
They kept on investigating what particular time or what season the spirit within them was indicating concerning Christ as it testified beforehand about the sufferings meant for Christ and about the glory that would follow.
It was revealed to them that they were ministering, not to themselves, but to you, regarding what has now been announced to you by those who declared the good news to you with holy spirit sent from heaven. Into these very things, angels are desiring to peer.
So brace up your minds for activity; keep your senses completely; set your hope on the undeserved kindness that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
As obedient children, stop being molded by the desires you formerly had in your ignorance,
but like the Holy One who called you, become holy yourselves in all your conduct,
for it is written: “You must be holy, because I am holy.”
And if you are calling on the Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your temporary residence.
For you know that it was not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, that you were set free from your futile way of life handed down to you by your forefathers.
But it was with precious blood, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb, that of Christ.
True, he was foreknown before the founding of the world, but he was made manifest at the end of the times for your sake.
Through him you are believers in God, the one who raised him up from the dead and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope might be in God.
Now that you have purified yourselves by your obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.
For you have been given a new birth, not by corruptible, but by incorruptible seed, through the word of the living and enduring God.
For “all flesh is like grass, and all its glory is like a blossom of the field; the grass withers, and the flower falls off,
but the saying of Jehovah endures forever.” And this “saying” is the good news that was declared to you.
In the same way, you wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives,
because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.
Do not let your adornment be external—the braiding of hair and the wearing of gold ornaments or fine clothing—
but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible adornment of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.
For this is how the holy women of the past who hoped in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their husbands,
just as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. And you have become her children, provided you continue doing good and do not give in to fear.
You husbands, in the same way, continue dwelling with them according to knowledge. Assign them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life, in order for your prayers not to be hindered.
Finally, all of you have unity of mind, fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.
Do not pay back injury for injury or insult for insult. Instead, repay with a blessing, for you were called to this course, so that you might inherit a blessing.
For “whoever would love life and see good days must guard his tongue from bad and his lips from speaking deception.
Let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good; let him seek peace and pursue it.
For the eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their supplication, but the face of Jehovah is against those doing bad things.”
Indeed, who will harm you if you become zealous for what is good?
But even if you should suffer for the sake of righteousness, you are happy. However, do not fear what they fear, nor be disturbed.
But sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect.
Maintain a good conscience, so that in whatever way you are spoken against, those who speak against you may be put to shame because of your good conduct as followers of Christ.
For it is better to suffer because you are doing good, if it is God’s will to allow it, than because you are doing evil.
For Christ died once for all time for sins, a righteous person for unrighteous ones, in order to lead you to God. He was put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit.
And in this state he went and preached to the spirits in prison,
who had formerly been disobedient when God was patiently waiting in Noah’s day, while the ark was being constructed, in which a few people, that is, eight souls, were carried safely through the water.
Baptism, which corresponds to this, is also now saving you (not by the removing of the filth of the flesh, but by the request to God for a good conscience), through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
He is at God’s right hand, for he went to heaven, and angels and authorities and powers were made subject to him.
So rid yourselves of all badness and deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all backbiting.
As newborn infants, form a longing for the unadulterated milk of the word, so that by means of it you may grow to salvation,
provided you have tasted that the Lord is kind.
As you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen, precious to God,
you yourselves as living stones are being built up into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, in order to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
For it says in Scripture: “Look! I am laying in Zion a chosen stone, a precious foundation cornerstone, and no one exercising faith in it will ever be disappointed.”
It is to you, therefore, that he is precious, because you are believers; but to those not believing, “the stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone”
and “a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” They are stumbling because they are disobedient to the word. To this very end they were appointed.
But you are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies” of the One who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
For you were once not a people, but now you are God’s people; once you had not been shown mercy, but now you have received mercy.
Beloved, I urge you as foreigners and temporary residents to keep abstaining from fleshly desires, which wage war against you.
Maintain your conduct fine among the nations, so that when they accuse you of being wrongdoers, they may be eyewitnesses of your fine works and, as a result, glorify God in the day of his inspection.
For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human creation, whether to a king as being superior
or to governors as sent by him to punish wrongdoers but to praise those who do good.
For it is the will of God that by doing good you may silence the ignorant talk of unreasonable men.
Be as free people, using your freedom, not as a cover for doing wrong, but as slaves of God.
Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers, be in fear of God, honor the king.
Let servants be in subjection to their masters with all due fear, not only to the good and reasonable but also to those hard to please.
For it is agreeable when someone endures hardship and suffers unjustly because of conscience toward God.
For what merit is there if you are beaten for sinning and you endure it? But if you endure suffering because of doing good, this is an agreeable thing to God.
In fact, to this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.
He committed no sin, nor was deception found in his mouth.
When he was being insulted, he did not insult in return. When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the One who judges righteously.
He himself bore our sins in his own body on the stake, so that we might die to sins and live to righteousness. And “by his wounds you were healed.”
For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.
Therefore, as a fellow elder, a witness of the sufferings of the Christ and a sharer of the glory that is to be revealed, I make this appeal to the elders among you:
Shepherd the flock of God under your care, serving as overseers, not under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly;
not lording it over those who are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the flock.
And when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.
In the same way, you younger men, be in subjection to the older men. But all of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time,
while you throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.
Keep your senses, be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.
But take your stand against him, firm in the faith, knowing that the same kind of sufferings are being experienced by the entire association of your brothers in the world.
But after you have suffered a little while, the God of all undeserved kindness, who called you to his everlasting glory in union with Christ, will himself finish your training. He will make you firm, he will make you strong, he will firmly ground you.
To him be the might forever. Amen.
Through Sil·vaʹnus, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written you in few words in order to encourage you and to give an earnest witness that this is the true undeserved kindness of God. Stand firm in it.
She who is in Babylon, a chosen one like you, sends you her greetings, and so does Mark, my son.
Greet one another with a kiss of love. May all of you who are in union with Christ have peace.
Since Christ suffered in the flesh, you too arm yourselves with the same mental disposition; because the person who has suffered in the flesh has desisted from sins,
so that he may live the remainder of his time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.
For the time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of brazen conduct, unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties, drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries.
They are puzzled that you do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery, so they speak abusively of you.
But these people will render an account to the one who is ready to judge those living and those dead.
In fact, this is why the good news was declared also to the dead, so that although they are judged in the flesh from the standpoint of men, they might live in harmony with the spirit from God’s standpoint.
But the end of all things has drawn close. Therefore, be sound in mind, and be vigilant with a view to prayers.
Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.
Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
To the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness that is expressed in various ways.
If anyone speaks, let him do so as speaking pronouncements from God; if anyone ministers, let him do so as depending on the strength that God supplies; so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. The glory and the might are his forever and ever. Amen.
Beloved ones, do not be surprised about the fiery trials that you are experiencing, as though something strange were happening to you.
On the contrary, go on rejoicing over the extent to which you are sharers in the sufferings of the Christ, so that you may rejoice and be overjoyed also during the revelation of his glory.
If you are being reproached for the name of Christ, you are happy, because the spirit of glory, yes, the spirit of God, is resting upon you.
However, let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a wrongdoer or a busybody in other people’s matters.
But if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not feel ashamed, but let him keep on glorifying God while bearing this name.
For it is the appointed time for the judgment to start with the house of God. Now if it starts first with us, what will the outcome be for those who are not obedient to the good news of God?
“And if the righteous man is being saved with difficulty, what will happen to the ungodly man and the sinner?”
So, then, let those who are suffering in harmony with the will of God keep on entrusting themselves to a faithful Creator while they are doing good.
Simon Peter, a slave and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have acquired a faith as precious as ours through the righteousness of our God and the Savior Jesus Christ:
May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to you by an accurate knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
for his divine power has granted us all the things that contribute to life and godly devotion through the accurate knowledge of the One who called us by his own glory and virtue.
Through these things he has granted us the precious and very grand promises, so that through these you may become sharers in divine nature, having escaped from the world’s corruption produced by wrong desire.
For this very reason, put forth all earnest effort to supply to your faith virtue, to your virtue knowledge,
to your knowledge self-control, to your self-control endurance, to your endurance godly devotion,
to your godly devotion brotherly affection, to your brotherly affection love.
For if these things exist in you and overflow, they will prevent you from being either inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For anyone lacking these things is blind, shutting his eyes to the light, and has become forgetful of his cleansing from his sins of long ago.
Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to make your calling and choosing sure for yourselves, for if you keep on doing these things, you will by no means ever fail.
In fact, in this way you will be richly granted entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
For this reason I intend always to remind you of these things, although you know them and are well-established in the truth that is present in you.
But I consider it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you with reminders,
knowing as I do that my tabernacle is soon to be removed, just as also our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
I will always do my utmost so that after my departure, you may be able to recall these things for yourselves.
No, it was not by following artfully contrived false stories that we made known to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather, we were eyewitnesses of his magnificence.
For he received from God the Father honor and glory when words such as these were conveyed to him by the magnificent glory: “This is my Son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.”
Yes, these words we heard coming from heaven while we were with him in the holy mountain.
So we have the prophetic word made more sure, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place (until day dawns and a daystar rises) in your hearts.
For you know this first, that no prophecy of Scripture springs from any private interpretation.
For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were moved by holy spirit.
Beloved ones, this is now the second letter I am writing you in which, as in my first one, I am stirring up your clear thinking faculties by way of a reminder,
that you should remember the sayings previously spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles.
First of all know this, that in the last days ridiculers will come with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires
and saying: “Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death, all things are continuing exactly as they were from creation’s beginning.”
For they deliberately ignore this fact, that long ago there were heavens and an earth standing firmly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God;
and that by those means the world of that time suffered destruction when it was flooded with water.
But by the same word the heavens and the earth that now exist are reserved for fire and are being kept until the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly people.
However, do not let this escape your notice, beloved ones, that one day is with Jehovah as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day.
Jehovah is not slow concerning his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.
But Jehovah’s day will come as a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with a roar, but the elements being intensely hot will be dissolved, and earth and the works in it will be exposed.
Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion,
as you await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah, through which the heavens will be destroyed in flames and the elements will melt in the intense heat!
But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.
Therefore, beloved ones, since you are awaiting these things, do your utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.
Furthermore, consider the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also wrote you according to the wisdom given him,
speaking about these things as he does in all his letters. However, some things in them are hard to understand, and these things the ignorant and unstable are twisting, as they do also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction.
You, therefore, beloved ones, having this advance knowledge, be on your guard so that you may not be led astray with them by the error of the lawless people and fall from your own steadfastness.
No, but go on growing in the undeserved kindness and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.
However, there also came to be false prophets among the people, as there will also be false teachers among you. These will quietly bring in destructive sects, and they will even disown the owner who bought them, bringing speedy destruction upon themselves.
Furthermore, many will follow their brazen conduct, and because of them the way of the truth will be spoken of abusively.
Also, they will greedily exploit you with counterfeit words. But their judgment, decided long ago, is not moving slowly, and their destruction is not sleeping.
Certainly God did not refrain from punishing the angels who sinned, but threw them into Tarʹta·rus, putting them in chains of dense darkness to be reserved for judgment.
And he did not refrain from punishing an ancient world, but kept Noah, a preacher of righteousness, safe with seven others when he brought a flood upon a world of ungodly people.
And by reducing the cities of Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah to ashes, he condemned them, setting a pattern for ungodly people of things to come.
And he rescued righteous Lot, who was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people—
for day after day that righteous man was tormenting his righteous soul over the lawless deeds that he saw and heard while dwelling among them.
So, then, Jehovah knows how to rescue people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people to be destroyed on the day of judgment,
especially those who seek to defile the flesh of others and who despise authority. Daring and self-willed, they are not afraid to speak abusively of glorious ones,
whereas angels, although they are greater in strength and power, do not bring against them an accusation in abusive terms, out of respect for Jehovah.
But these men, like unreasoning animals that act on instinct and are born to be caught and destroyed, speak abusively about things of which they are ignorant. They will suffer destruction brought on by their own destructive course,
suffering harm as their reward for their own harmful course. They consider it pleasurable to indulge in luxurious living, even in the daytime. They are spots and blemishes who revel in their deceptive teachings while feasting together with you.
Their eyes are full of adultery and are unable to desist from sin, and they entice unstable ones. They have a heart trained in greed. They are accursed children.
Abandoning the straight path, they have been led astray. They have followed the path of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, who loved the reward of wrongdoing,
but was reproved for his own violation of what was right. A voiceless beast of burden speaking with a human voice hindered the prophet’s mad course.
These are waterless springs and mists driven by a violent storm, and the blackest darkness has been reserved for them.
They make high-sounding statements that are empty. By appealing to the desires of the flesh and with acts of brazen conduct, they entice people who have just escaped from those who live in error.
While they are promising them freedom, they themselves are slaves of corruption; for if anyone is overcome by someone, he is his slave.
Certainly if after escaping from the defilements of the world by an accurate knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they get involved again with these very things and are overcome, their final state has become worse for them than the first.
It would have been better for them not to have accurately known the path of righteousness than after knowing it to turn away from the holy commandment they had received.
What the true proverb says has happened to them: “The dog has returned to its own vomit, and the sow that was bathed to rolling in the mire.”
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have observed and our hands have felt, concerning the word of life,
(yes, the life was made manifest, and we have seen and are bearing witness and reporting to you the everlasting life that was with the Father and was made manifest to us),
that which we have seen and heard we are reporting also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us. And this fellowship of ours is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
This is the message that we heard from him and are announcing to you: God is light, and there is no darkness at all in him.
If we make the statement, “We are having fellowship with him,” and yet we go on walking in the darkness, we are lying and are not practicing the truth.
However, if we are walking in the light as he himself is in the light, we do have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.
If we make the statement, “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so as to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we make the statement, “We have not sinned,” we are making him a liar, and his word is not in us.
See what sort of love the Father has given us, that we should be called children of God! And that is what we are. That is why the world does not know us, because it has not come to know him.
Beloved ones, we are now children of God, but it has not yet been made manifest what we will be. We do know that when he is made manifest we will be like him, because we will see him just as he is.
And everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as that one is pure.
Everyone who practices sin is also practicing lawlessness, and sin is lawlessness.
You know, too, that he was made manifest to take away our sins, and there is no sin in him.
Everyone remaining in union with him does not practice sin; no one who practices sin has either seen him or come to know him.
Little children, let no one mislead you; the one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as that one is righteous.
The one who practices sin originates with the Devil, because the Devil has been sinning from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, to break up the works of the Devil.
Everyone who has been born from God does not practice sin, for His seed remains in such one, and he cannot practice sin, for he has been born from God.
The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice righteousness does not originate with God, nor does the one who does not love his brother.
For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;
not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother. And for what reason did he slaughter him? Because his own works were wicked, but those of his brother were righteous.
Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you.
We know that we have passed over from death to life, because we love the brothers. The one who does not love remains in death.
Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has everlasting life remaining in him.
By this we have come to know love, because that one surrendered his life for us, and we are under obligation to surrender our lives for our brothers.
But whoever has the material possessions of this world and sees his brother in need and yet refuses to show him compassion, in what way does the love of God remain in him?
Little children, we should love, not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.
By this we will know that we originate with the truth, and we will assure our hearts before him
regarding whatever our hearts may condemn us in, because God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.
Beloved ones, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have freeness of speech toward God;
and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and doing what is pleasing in his eyes.
Indeed, this is his commandment: that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he gave us a commandment.
Moreover, the one who observes his commandments remains in union with him, and he in union with such one. And by the spirit that he gave us, we know that he remains in union with us.
My little children, I am writing you these things so that you may not commit a sin. And yet, if anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one.
And he is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, yet not for ours only but also for the whole world’s.
And by this we realize that we have come to know him, namely, if we continue observing his commandments.
The one who says, “I have come to know him,” and yet does not observe his commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in this person.
But whoever does observe his word, in this person the love of God has truly been made perfect. By this we know that we are in union with him.
The one who says he remains in union with him is himself under obligation to go on walking just as that one walked.
Beloved ones, I am writing you, not a new commandment, but an old commandment that you have had from the beginning. This old commandment is the word that you heard.
Again, I am writing you a new commandment, which is true in his case and in yours, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
The one who says that he is in the light and yet hates his brother is still in the darkness.
The one who loves his brother remains in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling.
But the one who hates his brother is in the darkness and is walking in the darkness, and he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
I am writing you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you for the sake of his name.
I am writing you, fathers, because you have come to know him who is from the beginning. I am writing you, young men, because you have conquered the wicked one. I write you, young children, because you have come to know the Father.
I write you, fathers, because you have come to know him who is from the beginning. I write you, young men, because you are strong and the word of God remains in you and you have conquered the wicked one.
Do not love either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him;
because everything in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—does not originate with the Father, but originates with the world.
Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.
Young children, it is the last hour, and just as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have appeared, from which fact we know that it is the last hour.
They went out from us, but they were not of our sort; for if they had been of our sort, they would have remained with us. But they went out so that it might be shown that not all are of our sort.
And you have an anointing from the holy one, and all of you have knowledge.
I write you, not because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie originates with the truth.
Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, the one who denies the Father and the Son.
Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father either. But whoever acknowledges the Son has the Father also.
As for you, what you have heard from the beginning must remain in you. If what you have heard from the beginning remains in you, you will also remain in union with the Son and in union with the Father.
Furthermore, this is what he himself promised us—the life everlasting.
I write you these things about those who are trying to mislead you.
And as for you, the anointing that you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to be teaching you; but the anointing from him is teaching you about all things and is true and is no lie. Just as it has taught you, remain in union with him.
So now, little children, remain in union with him, so that when he is made manifest we may have freeness of speech and not shrink away from him in shame at his presence.
If you know that he is righteous, you also know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born from him.
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born from God, and everyone who loves the one who caused to be born loves him who has been born from that one.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and carry out his commandments.
For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,
because everyone who has been born from God conquers the world. And this is the conquest that has conquered the world, our faith.
Who can conquer the world? Is it not the one who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is the one who came by means of water and blood, Jesus Christ, not with the water only, but with the water and with the blood. And the spirit is bearing witness, because the spirit is the truth.
For there are three witness bearers:
the spirit and the water and the blood; and the three are in agreement.
If we accept the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. Because this is the witness God gives, the witness that he has given about his Son.
The person putting his faith in the Son of God has the witness within himself. The person not having faith in God has made him a liar, because he has not put his faith in the witness given by God concerning his Son.
And this is the witness, that God gave us everlasting life, and this life is in his Son.
The one who has the Son has this life; the one who does not have the Son of God does not have this life.
I write you these things so that you may know that you have life everlasting, you who put your faith in the name of the Son of God.
And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that no matter what we ask according to his will, he hears us.
And if we know that he hears us concerning whatever we are asking, we know that we are to have the things we ask for, since we have asked them of him.
If anyone catches sight of his brother committing a sin that does not incur death, he will ask, and God will give life to him, yes, to those not committing sin that incurs death. There is a sin that does incur death. It is concerning that sin that I do not tell him to make request.
All unrighteousness is sin, and yet there is a sin that does not incur death.
We know that everyone who has been born from God does not practice sin, but the one born from God watches him, and the wicked one cannot take hold of him.
We know that we originate with God, but the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.
But we know that the Son of God has come, and he has given us insight so that we may gain the knowledge of the one who is true. And we are in union with the one who is true, by means of his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and life everlasting.
Little children, guard yourselves from idols.
Beloved ones, do not believe every inspired statement, but test the inspired statements to see whether they originate with God, for many false prophets have gone out into the world.
This is how you know that the inspired statement is from God: Every inspired statement that acknowledges Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh originates with God.
But every inspired statement that does not acknowledge Jesus does not originate with God. Furthermore, this is the antichrist’s inspired statement that you have heard was coming, and now it is already in the world.
You originate with God, little children, and you have conquered them, because the one who is in union with you is greater than the one who is in union with the world.
They originate with the world; that is why they speak what originates with the world and the world listens to them.
We originate with God. Whoever comes to know God listens to us; whoever does not originate with God does not listen to us. By this we distinguish the inspired statement of truth from the inspired statement of error.
Beloved ones, let us continue loving one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born from God and knows God.
Whoever does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.
By this the love of God was revealed in our case, that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.
The love is in this respect, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.
Beloved ones, if this is how God loved us, then we are also under obligation to love one another.
No one has seen God at any time. If we continue loving one another, God remains in us and his love is made perfect in us.
By this we know that we are remaining in union with him and he in union with us, because he has given his spirit to us.
In addition, we ourselves have seen and are bearing witness that the Father has sent his Son as Savior of the world.
Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is God’s Son, God remains in union with such one and he in union with God.
And we have come to know and believe the love that God has for us. God is love, and the one who remains in love remains in union with God and God remains in union with him.
In this way love has been made perfect in us, so that we may have freeness of speech in the day of judgment, because just as that one is, so are we ourselves in this world.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts fear out, because fear restrains us. Indeed, the one who is fearful has not been made perfect in love.
We love, because he first loved us.
If anyone says, “I love God,” and yet is hating his brother, he is a liar. For the one who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.
And we have this commandment from him, that whoever loves God must also love his brother.
The older man to the chosen lady and to her children, whom I truly love, and not only I but also all those who have come to know the truth,
because of the truth that remains in us and will be with us forever.
There will be with us undeserved kindness, mercy, and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, with truth and love.
I rejoice very much because I have found some of your children walking in the truth, just as we received commandment from the Father.
So now I request you, lady, that we love one another. (I am writing you, not a new commandment, but one that we had from the beginning.)
And this is what love means, that we go on walking according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning, that you should go on walking in it.
For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those not acknowledging Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Look out for yourselves, so that you do not lose the things we have worked to produce, but that you may obtain a full reward.
Everyone who pushes ahead and does not remain in the teaching of the Christ does not have God. The one who does remain in this teaching is the one who has both the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your homes or say a greeting to him.
For the one who says a greeting to him is a sharer in his wicked works.
Although I have many things to write to you, I do not want to do so with paper and ink, but I am hoping to come to you and to speak with you face-to-face, so that your joy may be in full measure.
The children of your sister, the chosen one, send you their greetings.
The older man to Gaʹius, the beloved, whom I truly love.
Beloved one, I pray that in all things you continue to prosper and enjoy good health, just as you are now prospering.
For I rejoiced very much when brothers came and bore witness about the truth you hold, as you go on walking in the truth.
No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.
Beloved one, you show your faithfulness in what you do for the brothers, even though they are strangers to you.
They have given a witness about your love before the congregation. Please send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
For it was in behalf of his name that they went out, not taking anything from the people of the nations.
So we are under obligation to show hospitality to such ones, so that we may become fellow workers in the truth.
I wrote something to the congregation, but Di·otʹre·phes, who likes to have the first place among them, does not accept anything from us with respect.
That is why if I come, I will call attention to the works he is doing in spreading malicious talk about us. Not being content with this, he refuses to welcome the brothers with respect; and those who want to welcome them, he tries to hinder and to throw out of the congregation.
Beloved one, do not imitate what is bad, but imitate what is good. The one who does good originates with God. The one who does bad has not seen God.
De·meʹtri·us has been well-reported-on by them all and by the truth itself. In fact, we too are bearing witness about him, and you know that the witness we give is true.
I had many things to write you, but I do not wish to go on writing you with pen and ink.
However, I am hoping to see you soon, and we will speak face-to-face. May you have peace. The friends send you their greetings. Give my greetings to the friends by name.
Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ, but a brother of James, to the called ones who are loved by God the Father and preserved for Jesus Christ:
May mercy and peace and love be increased to you.
Beloved ones, although I was making every effort to write you about the salvation we hold in common, I found it necessary to write you to urge you to put up a hard fight for the faith that was once for all time delivered to the holy ones.
My reason is that certain men have slipped in among you who were long ago appointed to this judgment by the Scriptures; they are ungodly men who turn the undeserved kindness of our God into an excuse for brazen conduct and who prove false to our only owner and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Although you are fully aware of all of this, I want to remind you that Jehovah, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those not showing faith.
And the angels who did not keep their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place, he has reserved with eternal bonds in dense darkness for the judgment of the great day.
In the same manner, Sodʹom and Go·morʹrah and the cities around them also gave themselves over to gross sexual immorality and pursued unnatural fleshly desires; they are placed before us as a warning example by undergoing the judicial punishment of everlasting fire.
Despite this, these men too are indulging in dreams, defiling the flesh, despising authority, and speaking abusively of glorious ones.
But when Miʹcha·el the archangel had a difference with the Devil and was disputing about Moses’ body, he did not dare to bring a judgment against him in abusive terms, but said: “May Jehovah rebuke you.”
But these men are speaking abusively about all the things they really do not understand. And in all the things that they do understand by instinct like unreasoning animals, they go on corrupting themselves.
Too bad for them, for they have followed the path of Cain and have rushed into the erroneous course of Baʹlaam for reward, and they have perished in the rebellious talk of Korʹah!
These are the rocks hidden below water at your love feasts while they feast with you, shepherds who feed themselves without fear; waterless clouds carried here and there by the wind; fruitless trees in late autumn, having died twice and having been uprooted;
wild waves of the sea that cast up the foam of their own shame; stars with no set course, for which the blackest darkness stands reserved forever.
Yes, the seventh one in line from Adam, Eʹnoch, also prophesied about them when he said: “Look! Jehovah came with his holy myriads
to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly deeds that they did in an ungodly way, and concerning all the shocking things that ungodly sinners spoke against him.”
These men are murmurers, complainers about their lot in life, following their own desires, and their mouths make grandiose boasts, while they are flattering others for their own benefit.
As for you, beloved ones, call to mind the sayings that have been previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
how they used to say to you: “In the last time there will be ridiculers, following their own desires for ungodly things.”
These are the ones who cause divisions, animalistic men, not having spirituality.
But you, beloved ones, build yourselves up on your most holy faith, and pray with holy spirit,
in order to keep yourselves in God’s love, while you await the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ with everlasting life in view.
Also, continue showing mercy to some who have doubts;
save them by snatching them out of the fire. But continue showing mercy to others, doing so with fear, while you hate even the garment that has been stained by the flesh.
Now to the one who is able to guard you from stumbling and to make you stand unblemished in the sight of his glory with great joy,
to the only God our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, might, and authority for all past eternity and now and into all eternity. Amen.
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me: “Come, I will show you the judgment on the great prostitute who sits on many waters,
with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and earth’s inhabitants were made drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.”
And he carried me away in the power of the spirit into a wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored wild beast that was full of blasphemous names and that had seven heads and ten horns.
The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and she was adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, and she had in her hand a golden cup that was full of disgusting things and the unclean things of her sexual immorality.
On her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the mother of the prostitutes and of the disgusting things of the earth.”
And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. Well, on seeing her I was greatly amazed.
So the angel said to me: “Why is it that you were amazed? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the wild beast that is carrying her and that has the seven heads and the ten horns:
The wild beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet is about to ascend out of the abyss, and it is to go off into destruction. And the inhabitants of the earth—those whose names have not been written in the scroll of life from the founding of the world—will be amazed when they see how the wild beast was, but is not, and yet will be present.
“This calls for a mind that has wisdom: The seven heads mean seven mountains, where the woman sits on top.
And there are seven kings: Five have fallen, one is, and the other has not yet arrived; but when he does arrive, he must remain a short while.
And the wild beast that was but is not, it is also an eighth king, but it springs from the seven, and it goes off into destruction.
“The ten horns that you saw mean ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they do receive authority as kings for one hour with the wild beast.
These have one thought, so they give their power and authority to the wild beast.
These will battle with the Lamb, but because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, the Lamb will conquer them. Also, those with him who are called and chosen and faithful will do so.”
He said to me: “The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is sitting, mean peoples and crowds and nations and tongues.
And the ten horns that you saw and the wild beast, these will hate the prostitute and will make her devastated and naked, and they will eat up her flesh and completely burn her with fire.
For God put it into their hearts to carry out his thought, yes, to carry out their one thought by giving their kingdom to the wild beast, until the words of God will have been accomplished.
And the woman whom you saw means the great city that has a kingdom over the kings of the earth.”
After this I heard what seemed to be a loud voice of a great crowd in heaven. They said: “Praise Jah! The salvation and the glory and the power belong to our God,
because his judgments are true and righteous. For he has executed judgment on the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and he has avenged the blood of his slaves that is on her hands.”
And right away for the second time they said: “Praise Jah! And the smoke from her goes on ascending forever and ever.”
And the 24 elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshipped God who sits on the throne and said: “Amen! Praise Jah!”
Also, a voice came from the throne and said: “Be praising our God, all you his slaves, who fear him, the small ones and the great.”
And I heard what sounded like a voice of a great crowd and like the sound of many waters and like the sound of heavy thunders. They said: “Praise Jah, because Jehovah our God, the Almighty, has begun to rule as king!
Let us rejoice and be overjoyed and give him glory, because the marriage of the Lamb has arrived and his wife has prepared herself.
Yes, it has been granted to her to be clothed with bright, clean, fine linen—for the fine linen stands for the righteous acts of the holy ones.”
And he tells me, “Write: Happy are those invited to the evening meal of the Lamb’s marriage.” Also, he tells me: “These are the true sayings of God.”
At that I fell down before his feet to worship him. But he tells me: “Be careful! Do not do that! I am only a fellow slave of you and of your brothers who have the work of witnessing concerning Jesus. Worship God! For the witness concerning Jesus is what inspires prophecy.”
I saw heaven opened, and look! a white horse. And the one seated on it is called Faithful and True, and he judges and carries on war in righteousness.
His eyes are a fiery flame, and on his head are many diadems. He has a name written that no one knows but he himself,
and he is clothed with an outer garment stained with blood, and he is called by the name The Word of God.
Also, the armies in heaven were following him on white horses, and they were clothed in white, clean, fine linen.
And out of his mouth protrudes a sharp, long sword with which to strike the nations, and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron. Moreover, he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty.
On his outer garment, yes, on his thigh, he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords.
I saw also an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice and said to all the birds that fly in midheaven: “Come here, be gathered together to the great evening meal of God,
so that you may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of military commanders and the flesh of strong men and the flesh of horses and of those seated on them, and the flesh of all, of freemen as well as of slaves and of small ones and great.”
And I saw the wild beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the one seated on the horse and against his army.
And the wild beast was caught, and along with it the false prophet that performed in front of it the signs with which he misled those who received the mark of the wild beast and those who worship its image. While still alive, they both were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulfur.
But the rest were killed off with the long sword that proceeded out of the mouth of the one seated on the horse. And all the birds were filled with their flesh.
And a reed like a rod was given to me as he said: “Get up and measure the temple sanctuary of God and the altar and those worshipping in it.
But as for the courtyard that is outside the temple sanctuary, leave it out and do not measure it, because it has been given to the nations, and they will trample the holy city underfoot for 42 months.
I will cause my two witnesses to prophesy for 1,260 days dressed in sackcloth.”
These are symbolized by the two olive trees and the two lampstands and are standing before the Lord of the earth.
If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and consumes their enemies. If anyone should want to harm them, this is how he must be killed.
These have the authority to shut up the sky so that no rain may fall during the days of their prophesying, and they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood and to strike the earth with every sort of plague as often as they wish.
When they have finished their witnessing, the wild beast that ascends out of the abyss will wage war with them and conquer them and kill them.
And their corpses will be on the main street of the great city that is in a spiritual sense called Sodʹom and Egypt, where their Lord was also executed on the stake.
And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations will look at their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not allow their corpses to be laid in a tomb.
And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and celebrate, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those dwelling on the earth.
After the three and a half days, spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them.
And they heard a loud voice from heaven say to them: “Come up here.” And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them.
In that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell; and 7,000 persons were killed by the earthquake, and the rest became frightened and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe is past. Look! The third woe is coming quickly.
The seventh angel blew his trumpet. And there were loud voices in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.”
And the 24 elders who were seated before God on their thrones fell upon their faces and worshipped God,
saying: “We thank you, Jehovah God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king.
But the nations became wrathful, and your own wrath came, and the appointed time came for the dead to be judged and to reward your slaves the prophets and the holy ones and those fearing your name, the small and the great, and to bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”
And the temple sanctuary of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple sanctuary. And there were flashes of lightning and voices and thunders and an earthquake and a great hail.
A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place. And he sent his angel and presented it in signs through him to his slave John,
who bore witness to the word God gave and to the witness Jesus Christ gave, yes, to all the things he saw.
Happy is the one who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy and who observe the things written in it, for the appointed time is near.
John to the seven congregations that are in the province of Asia: May you have undeserved kindness and peace from “the One who is and who was and who is coming,” and from the seven spirits that are before his throne,
and from Jesus Christ, “the Faithful Witness,” “the firstborn from the dead,” and “the Ruler of the kings of the earth.” To him who loves us and who set us free from our sins by means of his own blood—
and he made us to be a kingdom, priests to his God and Father—yes, to him be the glory and the might forever. Amen.
Look! He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, and those who pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief because of him. Yes, Amen.
“I am the Alʹpha and the O·meʹga,” says Jehovah God, “the One who is and who was and who is coming, the Almighty.”
I John, your brother and a sharer with you in the tribulation and kingdom and endurance in association with Jesus, was on the island called Patʹmos for speaking about God and bearing witness concerning Jesus.
By inspiration I came to be in the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a strong voice like that of a trumpet,
saying: “What you see, write in a scroll and send it to the seven congregations: in Ephʹe·sus, in Smyrʹna, in Perʹga·mum, in Thy·a·tiʹra, in Sarʹdis, in Philadelphia, and in La·o·di·ceʹa.”
I turned to see who was speaking with me, and when I turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
and in the midst of the lampstands someone like a son of man, clothed in a garment that reached down to the feet and wearing a golden sash around his chest.
Moreover, his head and his hair were white as white wool, as snow, and his eyes were like a fiery flame,
and his feet were like fine copper when glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters.
And he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth a sharp, long, two-edged sword was protruding, and his countenance was like the sun when it shines at its brightest.
When I saw him, I fell as dead at his feet. And he laid his right hand on me and said: “Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last,
and the living one, and I became dead, but look! I am living forever and ever, and I have the keys of death and of the Grave.
So write down the things you saw, and the things that are, and the things that will take place after these.
As for the sacred secret of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and of the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars mean the angels of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands mean the seven congregations.
After this I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding tight the four winds of the earth, so that no wind could blow on the earth or on the sea or on any tree.
And I saw another angel ascending from the sunrise, having a seal of the living God; and he called with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was granted to harm the earth and the sea,
saying: “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees, until after we have sealed the slaves of our God in their foreheads.”
And I heard the number of those who were sealed, 144,000, sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
Out of the tribe of Judah 12,000 sealed;out of the tribe of Reuʹben 12,000;out of the tribe of Gad 12,000;
out of the tribe of Ashʹer 12,000;out of the tribe of Naphʹta·li 12,000;out of the tribe of Ma·nasʹseh 12,000;
out of the tribe of Simʹe·on 12,000;out of the tribe of Leʹvi 12,000;out of the tribe of Isʹsa·char 12,000;
out of the tribe of Zebʹu·lun 12,000;out of the tribe of Joseph 12,000;out of the tribe of Benjamin 12,000 sealed.
After this I saw, and look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands.
And they keep shouting with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.”
All the angels were standing around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell facedown before the throne and worshipped God,
saying: “Amen! Let the praise and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power and the strength be to our God forever and ever. Amen.”
In response one of the elders said to me: “These who are dressed in the white robes, who are they and where did they come from?”
So right away I said to him: “My lord, you are the one who knows.” And he said to me: “These are the ones who come out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
That is why they are before the throne of God, and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple; and the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.
They will hunger no more nor thirst anymore, neither will the sun beat down on them nor any scorching heat,
because the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne, will shepherd them and will guide them to springs of waters of life. And God will wipe out every tear from their eyes.”
And it stood still on the sand of the sea. And I saw a wild beast ascending out of the sea, with ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns ten diadems, but on its heads blasphemous names.
Now the wild beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were like those of a bear, and its mouth was like a lion’s mouth. And the dragon gave to the beast its power and its throne and great authority.
I saw that one of its heads seemed to have been fatally wounded, but its mortal wound had been healed, and all the earth followed the wild beast with admiration.
And they worshipped the dragon because it gave the authority to the wild beast, and they worshipped the wild beast with the words: “Who is like the wild beast, and who can do battle with it?”
It was given a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and it was given authority to act for 42 months.
And it opened its mouth in blasphemies against God to blaspheme his name and his dwelling place, even those residing in heaven.
It was permitted to wage war with the holy ones and conquer them, and it was given authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
And all those who dwell on the earth will worship it. From the founding of the world, not one of their names has been written in the scroll of life of the Lamb who was slaughtered.
If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
If anyone is meant for captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone will kill with the sword, he must be killed with the sword. This is where it calls for endurance and faith on the part of the holy ones.
Then I saw another wild beast ascending out of the earth, and it had two horns like a lamb, but it began speaking like a dragon.
It exercises all the authority of the first wild beast in its sight. And it makes the earth and its inhabitants worship the first wild beast, whose mortal wound was healed.
And it performs great signs, even making fire come down out of heaven to the earth in the sight of mankind.
It misleads those who dwell on the earth, because of the signs that it was permitted to perform in the sight of the wild beast, while it tells those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the wild beast that had the sword-stroke and yet revived.
And it was permitted to give breath to the image of the wild beast, so that the image of the wild beast should both speak and cause to be killed all those who refuse to worship the image of the wild beast.
It puts under compulsion all people—the small and the great, the rich and the poor, the free and the slaves—that these should be marked on their right hand or on their forehead,
and that nobody can buy or sell except a person having the mark, the name of the wild beast or the number of its name.
This is where it calls for wisdom: Let the one who has insight calculate the number of the wild beast, for it is a man’s number, and its number is 666.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away, and the sea is no more.
I also saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God and prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
With that I heard a loud voice from the throne say: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his people. And God himself will be with them.
And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
And the One seated on the throne said: “Look! I am making all things new.” Also he says: “Write, for these words are faithful and true.”
And he said to me: “They have come to pass! I am the Alʹpha and the O·meʹga, the beginning and the end. To anyone thirsting I will give from the spring of the water of life free.
Anyone conquering will inherit these things, and I will be his God and he will be my son.
But as for the cowards and those without faith and those who are disgusting in their filth and murderers and the sexually immoral and those practicing spiritism and idolaters and all the liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur. This means the second death.”
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls that were full of the seven last plagues came and said to me: “Come, and I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.”
So he carried me away in the power of the spirit to a great and lofty mountain, and he showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God
and having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious stone, like a jasper stone shining crystal clear.
It had a great and lofty wall and had 12 gates with 12 angels at the gates, and on the gates were inscribed the names of the 12 tribes of the sons of Israel.
On the east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south three gates, and on the west three gates.
The wall of the city also had 12 foundation stones, and on them were the 12 names of the 12 apostles of the Lamb.
Now the one who was speaking with me was holding a golden reed as a measure in order to measure the city and its gates and its wall.
And the city is laid out as a square, and its length is as great as its width. And he measured the city with the reed, 12,000 stadia; its length and width and height are equal.
He also measured its wall, 144 cubits according to a man’s measure, at the same time an angel’s measure.
Now the wall was made of jasper, and the city was pure gold like clear glass.
The foundations of the city wall were adorned with every sort of precious stone: the first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chal·ceʹdo·ny, the fourth emerald,
the fifth sar·donʹyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysʹo·lite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysʹo·prase, the eleventh hyacinth, the twelfth amethyst.
Also, the 12 gates were 12 pearls; each one of the gates was made of one pearl. And the main street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
I did not see a temple in it, for Jehovah God the Almighty is its temple, also the Lamb is.
And the city has no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God illuminated it, and its lamp was the Lamb.
And the nations will walk by means of its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it.
Its gates will not be closed at all by day, for night will not exist there.
And they will bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it.
But anything defiled and anyone who does what is disgusting and deceitful will in no way enter into it; only those written in the Lamb’s scroll of life will enter.
“To the angel of the congregation in Sarʹdis write: These are the things that he says who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars: ‘I know your deeds, that you have the name that you are alive, but you are dead.
Become watchful, and strengthen the things remaining that were ready to die, for I have not found your works fully performed before my God.
Therefore, continue mindful of how you have received and how you heard, and go on keeping it, and repent. Certainly unless you wake up, I will come as a thief, and you will not know at all at what hour I will come upon you.
“‘Nevertheless, you do have a few individuals in Sarʹdis who did not defile their garments, and they will walk with me in white ones, because they are worthy.
The one who conquers will thus be dressed in white garments, and I will by no means blot out his name from the book of life, but I will acknowledge his name before my Father and before his angels.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
“To the angel of the congregation in Philadelphia write: These are the things he says who is holy, who is true, who has the key of David, who opens so that no one will shut and shuts so that no one opens:
‘I know your deeds—look! I have set before you an opened door, which no one can shut. And I know that you have a little power, and you kept my word and did not prove false to my name.
Look! I will make those from the synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews yet are not, but are lying—look! I will make them come and bow before your feet and make them know that I have loved you.
Because you kept the word about my endurance, I will also keep you from the hour of test, which is to come upon the entire inhabited earth, to put to the test those dwelling on the earth.
I am coming quickly. Keep holding fast to what you have, so that no one may take your crown.
“‘The one who conquers—I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will by no means go out from it anymore, and I will write upon him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the New Jerusalem that descends out of heaven from my God, and my own new name.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
“To the angel of the congregation in La·o·di·ceʹa write: These are the things that the Amen says, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation by God:
‘I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or else hot.
So because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I am going to vomit you out of my mouth.
Because you say, “I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all,” but you do not know that you are miserable and pitiful and poor and blind and naked,
I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire so that you may become rich, and white garments so that you may become dressed and that the shame of your nakedness may not be exposed, and eyesalve to rub in your eyes so that you may see.
“‘All those for whom I have affection, I reprove and discipline. So be zealous and repent.
Look! I am standing at the door and knocking. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come into his house and take the evening meal with him and he with me.
To the one who conquers I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, just as I conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’”
The fifth angel blew his trumpet. And I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to the earth, and the key to the shaft of the abyss was given to him.
He opened the shaft of the abyss, and smoke ascended out of the shaft like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun was darkened, also the air, by the smoke of the shaft.
And locusts came out of the smoke onto the earth, and authority was given to them, the same authority that the scorpions of the earth have.
They were told not to harm the vegetation of the earth or any green plant or any tree, but only those people who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
And it was granted the locusts, not to kill them, but to torment them five months, and their torment was like torment by a scorpion when it strikes a person.
In those days people will seek death but will by no means find it, and they will long to die, but death will flee from them.
And in appearance the locusts resembled horses prepared for battle; on their heads were what seemed to be crowns of gold, and their faces were like human faces,
but they had hair like women’s hair. And their teeth were like those of lions,
and they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings was like the sound of horse-drawn chariots rushing into battle.
Also, they have tails with stingers like scorpions, and in their tails is their authority to hurt the people for five months.
They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss. In Hebrew his name is A·badʹdon, but in Greek he has the name A·polʹlyon.
The one woe is past. Look! Two more woes are coming after these things.
The sixth angel blew his trumpet. And I heard one voice from the horns of the golden altar that is before God
say to the sixth angel who had the trumpet: “Untie the four angels who are bound at the great river Eu·phraʹtes.”
And the four angels who have been prepared for the hour and day and month and year were untied to kill a third of the people.
The number of the armies of cavalry was two myriads of myriads; I heard the number of them.
And this is how I saw the horses in the vision and those seated on them: They had fire-red and hyacinth-blue and sulfur-yellow breastplates, and the heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and fire and smoke and sulfur came out of their mouths.
A third of the people were killed by these three plagues, by the fire and the smoke and the sulfur that came out of their mouths.
For the authority of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, for their tails are like serpents and have heads, and with these they inflict harm.
But the rest of the people who were not killed by these plagues did not repent of the works of their hands; they did not stop worshipping the demons and the idols of gold and silver and copper and stone and wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk.
And they did not repent of their murders nor of their spiritistic practices nor of their sexual immorality nor of their thefts.
“To the angel of the congregation in Ephʹe·sus write: These are the things that he says who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands:
‘I know your deeds, and your labor and endurance, and that you cannot tolerate bad men, and that you put to the test those who say they are apostles, but they are not, and you found them to be liars.
You are also showing endurance, and you have persevered for the sake of my name and have not grown weary.
Nevertheless, I hold this against you, that you have left the love you had at first.
“‘Therefore remember from where you have fallen, and repent and do the deeds you did at first. If you do not, I will come to you, and I will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
Still, you do have this in your favor: that you hate the deeds of the sect of Nic·o·laʹus, which I also hate.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To the one who conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.’
“And to the angel of the congregation in Smyrʹna write: These are the things that he says, ‘the First and the Last,’ who became dead and came to life again:
‘I know your tribulation and poverty—but you are rich—and the blasphemy by those who call themselves Jews and really are not, but they are a synagogue of Satan.
Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer. Look! The Devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison so that you may be fully put to the test, and you will have tribulation for ten days. Prove yourself faithful even to death, and I will give you the crown of life.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: The one who conquers will by no means be harmed by the second death.’
“To the angel of the congregation in Perʹga·mum write: These are the things that he says who has the sharp, long, two-edged sword:
‘I know where you are dwelling, that is, where the throne of Satan is; and yet you keep holding fast to my name, and you did not deny your faith in me even in the days of Anʹti·pas, my faithful witness, who was killed by your side, where Satan is dwelling.
“‘Nevertheless, I have a few things against you, that you have there those adhering to the teaching of Baʹlaam, who taught Baʹlak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit sexual immorality.
In the same way, you also have those adhering to the teaching of the sect of Nic·o·laʹus.
So repent. If you do not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will war against them with the long sword of my mouth.
“‘Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To the one who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white pebble, and written on the pebble is a new name that no one knows except the one receiving it.’
“To the angel of the congregation in Thy·a·tiʹra write: These are the things that the Son of God says, the one who has eyes like a fiery flame and whose feet are like fine copper:
‘I know your deeds, and your love and faith and ministry and endurance, and that your deeds of late are more than those you did at first.
“‘Nevertheless, I do hold this against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezʹe·bel, who calls herself a prophetess, and she teaches and misleads my slaves to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
And I gave her time to repent, but she is not willing to repent of her sexual immorality.
Look! I am about to throw her into a sickbed, and those committing adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they repent of her deeds.
And I will kill her children with deadly plague, so that all the congregations will know that I am the one who searches the innermost thoughts and hearts, and I will give to you individually according to your deeds.
“‘However, I say to the rest of you who are in Thy·a·tiʹra, all those who do not follow this teaching, those who did not get to know the so-called “deep things of Satan”: I am not putting on you any other burden.
Just the same, hold fast to what you have until I come.
And to the one who conquers and observes my deeds down to the end, I will give authority over the nations,
and he will shepherd the people with an iron rod so that they will be broken to pieces like clay vessels, just as I have received from my Father.
And I will give him the morning star.
Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
And I saw another strong angel descending from heaven, arrayed with a cloud, and a rainbow was on his head, and his face was like the sun, and his legs were like pillars of fire,
and he had in his hand a little scroll that had been unrolled. And he set his right foot on the sea, but his left one on the earth,
and he cried out with a loud voice just as when a lion roars. And when he cried out, the voices of the seven thunders spoke.
Now when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write, but I heard a voice out of heaven say: “Seal up the things the seven thunders spoke, and do not write them down.”
The angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the earth raised his right hand to heaven,
and he swore by the One who lives forever and ever, who created the heaven and the things in it and the earth and the things in it and the sea and the things in it: “There will be no delay any longer.
But in the days when the seventh angel is about to blow his trumpet, the sacred secret that God declared as good news to his own slaves the prophets is indeed brought to a finish.”
And I heard the voice out of heaven speaking again with me and saying: “Go, take the opened scroll that is in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the earth.”
I went to the angel and told him to give me the little scroll. He said to me: “Take it and eat it up, and it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet like honey.”
I took the little scroll out of the hand of the angel and ate it, and in my mouth it was sweet like honey, but when I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
And they said to me: “You must prophesy again about peoples and nations and tongues and many kings.”
And I heard a loud voice out of the sanctuary say to the seven angels: “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the anger of God on the earth.”
The first one went off and poured out his bowl on the earth. And a hurtful and malignant ulcer afflicted the people who had the mark of the wild beast and who were worshipping its image.
The second one poured out his bowl into the sea. And it became blood like that of a dead man, and every living creature died, yes, the things in the sea.
The third one poured out his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water. And they became blood.
I heard the angel over the waters say: “You, the One who is and who was, the loyal One, are righteous, for you have issued these judgments,
because they poured out the blood of holy ones and of prophets, and you have given them blood to drink; they deserve it.”
And I heard the altar say: “Yes, Jehovah God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments.”
The fourth one poured out his bowl on the sun, and to the sun it was granted to scorch the people with fire.
And the people were scorched by the great heat, but they blasphemed the name of God, who has the authority over these plagues, and they did not repent and give glory to him.
The fifth one poured out his bowl on the throne of the wild beast. And its kingdom became darkened, and they began to gnaw their tongues because of their pain,
but they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their ulcers, and they did not repent of their works.
The sixth one poured out his bowl on the great river Eu·phraʹtes, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the rising of the sun.
And I saw three unclean inspired expressions that looked like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the wild beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
They are, in fact, expressions inspired by demons and they perform signs, and they go out to the kings of the entire inhabited earth, to gather them together to the war of the great day of God the Almighty.
“Look! I am coming as a thief. Happy is the one who stays awake and keeps his outer garments, so that he may not walk naked and people look upon his shamefulness.”
And they gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.
The seventh one poured out his bowl on the air. At this a loud voice came out of the sanctuary from the throne, saying: “It has come to pass!”
And there were flashes of lightning and voices and thunders, and there was a great earthquake unlike any that had occurred since men came to be on the earth, so extensive and so great was the earthquake.
The great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell; and Babylon the Great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath.
Also, every island fled, and mountains were not found.
Then great hailstones, each about the weight of a talent, fell from heaven on the people, and the people blasphemed God because of the plague of hail, for the plague was unusually great.
And I saw in the right hand of the One seated on the throne a scroll written on both sides, sealed tight with seven seals.
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice: “Who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?”
But no one in heaven or on earth or underneath the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it.
I gave way to a great deal of weeping because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it.
But one of the elders said to me: “Stop weeping. Look! The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has conquered so as to open the scroll and its seven seals.”
And I saw standing in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures and in the midst of the elders a lamb that seemed to have been slaughtered, having seven horns and seven eyes, and the eyes mean the seven spirits of God that have been sent out into the whole earth.
At once he came forward and took it out of the right hand of the One seated on the throne.
When he took the scroll, the four living creatures and the 24 elders fell down before the Lamb, and each one had a harp and golden bowls that were full of incense. (The incense means the prayers of the holy ones.)
And they sing a new song, saying: “You are worthy to take the scroll and open its seals, for you were slaughtered and with your blood you bought people for God out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation,
and you made them to be a kingdom and priests to our God, and they are to rule as kings over the earth.”
And I saw, and I heard a voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders, and the number of them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands,
and they were saying with a loud voice: “The Lamb who was slaughtered is worthy to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.”
And I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and underneath the earth and on the sea, and all the things in them, saying: “To the One sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing and the honor and the glory and the might forever and ever.”
The four living creatures were saying: “Amen!” and the elders fell down and worshipped.
Then I saw, and look! the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
I heard a sound coming out of heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was like singers who accompany themselves by playing on their harps.
And they are singing what seems to be a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and no one was able to master that song except the 144,000, who have been bought from the earth.
These are the ones who did not defile themselves with women; in fact, they are virgins. These are the ones who keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes. These were bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb,
and no deceit was found in their mouths; they are without blemish.
And I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.
He was saying in a loud voice: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of judgment by him has arrived, so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs of water.”
Another, a second angel, followed, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, she who made all the nations drink of the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality!”
Another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a loud voice: “If anyone worships the wild beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,
he will also drink of the wine of the anger of God that is poured out undiluted into the cup of His wrath, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the sight of the holy angels and in the sight of the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment ascends forever and ever, and day and night they have no rest, those who worship the wild beast and its image and whoever receives the mark of its name.
Here is where it calls for endurance on the part of the holy ones, those who keep the commandments of God and hold fast to the faith of Jesus.”
And I heard a voice out of heaven say, “Write: Happy are the dead who die in union with the Lord from this time onward. Yes, says the spirit, let them rest from their labors, for the things they did go right with them.”
Then I saw, and look! a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was someone like a son of man, with a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
Another angel emerged from the temple sanctuary, calling with a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud: “Put your sickle in and reap, because the hour has come to reap, for the harvest of the earth is fully ripe.”
And the one seated on the cloud thrust his sickle into the earth, and the earth was reaped.
And still another angel emerged from the temple sanctuary that is in heaven, and he also had a sharp sickle.
And still another angel emerged from the altar, and he had authority over the fire. And he called out with a loud voice to the one who had the sharp sickle, saying: “Put your sharp sickle in and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for its grapes have become ripe.”
The angel thrust his sickle into the earth and gathered the vine of the earth, and he hurled it into the great winepress of God’s anger.
The winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress as high up as the bridles of the horses for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, flowing out from the throne of God and of the Lamb
down the middle of its main street. On both sides of the river were trees of life producing 12 crops of fruit, yielding their fruit each month. And the leaves of the trees were for the healing of the nations.
And there will no longer be any curse. But the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city, and his slaves will offer him sacred service;
and they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
Also, night will be no more, and they have no need of lamplight or sunlight, for Jehovah God will shed light upon them, and they will rule as kings forever and ever.
He said to me: “These words are faithful and true; yes, Jehovah, the God who inspired the prophets, has sent his angel to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place.
Look! I am coming quickly. Happy is anyone observing the words of the prophecy of this scroll.”
Well I, John, was the one hearing and seeing these things. When I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who had been showing me these things.
But he tells me: “Be careful! Do not do that! I am only a fellow slave of you and of your brothers the prophets and of those observing the words of this scroll. Worship God.”
He also tells me: “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this scroll, for the appointed time is near.
Let the one who is unrighteous continue in unrighteousness, and let the filthy one continue in his filth; but let the righteous one continue in righteousness, and let the holy one continue in holiness.
“‘Look! I am coming quickly, and the reward I give is with me, to repay each one according to his work.
I am the Alʹpha and the O·meʹga, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
Happy are those who wash their robes, so that they may have authority to go to the trees of life and that they may gain entrance into the city through its gates.
Outside are the dogs and those who practice spiritism and those who are sexually immoral and the murderers and the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices lying.’
“‘I, Jesus, sent my angel to bear witness to you about these things for the congregations. I am the root and the offspring of David and the bright morning star.’”
And the spirit and the bride keep on saying, “Come!” and let anyone hearing say, “Come!” and let anyone thirsting come; let anyone who wishes take life’s water free.
“I am bearing witness to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this scroll: If anyone makes an addition to these things, God will add to him the plagues that are written in this scroll;
and if anyone takes anything away from the words of the scroll of this prophecy, God will take his portion away from the trees of life and out of the holy city, things that are written about in this scroll.
“The one who bears witness of these things says, ‘Yes, I am coming quickly.’” “Amen! Come, Lord Jesus.”
May the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus be with the holy ones.
And I saw in heaven another sign, great and wonderful, seven angels with seven plagues. These are the last ones, because by means of them the anger of God is brought to a finish.
And I saw something like a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those who are victorious over the wild beast and its image and the number of its name were standing by the sea of glass, holding harps of God.
They were singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity.
Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, for you alone are loyal? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been revealed.”
After this I saw, and the sanctuary of the tent of the witness was opened in heaven,
and the seven angels with the seven plagues emerged from the sanctuary, clothed with clean, bright linen and with golden sashes wrapped around their chests.
One of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls that were full of the anger of God, who lives forever and ever.
And the sanctuary became filled with smoke because of the glory of God and because of his power, and no one was able to enter the sanctuary until the seven plagues of the seven angels were finished.
After this I saw, and look! an opened door in heaven, and the first voice that I heard speaking with me was like a trumpet, saying: “Come up here, and I will show you the things that must take place.”
After this I immediately came to be in the power of the spirit, and look! a throne was in its position in heaven, and someone was seated on the throne.
And the One seated had the appearance of a jasper stone and a sardius stone, and all around the throne was a rainbow like an emerald in appearance.
All around the throne were 24 thrones, and on these thrones I saw seated 24 elders dressed in white garments, and on their heads golden crowns.
From the throne were coming lightning and voices and thunders; and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, and these mean the seven spirits of God.
Before the throne was something resembling a glassy sea, like crystal. In the midst of the throne and around the throne were four living creatures that were full of eyes in front and behind.
The first living creature was like a lion, and the second living creature was like a young bull, and the third living creature had a face like a man’s, and the fourth living creature was like a flying eagle.
As for the four living creatures, each one of them had six wings; they were full of eyes all around and underneath. And continuously, day and night, they say: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is coming.”
Whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanksgiving to the One seated on the throne, the One who lives forever and ever,
the 24 elders fall down before the One seated on the throne and worship the One who lives forever and ever, and they cast their crowns before the throne, saying:
“You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”
And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
He seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for 1,000 years.
And he hurled him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, so that he would not mislead the nations anymore until the 1,000 years were ended. After this he must be released for a little while.
And I saw thrones, and those who sat on them were given authority to judge. Yes, I saw the souls of those executed for the witness they gave about Jesus and for speaking about God, and those who had not worshipped the wild beast or its image and had not received the mark on their forehead and on their hand. And they came to life and ruled as kings with the Christ for 1,000 years.
(The rest of the dead did not come to life until the 1,000 years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.
Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection; over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him for the 1,000 years.
Now as soon as the 1,000 years have ended, Satan will be released from his prison,
and he will go out to mislead those nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Maʹgog, to gather them together for the war. The number of these is as the sand of the sea.
And they advanced over the whole earth and encircled the camp of the holy ones and the beloved city. But fire came down out of heaven and consumed them.
And the Devil who was misleading them was hurled into the lake of fire and sulfur, where both the wild beast and the false prophet already were; and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
And I saw a great white throne and the One seated on it. From before him the earth and the heaven fled away, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and scrolls were opened. But another scroll was opened; it is the scroll of life. The dead were judged out of those things written in the scrolls according to their deeds.
And the sea gave up the dead in it, and death and the Grave gave up the dead in them, and they were judged individually according to their deeds.
And death and the Grave were hurled into the lake of fire. This means the second death, the lake of fire.
Furthermore, whoever was not found written in the book of life was hurled into the lake of fire.
Then a great sign was seen in heaven: A woman was arrayed with the sun, and the moon was beneath her feet, and on her head was a crown of 12 stars,
and she was pregnant. And she was crying out in her pains and in her agony to give birth.
Another sign was seen in heaven. Look! A great fiery-colored dragon, with seven heads and ten horns and on its heads seven diadems;
and its tail drags a third of the stars of heaven, and it hurled them down to the earth. And the dragon kept standing before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she did give birth, it might devour her child.
And she gave birth to a son, a male, who is to shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was snatched away to God and to his throne.
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God and where they would feed her for 1,260 days.
And war broke out in heaven: Miʹcha·el and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled
but they did not prevail, nor was a place found for them any longer in heaven.
So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.
I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!
And they conquered him because of the blood of the Lamb and because of the word of their witnessing, and they did not love their souls even in the face of death.
On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.”
Now when the dragon saw that it had been hurled down to the earth, it persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child.
But the two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is to be fed for a time and times and half a time away from the face of the serpent.
And the serpent spewed out water like a river from its mouth after the woman, to cause her to be drowned by the river.
But the earth came to the woman’s help, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river that the dragon spewed out from its mouth.
So the dragon became enraged at the woman and went off to wage war with the remaining ones of her offspring, who observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness concerning Jesus.
After this I saw another angel descending from heaven with great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his glory.
And he cried out with a strong voice, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, and she has become a dwelling place of demons and a place where every unclean spirit and every unclean and hated bird lurks!
For because of the wine of the passion of her sexual immorality, all the nations have fallen victim, and the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth became rich owing to the power of her shameless luxury.”
And I heard another voice out of heaven say: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.
For her sins have massed together clear up to heaven, and God has called her acts of injustice to mind.
Repay her in the way she treated others, yes, pay her back double for the things she has done; in the cup she has mixed, mix a double portion for her.
To the extent that she glorified herself and lived in shameless luxury, to that extent give her torment and mourning. For she keeps saying in her heart: ‘I sit as queen, and I am not a widow, and I will never see mourning.’
That is why in one day her plagues will come, death and mourning and famine, and she will be completely burned with fire, because Jehovah God, who judged her, is strong.
“And the kings of the earth who committed sexual immorality with her and lived with her in shameless luxury will weep and beat themselves in grief over her when they see the smoke from her burning.
They will stand at a distance because of their fear of her torment and say: ‘Too bad, too bad, you great city, Babylon you strong city, because in one hour your judgment has arrived!’
“Also, the merchants of the earth are weeping and mourning over her, because there is no one to buy their full cargo anymore,
a full cargo of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple cloth, silk, and scarlet cloth; and everything made from scented wood; and every sort of object made from ivory, and from precious wood, copper, iron, and marble;
also cinnamon, Indian spice, incense, perfumed oil, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, cattle, sheep, horses, carriages, slaves, and human lives.
Yes, the fine fruit that you desired has left you, and all the delicacies and the splendid things have vanished from you, never to be found again.
“The merchants who sold these things, who became rich from her, will stand at a distance because of their fear of her torment and will weep and mourn,
saying: ‘Too bad, too bad, the great city, clothed with fine linen, purple, and scarlet and richly adorned with gold ornaments, precious stones, and pearls,
because in one hour such great riches have been devastated!’ “And every ship captain and every seafaring person and sailors and all those who make a living by the sea stood at a distance
and cried out as they looked at the smoke from her burning and said: ‘What city is like the great city?’
They threw dust on their heads and cried out, weeping and mourning, and said: ‘Too bad, too bad, the great city, in which all those who had ships at sea became rich from her wealth, because in one hour she has been devastated!’
“Be glad over her, O heaven, also you holy ones and apostles and prophets, because God has pronounced his judgment on her in your behalf!”
And a strong angel lifted up a stone like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying: “Thus with a swift pitch will Babylon the great city be hurled down, and she will never be found again.
And the sound of singers who accompany themselves on the harp, of musicians, of flutists, and of trumpeters will never be heard in you again. And no craftsman who practices any trade will ever be found in you again, and no sound of a millstone will ever be heard in you again.
No light of a lamp will ever shine in you again, and no voice of a bridegroom and of a bride will ever be heard in you again; for your merchants were the top-ranking men of the earth, and by your spiritistic practices all the nations were misled.
Yes, in her was found the blood of prophets and of holy ones and of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.”
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder: “Come!”
And I saw, and look! a white horse, and the one seated on it had a bow; and a crown was given him, and he went out conquering and to complete his conquest.
When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say: “Come!”
Another came out, a fiery-colored horse, and it was granted to the one seated on it to take peace away from the earth so that they should slaughter one another, and he was given a great sword.
When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say: “Come!” And I saw, and look! a black horse, and the one seated on it had a pair of scales in his hand.
I heard what sounded like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures say: “A quart of wheat for a de·narʹi·us and three quarts of barley for a de·narʹi·us; and do not harm the olive oil and the wine.”
When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say: “Come!”
And I saw, and look! a pale horse, and the one seated on it had the name Death. And the Grave was closely following him. And authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth.
When he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those slaughtered because of the word of God and because of the witness they had given.
They shouted with a loud voice, saying: “Until when, Sovereign Lord, holy and true, are you refraining from judging and avenging our blood on those who dwell on the earth?”
And a white robe was given to each of them, and they were told to rest a little while longer, until the number was filled of their fellow slaves and their brothers who were about to be killed as they had been.
And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred; and the sun became black as sackcloth made of hair, and the entire moon became as blood,
and the stars of heaven fell to the earth as when a fig tree shaken by a high wind drops its unripe figs.
And the heaven departed as a scroll that is being rolled up, and every mountain and every island was removed from its place.
Then the kings of the earth, the high officials, the military commanders, the rich, the strong, every slave, and every free person hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
And they keep saying to the mountains and to the rocks: “Fall over us and hide us from the face of the One seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
because the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”
When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
Another angel, holding a golden incense vessel, arrived and stood at the altar, and a large quantity of incense was given him to offer it with the prayers of all the holy ones on the golden altar that was before the throne.
The smoke of the incense from the hand of the angel ascended with the prayers of the holy ones before God.
But right away the angel took the incense vessel, and he filled it with some of the fire of the altar and hurled it to the earth. And there were thunders and voices and flashes of lightning and an earthquake.
And the seven angels with the seven trumpets prepared to blow them.
The first one blew his trumpet. And there was hail and fire mingled with blood, and it was hurled to the earth; and a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green vegetation was burned up.
The second angel blew his trumpet. And something like a great mountain burning with fire was hurled into the sea. And a third of the sea became blood;
and a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were wrecked.
The third angel blew his trumpet. And a great star burning like a lamp fell from heaven, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of waters.
The name of the star is Wormwood. And a third of the waters turned into wormwood, and many of the people died from the waters, because these had been made bitter.
The fourth angel blew his trumpet. And a third of the sun was struck and a third of the moon and a third of the stars, in order that a third of them might be darkened and the day might not have light for a third of it, and the night likewise.
And I saw, and I heard an eagle flying in midheaven say with a loud voice: “Woe, woe, woe to those dwelling on the earth because of the rest of the trumpet blasts of the three angels who are about to blow their trumpets!”
A humble person is generally also a modest person, able to estimate accurately his own abilities and achievements, to acknowledge his mistakes, and to accept suggestions and new ideas.
Humility greatly pleases Jehovah.
In the Bible, modesty similarly refers to having a proper estimate of ourselves and an awareness of our limitations.
In the original language of the text, the emphasis seems to be on how that awareness should affect our behavior toward others.
When might we start to think or act immodestly?
Consider a few of the warning signs.
We might be taking ourselves or our privileges too seriously.
We might be drawing attention to ourselves in inappropriate ways.
Or we might be advocating strong opinions solely on the basis of our position, connections, or personal thinking—not even being aware that we have crossed the line from modesty to presumptuousness.
When we deal with health problems or other challenges beyond our control, we should throw our anxiety on Jehovah, trusting that he cares for us.
Also, we should do what is within our power to benefit from Christian meetings and other spiritual provisions.
What about faithful parents whose children have gone astray?
Elderly Samuel could not force his adult sons to remain loyal to the righteous standards he taught them.
He had to leave the matter in Jehovah’s hands.
Even so, Samuel could maintain his own integrity and please his heavenly Father, Jehovah.
Today, a number of Christian parents find themselves in a similar situation.
They trust that Jehovah is ever on the lookout to welcome back sinners who repent.
At the same time, such parents work hard to remain loyal to Jehovah, hoping that their example will move their children to return to the fold.
Good communication, sharing your feelings with a trusted confidant, can help you cope with anxiety.
A marriage mate, a close friend, or a congregation elder may be able to help you to put your anxiety into perspective.
Frank and honest communication can do much to help you to understand and deal with your concerns.
The Bible tells us: Plans fail when there is no consultation, but there is accomplishment through many advisers.
Jehovah also helps Christians to deal with anxieties by means of weekly congregation meetings.
There you can associate with fellow believers who are concerned about you and who want to encourage one another.
Such an interchange of encouragement will help to replenish your spiritual resources and make it easier for you to deal with any anxiety.
You may wonder why Paul would stress to anointed Christians the danger of living according to the flesh.
And could a similar danger today threaten Christians, whom God has accepted as his friends and views as righteous?
Sadly, any Christian could begin to walk according to the sinful flesh.
For example, Paul wrote that some among the brothers in Rome were slaves of their own appetites, which could have been sexual appetite or appetite for food, drink, or other things.
Some of them were seducing unsuspecting ones.
Recall, too, that for a time, a brother in Corinth was living with his father’s wife.
It is understandable, then, why God used Paul to warn Christians about setting the mind on the flesh.
That warning is equally valid now.
What a privilege it is to be part of Jehovah’s organization! With our knowledge of God’s requirements and standards comes the responsibility to do what is right and uphold his sovereignty.
As this world sinks deeper and deeper into debauchery, we must hate what is bad, as Jehovah does.
We refuse to join the ungodly and say: Good is bad and bad is good.
Because we want to please God, we strive to remain clean physically, morally, and spiritually.
We love Jehovah and put our trust in him; we choose to show our loyalty to him by living up to the standards clearly outlined in his own precious Book.
And we make every effort to comply with those standards at home, in the congregation, on the job, at school—everywhere.
One of the limitations on our freedom is that we must respect the right that others have to make their own decisions in life.
Why?
Since we all have the gift of free will, no two Christians will always make exactly the same decision.
This is true even in matters that involve our conduct and worship.
When we recognize that each Christian must carry his own load, we will respect the right that others have to use their own gift of free will, including when making personal decisions in matters of lesser importance.
Jehovah has given us the gift of free will and with it true freedom.
We treasure this gift because it allows us to make decisions that reveal to Jehovah how much we love him.
May we continue to show our appreciation for this precious gift by using it in a way that honors God and by respecting the way that others choose to use their gift.
In this permissive world, sin has all but lost its stigma, so that many are unaware of the need for redemption.
They do not understand what sin is, how it affects us, and what we need to do to be delivered from slavery to sin.
Honesthearted ones are relieved to learn that Jehovah, out of his great love and undeserved kindness, sent his Son to earth to ransom us from sin and its consequence, death.
The ransom sacrifice of Christ is the greatest proof of God’s love for us and illustrates the richness of His undeserved kindness.
What a relief it is to learn that if we exercise faith in the shed blood of Jesus, our sins will be forgiven and our conscience will be cleansed! Good news indeed to share with others!
When Abishai crept into Saul’s camp, he did not have his loyalties in the proper order.
Out of loyalty to David, Abishai was eager to kill King Saul, but David restrained him, realizing that it would be wrong to lift one’s hand against the anointed of Jehovah.
From that incident, we learn an important lesson: Although we can properly have several loyalties in our heart, the correct order of their importance should be determined by our application of Bible principles.
Loyalty springs from the heart, but the human heart is treacherous.
Thus, one who is loyal to God could easily feel strong ties of loyalty to a close friend or relative even if that person is practicing what is bad.
Especially when someone close to us abandons the truth must we remember that Jehovah always merits our primary loyalty.
Why did Christians in Rome need to prove to themselves something that they had already accepted?
Consider a Bible example.
Timothy knew the Scriptures well.
He had been taught from infancy by his mother and grandmother.
Nevertheless, Paul urged Timothy: Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.
According to one reference work, the original-language word for persuaded has the sense to be convinced and certain of the truth of something.
Timothy had made the truth his own.
He accepted it, not because his mother and grandmother told him to do so, but because he had reasoned on it for himself and had been persuaded.
Likewise, diligent personal study can help you answer questions, resolve any doubts, and strengthen your convictions.
We win people’s hearts, not by boasting or drawing undue attention to ourselves, but by displaying a quiet and mild spirit.
Vain sentiments in our hearts will eventually show up in our actions.
We might drop hints, for example, implying that we enjoy special privileges, possess inside information, or have special relationships with responsible brothers.
Or we might explain things in such a way that only we get the credit for ideas or accomplishments that others also contributed to.
Jesus set a wonderful example.
A good portion of what he said was either a quotation from or an allusion to the Hebrew Scriptures.
He modestly spoke that way so that his hearers would know that what he said was coming from Jehovah and was not the product of his own intellect or wisdom.
You cannot read hearts as Jesus could, but with God’s help you can exercise insight.
Will you use that ability to look for the good in your teenager?
No one wants to be labeled a troublemaker.
In thought or word, never label your son or daughter a rebellious teenager or a problem child.
Even if your teen is struggling, let him know that you see his potential and heartfelt desire to do what is right.
Note any signs of growth and progress, and commend him.
Help him to develop his good qualities by giving him increased responsibility when possible.
Jesus did that with his disciples.
About a year and a half after meeting Nathanael, Jesus selected him as an apostle, and Nathanael proved to be a zealous Christian.
Your commendation and encouragement will help your child to feel that he is, not someone who always fails to measure up, but a capable Christian whom Jehovah can use.
When the last days began in 1914, there were only a few thousand servants of Jehovah worldwide.
Motivated by love for neighbor, and with the backing of God’s spirit, a small remnant of anointed Christians persevered in the Kingdom-preaching work.
As a result, today a great crowd with an earthly hope is being gathered.
Our ranks have grown to about 8,000,000 Witnesses associated with more than 115,400 congregations throughout the earth, and we continue to grow in number.
For example, over 275,500 new Witnesses were baptized during the 2014 service year—an average of some 5,300 each week.
The remarkable growth that we see today is the result of our faith in God and full acceptance of the Bible—Jehovah’s miraculously inspired Word.
Especially outstanding is the spiritual prosperity of Jehovah’s people—despite the hatred and opposition of Satan, the god of this system of things.
Thousands of fragments, manuscripts, and ancient translations have been compared and painstakingly studied by Bible scholars.
This study validated the contents of the vast majority of Bible passages.
The few verses about which there is a degree of uncertainty do not change the overall message.
A study of ancient manuscripts convinces sincere Bible students that they have what Jehovah originally inspired Bible writers to record.
Despite fierce opposition from enemies, Jehovah has seen to it that his Word is the most widely translated book in the history of mankind.
Even at a time when many have little or no faith in God, the Bible remains a best seller and is now available, in whole or in part, in over 2,800 languages.
Though some Bible translations are not as clear or as reliable as others, it is still possible to learn the Bible’s basic message of hope and salvation from nearly all translations.
Words have the power to hurt as well as to heal.
Using words to inflict pain is common in Satan’s world.
The field of entertainment incites many to sharpen their tongue just like a sword and to aim their cruel words like arrows.
A Christian needs to avoid this harmful practice.
One example of cruel words is sarcasm, stinging remarks intended to belittle or rebuke others.
Sarcasm is often meant to be humorous, but it can quickly deteriorate into disrespectful, insulting speech.
Cruel sarcasm is one form of abusive speech that Christians should put away.
Humor can add spice to our speech, but we need to avoid the trap of trying to evoke a laugh by resorting to cutting, sarcastic quips that hurt or humiliate others.
The Bible admonishes us: Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth, but only what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.
These final words of the letter that the first-century governing body sent to the congregations can also be rendered be strong.
We definitely want to prosper in good health and be strong as we serve our great God.
As long as the present system of things remains and we are imperfect, sickness is a fact that we must face.
We cannot expect now to be cured miraculously.
However, points to the time when we will be healed completely.
The apostle John saw in vision a river of water of life and trees of life with leaves for the healing of the nations.
This does not refer to any herbal remedy now or in the future.
Rather, it points to Jehovah’s provision through Jesus for giving everlasting life to obedient mankind—truly something we can look forward to.
Speaking of the time in which we are living, Jehovah foretold: In those days ten men out of all the languages of the nations will take hold, yes, they will take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.
Like the figurative ten men, those who have an earthly hope have taken firm hold of the robe of a Jew.
They are proud to associate with the spirit-anointed Israel of God, knowing that Jehovah is blessing his anointed ones.
As did the prophet Zechariah, Jesus highlighted the refreshing unity that is experienced by God’s people.
He spoke of his followers as two groups, a little flock and other sheep, but he said that they would be one flock with one shepherd.
We need to safeguard our spirituality.
Because we live in a world that is dominated by Satan the Devil and because we are imperfect, it is easy for us to adopt the wrong thinking and conduct of the world.
The world’s spirit might be compared to a river current that is pulling us in a direction we do not want to go.
To avoid being swept downstream, we must vigorously swim in the other direction.
Similarly, effort is required to keep from being swept away by the spirit of Satan’s world.
When we are preaching to others, we focus on important and beneficial spiritual matters, not on thoughts that will erode our faith.
Preaching strengthens our convictions, reminding us of God’s promises and loving standards.
It also helps keep our spiritual armor intact.
If we keep busy in our spiritual activities, we simply do not have time to become overly concerned with our own problems, and that helps to protect us.
Note Ruth’s love for Jehovah.
The landowner Boaz later praised Ruth for seeking refuge under Jehovah’s wings.
That may remind us of a baby bird taking refuge under the wings of a powerful, protective parent.
Jehovah became such a parent to Ruth.
He rewarded her for her faith, and she never had any reason to regret her decision.
Today, many learn about Jehovah but hesitate to take refuge in him.
They hold back from becoming his dedicated, baptized servants.
If you hesitate to make a dedication to Jehovah, have you stopped to ask yourself why?
Everyone alive serves some god or other.
Why not take refuge in the only God worth serving?
Making a dedication to Jehovah is an excellent way to demonstrate faith in him.
He will help you live up to that decision and face whatever challenges may arise.
That is what God did for Ruth.
Thirsting for Bible truth, Charles Taze Russell and a few associates began their systematic study of the Bible in the late 1800’s.
Initially, Brother Russell’s goal was to ascertain which of the prevailing religions was teaching the truth.
He had carefully compared the teachings of many different religions, even non-Christian religions, with what the Bible says.
He soon realized that not one of those religions completely adhered to God’s Word.
At one point, he met with a number of local clergymen in hopes that these men would accept the truths that Russell and his associates had discovered from the Bible and teach them to members of their congregations.
The clergymen were not interested.
The Bible Students would have to face the facts: There could be no partnership with those determined to hold on to false religion.
Our appreciation for God’s undeserved kindness involves more than avoiding adultery, drunkenness, or other sins that some in Corinth had been guilty of.
Accepting God’s undeserved kindness means not only avoiding sexual immorality but also fighting any tendency to enjoy lewd entertainment.
Presenting our members as slaves to righteousness will not only keep us from drunkenness but also move us to shun drinking to the point of almost being drunk.
It may require considerable effort for us to fight against such wrong practices; still, it is a fight that we can win.
Our goal should be to avoid gross sins as well as wrongs that are not as flagrant.
We will not be able to do that perfectly.
Nevertheless, we should strive to do so, even as Paul did.
He urged his brothers: Do not let sin continue to rule as king in your mortal bodies so that you should obey their desires.
As evidence of their humility, elders refuse to let themselves be treated as celebrities.
In this they differ from many modern-day religious leaders and from those of the first century about whom Jesus said: They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces.
Genuine Christian shepherds humbly obey Jesus words: Do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.
Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One.
Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ.
But the greatest one among you must be your minister.
You can thus understand why elders in congregations around the globe earn their fellow Witnesses love, respect, and honor.
Jesus knew that his earthly ministry would come to an end and that others would carry on his work.
Though his disciples were imperfect, he had confidence in them and told them that they would do works greater than he did.
He trained them thoroughly, and they spread the good news throughout the then-known world.
After his sacrificial death, Jesus was resurrected to heaven where he was given more work to do with authority far above every government and authority and power and lordship.
If we die faithful before Armageddon, we will be resurrected into a righteous new world, where there will be plenty of satisfying work for us to do.
Now, though, there is vitally important work that all of us can participate in—preaching the good news and making disciples.
May all of us, young or old, keep on having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
Is having free will with limits real freedom?
Yes, it is! Why can we say that?
Limitations put on people’s freedom can protect them.
For example, we may exercise our freedom of choice to drive to a distant city.
However, would we feel safe traveling on highways where there were no traffic laws, where everyone was free to decide how fast or on which side of the road to drive?
Obviously not.
Limits are necessary in order for all to enjoy the blessings of true freedom.
To illustrate further the wisdom of using our free will within the boundaries set by Jehovah, consider the case of Adam.
He chose to overstep his God-ordained boundaries by eating the forbidden fruit.
This gross misuse of free will resulted in millenniums of suffering and pain for Adam’s descendants.
Knowing the consequences of Adam’s decision should move us to use our freedom responsibly and within the limits set by Jehovah.
When we face a new assignment, a prayerful and realistic analysis will help us to avoid overreaching our current abilities and limitations.
Modesty may lead us to say no.
However, when we do accept a new assignment, Gideon’s example reminds us that we cannot succeed without Jehovah’s direction and blessing.
After all, we have been invited to walk in modesty with our God.
So any time we take on new responsibilities, we need to reflect prayerfully on whatever Jehovah tells us through his Word and his organization.
We have to learn to adjust our unsteady steps to match Jehovah’s steady lead.
Let us remember that it is Jehovah’s humility and not our own ability that makes us great.
Choosing to walk modestly with God will therefore help us to think neither too much nor too little of ourselves.
One aspect of having inner peace is that we strive to be at peace with those in our family and those in the congregation.
We have the good sense to realize that both we and our brothers and sisters are imperfect.
Because of this, problems may occasionally arise, and if that happens, we have been taught to follow Jesus advice: Make your peace with your brother.
This is made easier when we recall that the other brother or sister is also serving the God who gives peace.
And there is another peace that is of incalculable value.
By our setting the mind on the spirit, we enjoy peace with our Maker.
Isaiah recorded words that applied in his day but have an even greater fulfillment now: You Jehovah will safeguard those who fully lean on you; you will give them continuous peace, because it is in you that they trust.
Even in these dark last days of Satan’s wicked system of things, Jehovah is blessing his people.
He makes sure that true worshippers flourish in their spiritual estate, which is unprecedented in its spiritual abundance.
As Jesus promised, Jehovah rewards us now by letting us be part of a loving family of spiritual brothers and sisters, a family that is international in scope.
Furthermore, those who earnestly seek God are rewarded with the incomparable blessings of peace of mind, contentment, and happiness.
You can be certain that after you have done the will of God, you will receive the fulfillment of the promise.
So let us now continue to strengthen our faith and to work whole-souled as to Jehovah.
We can do this, knowing that it is from Jehovah that we will receive the due reward.
Many people form impressions and opinions of us by what appears to the eyes.
As God’s ministers, therefore, we understand that our getting dressed is not just a matter of putting on something comfortable that we like.
The principles that we glean from God’s Word should move us to avoid wearing clothing that is tight-fitting, revealing, or sexually provocative.
That would rule out wearing clothing that exposes or accentuates private parts of our anatomy.
Nobody should feel uncomfortable or forced to look the other way when seeing how we are dressed.
When we are neat, clean, modestly dressed, and well-groomed, people are more likely to respect us and to be attracted to the God we worship.
Furthermore, our appropriate attire will reflect well on the organization we represent.
As a result, others may be more likely to pay attention to our lifesaving message.
Do not be quick to assume you know what others believe.
Some people say that they believe in evolution, but they also feel that God exists.
They think that God used evolution to create different forms of life.
Others say that they believe in evolution because they feel that it would not be taught at school were it not a fact.
And some stop believing in God because they are disappointed with religion.
So when you discuss the origin of life with someone, it is usually wise to ask questions first.
Find out what that person believes.
If you are reasonable and willing to listen, he may be inclined to listen to you.
If someone seems to be attacking your belief in creation, you might ask him to explain how life could have begun without a Creator.
For the first life-form to continue, it had to be able to reproduce, to make copies of itself.
One professor of chemistry said: One is struck by the complexity of even the simplest form of life.
Though we cannot be sure whom Paul had in mind, some, like Naboth and Zechariah, were stoned to death for obeying God and doing his will.
Daniel and his companions clearly had the opportunity to accept release by compromising their integrity.
Instead, their faith in God’s power enabled them, so to speak, to stop the mouths of lions and quench the force of fire.
Because of their faith, such prophets as Micaiah and Jeremiah received their trial by mockings and prisons.
Others, like Elijah, wandered about in deserts and mountains and caves and dens of the earth.
All of them endured because they had an assured expectation of what is hoped for.
We can show kindness to newcomers from a foreign background by warmly greeting them at the Kingdom Hall.
We may have noticed that new immigrants are sometimes shy and stay by themselves.
Because of their upbringing or social status, they may feel inferior to those of another race or nationality.
So we should take the initiative to show a warm and sincere interest in them.
If available in your language, the JW Language app can help you learn how to greet newcomers in their mother tongue.
You may feel awkward about approaching those from another culture.
To overcome such feelings, you might tell them something about yourself.
You may soon realize that you have more things in common than you have differences—real or imagined—and that each culture has its own strengths and weaknesses.
Paul was very much aware that he had neither earned nor deserved God’s great mercy, having been a former persecutor of Christians.
Toward the end of his life, Paul wrote to his fellow worker Timothy: I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry.
What was that ministry?
Paul told the elders of the congregation in Ephesus what it included, stating: I do not consider my own life of any importance to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.
In his zeal to perform his ministry, Paul set an excellent example for modern-day Christians and demonstrated that God’s undeserved kindness had not been shown to him in vain.
Jehovah always supports his faithful servants, even though he may allow them to wait for privileges or a favorable change of circumstances.
He promised Abraham a son, but the patriarch had to exercise faith and patience.
Although he waited years for Isaac’s birth, Abraham did not lose heart, and Jehovah did not disappoint him.
Waiting is not easy.
If we were to brood over disappointments, we could become very discouraged.
Instead, it is wise to use our time to improve our spiritual qualifications.
By reading God’s Word and meditating on it, we can develop wisdom, insight, good judgment, knowledge, thinking ability, and soundness of mind.
Daily, we face issues involving entertainment, dress and grooming, managing money, and getting along with others.
By applying what we learn from the Bible, we can make decisions that please Jehovah.
God does not determine his course of action based on a momentary flare-up of anger, the type of emotional outburst that many humans display.
Yet, after observing the Ninevites repentant, changed attitude, Jehovah adjusted his decision.
In doing so, he manifested reasonableness, humility, and compassion.
Similarly, there may be occasions when it would be good for us to reconsider a choice or decision.
It could be when the prevailing circumstances change.
Jehovah altered his decision at times when circumstances changed.
Or new information may provide us with a valid reason to adjust a decision.
King David was given faulty information about Saul’s grandson Mephibosheth.
When David later received accurate information, he amended his decision.
Humans were created in God’s image.
Thus, most of them exhibit some godly qualities, though to differing degrees.
Humans are capable of showing one another love, kindness, and compassion.
Having been created with a conscience, people normally have an inborn sense—albeit at times inaccurate or distorted—that alerts them to what is right or wrong, honest or dishonest, appropriate or inappropriate.
Most people are drawn to things that are clean and beautiful.
Generally, they want to live with others in peace.
Whether they realize it or not, they reflect to some extent Jehovah’s glory, and for this reason, they deserve a measure of honor and respect.
However, balance is needed in determining what kind of honor should be rendered to other humans and to what extent.
What effect did God’s Word have on the men who took the lead?
Consider the example of King Josiah.
After a document containing the Mosaic Law was found, Josiah’s secretary began to read it to him.
Guided by God’s Word, Josiah began a vigorous campaign against idolatry and arranged an unprecedented celebration of the Passover.
Because Josiah and other faithful leaders were guided by God’s Word, they were willing to adjust and clarify the direction they gave to God’s people.
Those changes brought God’s ancient people into harmony with his will.
However, not all the kings who ruled God’s ancient people followed God’s instructions.
In some cases, Jehovah disciplined or replaced those leaders.
In his own due time, he appointed someone who would be superior to any of the men he had used thus far.
Nehemiah’s example demonstrates how modesty can help us to keep from becoming self-reliant when we receive a change of assignment or additional responsibility.
Relying just on his own experience, an elder could begin to care for congregation matters without first approaching Jehovah in prayer.
Others might make a decision first and then pray for Jehovah to bless their decision.
Is that being modest, however?
A modest person will always remember his place before God and his role in God’s arrangement.
Our abilities are not the important thing.
Especially when we are faced with a familiar situation or problem, we have to be careful not to rely on ourselves.
As members of God’s household, we learn to think in terms of fulfilling roles in a family or as part of a congregation rather than achieving a rank or climbing a corporate ladder.
Today, many people misuse their freedom to make choices in life even to the harm of others.
Indeed, just as the Bible foretold, during the last days men would be unthankful.
May we never misuse this precious gift from Jehovah or take it for granted.
How, though, can we avoid misusing our gift of free will?
All of us have freedom of choice regarding associations, styles of dress and grooming, and entertainment.
However, our freedom could become a cover for doing wrong if we chose to become slaves of our own fleshly desires or if we adopted the disgraceful fads and trends of the world.
Instead of using our freedom as an opportunity to pursue fleshly desires, we want to be determined to make choices that help us to heed the admonition: Do all things for God’s glory.
Noah lived in a world that was filled with violence and immorality.
Although Noah faithfully preached Jehovah’s warning message, he could not force wicked people around him to accept that message, nor could he make the Flood come any sooner.
Noah had to trust that Jehovah would keep His promise to end wickedness, believing that God would do so at just the right time.
We too live in a world filled with wickedness, which we know Jehovah has promised to destroy.
In the meantime, we cannot force people to accept the good news of the Kingdom.
And we cannot do anything to speed up the start of the great tribulation.
Like Noah, we need strong faith, trusting that God will soon intervene.
We are convinced that Jehovah will not allow this wicked world to continue for even one day longer than his purpose requires.
In God’s Word, we find Jesus soothing sayings.
His words and teachings were a source of refreshment to his listeners.
Multitudes were drawn to him because he calmed troubled hearts, strengthened the weak, and consoled the depressed.
He showed loving consideration for others spiritual, emotional, and physical needs.
Jesus promise of support still applies.
It can prove to be as true for you as it was for the apostles traveling with Jesus.
You do not have to be in Jesus physical presence to benefit.
As heavenly King, Jesus continues to have and show empathy.
Thus, when you are anxious, he can mercifully come to your aid and help you at the right time.
Yes, Jesus can help you to cope with distress, and he can fill your heart with hope and courage.
As a preacher of righteousness, Noah faithfully proclaimed the warning message he had been given.
No doubt, doing so helped Noah keep his faith strong.
In addition to preaching, he also used his physical and mental abilities to accomplish the God-assigned work of building an ark.
Like Noah, we strive to have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
Such work may include the construction and maintenance of facilities for worship, volunteering to assist at assemblies and conventions, or caring for assignments at a branch office or a remote translation office.
Above all, we stay busy in the preaching work, knowing that this work strengthens our hope for the future.
Indeed, sharing in the preaching work fortifies our resolve not to give up in the race for life.
Like his father, Asa, Jehoshaphat maintained his devotion to God even when threatened by an overwhelming enemy force.
Jehoshaphat did become afraid! Yet, he resolved to search for Jehovah.
In prayer, he humbly admitted that his people were powerless before this large crowd and that he and his people did not know what to do.
He fully relied on Jehovah, saying the words of today’s text.
Sometimes we, like Jehoshaphat, may not know what to do, even being afraid.
But remember that Jehoshaphat acknowledged in a public prayer how weak he and his people felt.
Those who take the spiritual lead in the family can imitate Jehoshaphat by turning to Jehovah for guidance and strength to cope with the problem they face.
Do not feel ashamed to let your family hear such supplications.
They will sense your trust in Jehovah.
God helped Jehoshaphat, and he will also help you.
If we met all of Jehovah’s requirements perfectly, his kindness toward us would be deserved.
As it is, we fail to do so.
Thus, wise King Solomon wrote: There is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins.
The apostle Paul likewise stated: All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and the wages sin pays is death.
That is what we deserve.
Jehovah, however, expressed his love toward fallen mankind in an incomparable act of undeserved kindness.
He sent his greatest gift of all, his only-begotten Son, to earth to die in our behalf.
So Paul wrote concerning Jesus that he is now crowned with glory and honor for having suffered death, so that by God’s undeserved kindness he might taste death for everyone.
Yes, the gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.
From the beginning of his ministry, Jesus allowed the Scriptures to direct him.
Even his final words before he died included quotations of Messianic prophecies.
In contrast, the religious leaders of that time disregarded God’s Word whenever it contradicted their own traditions.
Quoting Jehovah’s words through the prophet Isaiah, Jesus said about them: This people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.
Jesus allowed God’s Word to guide not only his actions but also his teaching.
When confronted with religious controversies, he appealed neither to his vast wisdom nor to his unparalleled experience.
Instead, he held up the Scriptures as the final authority.
In the decades leading up to World War I, Charles Taze Russell and his associates realized that the organizations of Christendom were not teaching Bible truth.
Accordingly, they resolved to have nothing to do with false religion as they understood it.
As early as November of 1879, Zion’s Watch Tower straightforwardly set out their Scriptural position by stating: Every church claiming to be a chaste virgin espoused to Christ, but in reality united to and supported by the world beast we must condemn as being in scripture language a harlot church, a reference to Babylon the Great.
God-fearing men and women knew what they must do.
They could not expect to receive God’s blessing if they continued to support false religious organizations.
Consequently, many Bible Students prepared letters of withdrawal from their churches.
Jehovah leads and feeds those in the earthly part of his organization by means of the faithful and discreet slave under the direction of Christ, the head of the congregation.
Like the first-century governing body, this slave accepts God’s inspired word, or message, and highly esteems it.
The Bible directs us to attend meetings regularly.
It urges us to promote unity of doctrine.
God’s Word tells us to give the Kingdom first place in our lives.
The Scriptures also emphasize our duty and privilege to preach from house to house, in public places, and informally.
God’s own Book directs Christian elders to keep his organization clean.
And Jehovah decrees that all those in his organization must be clean physically and spiritually.
What did Jesus mean when he said: Never be anxious?
Obviously, he could not have meant that a servant of God would not at some point in life experience anxiety.
Instead, Jesus was helping his disciples to realize that undue, or extreme, anxiety does not solve problems.
Each day has its own challenges, so Christians do not need to add anxious thoughts about the past or the future to the concerns of the present.
Unwarranted anxiety often results if a Christian agonizes over possible future problems.
However, you need not be consumed by anxiety, or worry, over events that you do not know anything about.
Why not?
Because things often do not turn out to be as bad as we feared they might be.
Moreover, there is no situation beyond the control of the God on whom you can throw all your anxiety.
You can be certain that God can reward his faithful ones and help them deal with anxiety about the past, the present, and the future.
Adam and Eve had to decide what to do.
Would they obey Jehovah, or would they listen to the serpent?
They decided to disobey God.
By rebelling against Jehovah, Adam and Eve lost their perfection.
Moreover, their rebellion resulted in alienation from Jehovah because his eyes are too pure to look on what is evil.
Therefore, he cannot tolerate wickedness.
If he had tolerated it, the well-being of all living creatures—in heaven and on earth—would be threatened.
Above all, had God done nothing about the sin committed in Eden, his own trustworthiness would have been called into question.
But Jehovah is faithful to his own standards; he never violates them.
Thus, having free will did not entitle Adam and Eve to disregard God’s law.
As a consequence of rebelling against Jehovah, they died and returned to the dust from which they had been created.
Modesty can help us to make good decisions even when we cannot fully know or control how things will turn out.
As an example, if we enter some feature of the full-time service, what will happen to us if we get sick?
What if our aging parents need our help?
How will we look after ourselves in our old age?
No amount of prayer or research will reveal a complete answer to questions like these.
Our confidence in Jehovah will help us not only to acknowledge but also to accept our limitations.
After doing research, consulting others, and praying for guidance, we need to take steps in the direction that God’s spirit is leading us.
That gives Jehovah something to bless, or he can gently redirect our goals.
Showing honor to those to whom it is due keeps us from becoming self-centered.
It helps us to avoid having an inflated opinion of ourselves if some honor comes our way.
It also keeps us in line with Jehovah’s organization, which refrains from giving humans—whether believers or unbelievers—excessive or undue honor.
Moreover, it is the course of wisdom, helping us to avoid being stumbled if some human to whom we showed honor disappoints us.
The most important benefit of giving proper honor to those to whom it is due is that we thereby please God.
We act as he wants us to and thus maintain integrity to him.
That contributes to making a reply to any who would try to taunt him.
The world is full of people whose sense of how to bestow honor is distorted.
We are truly grateful to know how to give honor Jehovah’s way.
Like his father, Asa, Jehoshaphat encouraged the people to search for Jehovah.
He did so by organizing a teaching campaign that used the book of Jehovah’s Law.
He even went to the territory of the northern kingdom of Israel, to the mountainous region of Ephraim, to bring them back to Jehovah.
We can all have a share in the great teaching campaign that Jehovah is having done today.
Is it your goal each month to teach the Word of God to others, trying to move their heart to serve God?
By your extending yourself and with God’s blessing, you may be able to start a Bible study.
Is that a goal that you pray about?
Are you willing to accept this challenge, even giving up some of what is commonly viewed as free time?
And just as Jehoshaphat went to the territory of Ephraim to help people return to true worship, we can reach out to those who have become inactive.
There is no doubt that God has the power to affect someone’s health.
The Bible confirms that.
At times, he punished individuals with sickness, such as the Pharaoh in Abraham’s day and later Moses sister, Miriam.
God warned that if the Israelites proved unfaithful, he would afflict them with every sickness or plague.
On the other hand, Jehovah could remove diseases or prevent sickness.
Also, he could heal people.
After Job had been so sick that he longed to die, God healed him! Yes, God definitely has the power to intervene and heal a sick person.
It is similar with his Son.
We read that Jesus miraculously cured lepers, epileptics, and blind or paralyzed ones.
How strengthening it is to think that the healings Jesus performed are a foregleam of what he will do on a grand scale in the new world.
Paul’s logic is very reasonable and effective! Yes, complex designs are the product of an intelligent mind.
You can use the same basic reasoning when you talk with someone who has doubts about the Bible.
Find out what he actually believes and what topics may interest him.
If he is interested in scientific things, he might respond when you mention points that show the Bible’s scientific accuracy.
Other people might be moved by examples showing that the Bible contains accurate prophecies and accurate history.
Or you might point out the Bible’s guiding principles, such as those found in the Sermon on the Mount.
Remember, your goal should be to win hearts, not arguments.
So be a good listener.
Ask sincere questions, and express yourself with mildness and respect, especially when you talk with older ones.
They will likely be more inclined to respect your views.
We owe it to our holy God, to our spiritual brothers and sisters, as well as to the people in our territory to wear clothing that dignifies the message we bear and that brings glory to Jehovah.
This is especially so when we are engaging in Christian activities, such as when we attend meetings or when we share in the preaching work.
We should dress in the way that is proper for people professing devotion to God.
Of course, some clothing that is appropriate in one place may not be appropriate in another.
Hence, Jehovah’s people throughout the world take local customs into account so as not to cause offense.
When we attend assemblies and conventions, our dress needs to be appropriate and modest rather than reflect the extreme styles that may be common in the world.
Thus we will be proud to identify ourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Yes, and we will feel free to give a witness as we have an opportunity.
After describing various men and women of faith, Paul highlighted the most outstanding example of all—our Lord Jesus Christ.
For the joy that was set before him, states , he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Indeed, we should consider closely Jesus example of faith in the face of the severest of trials.
Like Jesus, early Christian martyrs, such as the disciple Antipas, refused to compromise their integrity.
They would have the reward of a resurrection to heavenly life—surpassing the better resurrection that ancient men of faith looked forward to.
Sometime after the Kingdom’s birth in 1914, all such faithful anointed ones, who were sleeping in death, were raised to spirit life in heaven to share with Jesus in his rulership over mankind.
Shortly before his death, Jesus three times warned his disciples about the ruler of this world.
Jesus knew that the Devil would keep people in darkness mentally in order to undermine the sense of urgency that permeates God’s prophecies about the future.
Satan blinds people’s minds through the world empire of false religion.
What have you detected in your conversations with others?
Has the Devil not already blinded the minds of the unbelievers about the coming end of this system of things and the fact that Christ is now ruling God’s Kingdom?
For the most part, people are apathetic when we try to tell them where this world is headed.
Do not let the apathy of others discourage or dissuade you from keeping on the watch.
You know better.
Jehovah gives us a worldwide brotherhood of caring worshippers who can offer us encouragement.
Many in the first century received that sort of spiritual strengthening.
It is similar today.
What can we do?
Think of how Aaron and Hur literally supported Moses hands during a battle.
We can look for ways to support and to give practical aid to others.
To whom?
To those battling the effects of old age, health limitations, opposition from their family, loneliness, or the loss of a loved one.
We can also strengthen young ones who are facing pressure to share in wrongdoing or to seek success in this system of things, whether academically, financially, or professionally.
Look for ways to show genuine interest in others at the Kingdom Hall, in the ministry, while enjoying a meal together, or as you converse on the telephone.
Timothy was already an experienced Kingdom proclaimer.
Yet, his ministry would be effective only if he would pay constant attention to his teaching.
He could not take for granted that people would respond to his usual approach.
To continue reaching their hearts, he had to adapt his teaching methods to their needs.
As Kingdom proclaimers, we need to do the same.
We often find that people are not at home when we preach from door to door.
In some areas, we cannot enter certain apartment buildings and gated communities.
If that is true in your territory, why not consider different ways to preach the good news?
Public witnessing is one excellent method of spreading the good news.
Many Witnesses are having a very effective and rewarding share in such work.
They set aside time to approach people at train and bus stations, in marketplaces and parks, and in other public areas.
Some parents do not commend their children because their own parents never gave them any encouragement.
Many employees are not being commended, so they complain that there is a chronic shortage of encouragement in the workplace.
Encouragement often involves commending a person for something he or she did well.
We can also be encouraging by reassuring others that they have good qualities or by speaking consolingly to those who are discouraged.
The Greek word usually translated encouragement literally means a calling to one’s side.
As we serve alongside our brothers and sisters, we likely have opportunities to say something encouraging.
Do we use suitable occasions to let others know why we love and appreciate them?
Before answering that question, we would do well to think about this proverb: A word spoken at the right time—how good it is!—.
Jehovah and Jesus greatly value what all of us do to support Kingdom interests, even if our efforts and contributions are limited because of our circumstances.
For instance, some of our dear elderly ones make great effort to attend and share in meetings and the ministry regularly.
Should we not commend and encourage them?
Yes, seize opportunities to encourage others.
If we see something that merits commendation, why hold back?
Consider what happened when Paul and Barnabas were at Antioch in Pisidia.
The presiding officers of the synagogue there told them: Men, brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, tell it.
Paul responded by giving a fine talk.
If we can offer a word of encouragement, why not speak up?
We will very likely find that if we make it a habit to be encouraging, people will encourage us in return.
Although we may be very busy, we all need to make time for personal study and family worship.
Our aim, though, should not be simply to cover a certain number of pages or solely to prepare comments to participate at meetings.
We want to make sure that we allow God’s Word to reach our heart and strengthen our faith.
We should find a balance between keeping in mind the needs of others when studying and reflecting on our own spiritual needs.
We must recognize that when we prepare for the ministry, for the meetings, or for a talk, we may not necessarily apply what we read to ourselves.
To illustrate: Although a chef has to taste dishes before serving them, he cannot live merely on the food he samples.
If he wants to remain healthy, he has to prepare nutritious meals for himself.
Similarly, we should strive to nourish our heart with spiritual food that fills our personal needs.
Jacob was a very determined contender, and he proved that he would not turn aside from the challenge! And he was, indeed, rewarded for his perseverance.
He received the fitting name Israel, meaning Contender Perseverer With God or God Contends.
Jacob gained the rich reward that we too are seeking—Jehovah’s approval and blessing.
Jacob’s beloved wife, Rachel, was eager to see how Jehovah would fulfill his promise to bless her husband’s offspring.
But she had no children.
In her day, that situation was viewed as a great affliction.
How did Rachel find the emotional and physical strength to continue battling against circumstances that were discouraging but completely beyond her control?
She never gave up hope.
Rather, she kept contending by praying with more intensity.
Jehovah heard Rachel’s heartfelt supplications, and she was eventually blessed with children.
Unrealistic expectations may be at the root of a marital problem.
When dreams about a happy marriage do not come true, a person may feel dissatisfied, cheated, even bitter.
Differences in emotional nature and upbringing may become issues, or disagreements may arise regarding money, in-laws, and child-rearing.
However, it is commendable that the vast majority of Christian married couples find mutually acceptable solutions for all such problems because they let God guide them.
Christian marriage mates who have serious problems should seek help from the elders.
These experienced brothers can assist married couples to apply the counsel of God’s Word.
In resolving marital problems, we should also pray for Jehovah’s spirit and his help in applying Bible principles and displaying the fruitage of his spirit.
Jesus had limited time to carry out his ministry.
Nevertheless, he took time to cultivate the interest people showed in the good news.
For instance, Jesus taught a crowd, using a boat as a platform.
On that occasion, he miraculously gave Peter a huge catch of fish and said the words of today’s text.
What result did Jesus words and actions produce?
Peter and his associates abandoned everything and followed Jesus.
Nicodemus, a member of the Sanhedrin, became interested in Jesus teaching.
He wanted to learn more but was afraid of what others would say if he spoke with Jesus in public.
Jesus was flexible and generous with his time; he met with Nicodemus at night—away from the crowds.
God’s Son set aside time to build up the faith of individuals.
Should we not be diligent in making return visits and conducting Bible studies with interested ones?
How did humans inherit the sinful, dying condition that plagues us all?
The Bible explains: By the trespass of the one man Adam death ruled as king over Adam’s descendants.
Happily, though, we can choose no longer to be ruled, or dominated, by sin.
By exercising faith in Christ’s ransom sacrifice, we place ourselves under the rule of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness.
Even though we remain sinners, we need not resign ourselves to having sin dominate our lives.
When we do give in to sin, we will ask Jehovah for his forgiveness.
Therefore, we come under the rule of undeserved kindness.
With what result?
Paul explained: The undeserved kindness of God trains us to reject ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things.
The first marriage was struck with calamity because both Adam and Eve chose to misuse their free will by disobeying Jehovah.
The original serpent, Satan the Devil, deceived Eve by leading her to believe that eating fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and bad imparted special knowledge that would enable her to decide what was good and what was bad.
She did not show respect for her husband’s headship by asking him about the matter.
And instead of obeying God, Adam accepted the fruit Eve held out to him.
When brought to account by God, Adam blamed his wife.
Eve blamed the serpent for deceiving her.
Lame excuses but no justification! Because the first human pair had disobeyed Jehovah, they stood before him as condemned rebels.
What a warning for us! For success in marriage, each mate must accept personal responsibility and obey Jehovah.
We need to develop our brotherly love now, for it will help us during whatever tests and trials we may face in the future.
Even now, before the outbreak of the great tribulation, we have a strong need for brotherly love.
Many of our brothers have been adversely affected by earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, tsunamis, or other natural disasters.
Some brothers are suffering because of opposition and persecution.
Added to all of this are the economic woes we experience daily as a result of living in this corrupt system of things.
As such problems increase, so do our opportunities to demonstrate the depth of our brotherly affection.
Even though the love of the greater number of people will grow cold, we need to prove that our brotherly love continues.
The earth appears to be unique among all of God’s creation.
Just imagine, out of the unknown number of planets that exist in the Milky Way and beyond, Jehovah created the earth to be not merely a habitable place but a comfortable, beautiful, and safe home for his human creation! This reflects how Jehovah must love us.
Though Jehovah created a wonderful home for us, he knows that for us to be happy and content, we need more than material provisions.
A child feels truly secure when he senses his parents love and attention.
Jehovah created humans in his image, giving them the spiritual capacity to sense and to respond to his love and care.
Furthermore, Jesus said: Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.
As a loving Father, Jehovah richly provides us with all the things we enjoy, both physically and spiritually.
Do you at times take notes during public talks, assemblies, and conventions?
Reviewing these notes provides excellent opportunities for meditation as you think about what you have learned from God’s Word and from his organization.
Also, each month’s issues of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines and the latest convention releases give us fresh information that we can read and digest.
When you read the Yearbook, you may find it helpful to pause and reflect on what you read and let the experiences touch your heart.
You may want to underline key thoughts or to make notes in the margin, which you might find helpful when preparing for a return visit, a shepherding call, or a future talk.
Most important, pausing and meditating every now and then while reading Bible-based publications will give you the opportunity to absorb the material and to say a prayer of thanks to Jehovah for the good things you are learning.
When we share in the field ministry, not only do we build faith in others but our own faith grows.
Like the early Christians, we learn to put full faith in Jehovah and speak boldly in any situation.
As we sense how Jehovah helps us in life and how he answers our prayers, our faith grows.
This was true of Caleb and Joshua.
They showed faith in Jehovah when they spied out the Promised Land.
However, as they saw Jehovah’s direction at each turn in their life thereafter, their faith grew even more.
No wonder Joshua spoke so strongly to the Israelites, saying: Not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed.
He later added: Therefore, fear Jehovah and serve him with integrity and faithfulness.
As we taste Jehovah’s goodness, we too can develop such conviction.
The psalmist showed the right heart attitude when he wrote: Wait for God, for I will yet praise him as my Grand Savior.
My God, I am in despair.
That is why I remember you.
What deep feeling and love for Jehovah! Have you developed such love for and reliance on our heavenly Father?
Even if you are inclined to answer yes, you may be able to increase your reliance on him in line with what the Bible tells us: Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, and do not rely on your own understanding.
In all your ways take notice of him, and he will make your paths straight.
By loving us first, Jehovah has shown us how to love him.
Let us always keep in mind his surpassing example.
And let us increasingly demonstrate our love for him with our whole heart and with our whole soul and with our whole mind and with our whole strength.
’—.
Countless Bible verses show the importance of God’s name and its sanctification.
Jehovah God—the Author of the Bible—inspired its writers to use his name freely.
Omitting the name, found thousands of times in ancient manuscripts, shows disrespect for the Author.
The evidence for retaining God’s name in the Bible has not diminished but grown.
The 2013 revision of the New World Translation includes the name 7,216 times, which is 6 more than the 1984 edition.
Five of the additional instances are found at .
These were restored primarily because the Dead Sea Scrolls, which predate the Hebrew Masoretic text by over 1,000 years, contain the name in these verses.
Also, one occurrence at was restored as a result of further study of ancient manuscripts.
In many lands, Bibles are expensive and not readily available, so just receiving a Bible is a great blessing.
A report from Rwanda stated: For a long time, many people with whom the brothers were studying had not progressed because they had no Bibles.
They could not afford to purchase the local church edition.
And they often could not clearly understand the meaning of certain verses, which hindered their progress.
Things changed when the New World Translation in their language became available.
A Rwandan family with four teenagers said: We really thank Jehovah and the faithful and discreet slave for giving us this Bible.
We are very poor and had no money to purchase Bibles for every member of the family.
But now each of us has his own Bible.
To show our gratitude to Jehovah, we read the Bible as a family every day.
The apostle John referred to God’s first companion as the Word and the beginning of the creation by God.
Jehovah God communicated his thoughts and feelings to this firstborn Son.
The apostle Paul speaks of the tongues of angels, a heavenly form of communication superior to human language.
Jehovah has intimate knowledge of billions of intelligent creatures, earthly and heavenly.
At any given moment, countless individuals may be praying to him in many languages.
Not only does he listen to those prayers but he simultaneously gives direction to and communicates with heavenly beings.
To accomplish this, his thoughts, language, and communication must be vastly superior to those of humans.
Clearly, when Jehovah communicates with humans, he simplifies how he expresses his thoughts so that man can understand them.
God’s love for mankind is evident in the arrangement he has made for the Messianic Kingdom.
Jehovah has already placed this government in the hands of his Son, who loves mankind and is superbly qualified to rule.
At their resurrection, Jesus 144,000 heavenly joint heirs take with them the experience of human life.
The Kingdom was the main theme of Jesus teaching, and he taught his disciples to pray for it and the blessings it will bring.
Bible prophecy shows that God’s heavenly Kingdom was established when Christ’s presence began in 1914.
Since then, there has been a gathering of the remaining ones who will rule with Jesus in heaven as well as of a great crowd of people who will survive this system’s end and be ushered into the new world.
Christian parents have few joys like that of watching their child get baptized.
It was a highly emotional experience for us.
We were, of course, grateful that our children wanted to serve Jehovah, says Berenice, whose four children were baptized before they turned 14.
But, she adds, we also knew that as teenagers our children would face many challenges.
One expert on child development states: Adolescence is not a period of being crazy or immature.
It is an essential time of emotional intensity, social engagement, and creativity.
While they are teenagers, your children can develop a more meaningful friendship with Jehovah, set and pursue goals in the ministry, and use more initiative as they make their dedication and live up to it.
They may find adolescence to be a rewarding time of spiritual growth, even as Jesus did when he was young.
Those who have received this special invitation from God do not need another witness from any other source.
They do not need someone else to verify what has happened to them.
Jehovah leaves no doubt whatsoever in their minds and hearts.
The apostle John tells such anointed Christians: You have an anointing from the holy one, and all of you have knowledge.
He further states: As for you, the anointing that you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to be teaching you; but the anointing from him is teaching you about all things and is true and is no lie.
Just as it has taught you, remain in union with him.
These ones need spiritual instruction just like everyone else.
But they do not need anyone to validate their anointing.
The most powerful force in the universe has given them this conviction!
David may have written that regarding the time when Absalom tried to usurp the throne while David was ill and unable to handle the situation.
Despite having received God’s forgiveness, David did not forget his own sin with Bath-sheba and its consequences.
Still, the king was sure that God would sustain him on his sickbed.
David did not pray for God to heal him miraculously.
The context suggests that David asked Jehovah to help him in the same way that He would help an individual who showed consideration to a lowly one.
That included being sustained on his sickbed.
Because David’s sin had been forgiven, he could ask that God would comfort and support him and that the physical resources of his body might enable him to recover.
We can do likewise.
We can be sure that Jehovah appreciates every effort that we make to serve him.
He understands any insecurities or self-doubts that we may have.
He shows us compassion if financial burdens weigh us down or our health or emotions tend to limit our sacred service.
And we can have full confidence in Jehovah’s tender regard for what his servants do to stay faithful to him.
Bear in mind, too, that we can approach the Hearer of prayer with the confidence that he will give attention to our concerns.
The Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort will unstintingly give us the emotional and spiritual support that we need, perhaps doing so by means of our fellow worshippers.
It touches Jehovah’s heart when we show compassion toward others.
And he promises to reward that kindness.
This does not imply that a person needs to think and talk of nothing other than the Bible or his love for God and his hope for the future.
Let us recall that Paul and others in the first century who pleased God were living rather normal lives in many respects.
They consumed food and drink.
Many married and enjoyed family life, working to support themselves.
However, those servants of God did not allow such normal aspects of life to become the center of their lives.
After showing that Paul worked as a tentmaker, the record reveals what his life was centered on: He regularly gave attention to the Christian preaching and teaching work.
And those were the activities that he recommended to his brothers and sisters in Rome.
Yes, Paul’s life centered on spiritual provisions and activities.
The Romans needed to imitate him, and so do we.
Those Christians were still alive on earth, so how could that be said of them?
God applied the ransom to Paul and others of his day.
Thus Jehovah forgave their sins, anointed them with holy spirit, and called them to be his spiritual sons.
Then they had the heavenly hope.
If they proved faithful, they would live and rule with Christ in heaven.
But Paul could speak of them while they were still alive and serving God on earth as having died with reference to sin.
He used the example of Jesus, who died as a human and then was raised up as an immortal spirit in heaven.
Death was no longer master over Jesus.
It was similar with anointed Christians, who could consider themselves dead with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.
Their way of life was not as it once was.
They were no longer obeying the dictates or impulses of their sinful desires.
They had died to that previous way of life.
The Jewish exiles who submitted to the will of God lived a relatively normal life in Babylon.
Their captors allowed them to administer their own affairs to some extent.
The exiles even had freedom to move about the country.
Babylon was a center of trade and commerce in the ancient world, and documents that have been unearthed indicate that many Jews learned the art of buying and selling there, while others became skilled craftsmen.
Some Jews even became prosperous.
Exile in Babylon was nothing like the slavery in Egypt that the Israelites had experienced centuries before.
But would the Israelites ever again be able to worship God in a completely acceptable way?
At the time, it seemed most unlikely that they would.
Babylon never released its captives.
Yet, Jehovah had promised that his people would be liberated, and so they were.
God’s word of promise never fails.
We live in exciting times.
The earthly part of Jehovah’s organization is growing in many ways, but growth necessitates change.
As changes affect us personally, may we be humble, keeping an eye on Jehovah’s interests and not on our own.
Doing so promotes unity.
To Christians in Rome, Paul wrote: Just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function, so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ.
Whatever our circumstances, then, let all of us work to further the interests of Jehovah’s magnificent Kingdom.
You older ones, equip younger ones to do what you do.
You younger brothers, accept responsibility, be modest, and maintain a respectful attitude toward the older ones.
And you wives, imitate Aquila’s wife, Priscilla, who accompanied and supported Aquila faithfully as their circumstances changed.
When Jesus was on earth, he exercised his free will to reject the temptations of the great Adversary.
In earnest prayer the night before his death, Jesus reaffirmed his determination to do the will of God.
He said: Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me.
Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.
May we imitate Jesus and use our free will to honor Jehovah and to do his will! Is that really possible?
Yes, we can imitate the example of Jesus, for we too are made in God’s image and likeness.
However, we have limitations.
We do not have the absolute freedom that Jehovah has.
God’s Word explains that our freedom has boundaries and that we must observe the limits Jehovah appropriately places on us.
What is more, wives are to be in subjection to their husbands and children to their parents.
An important way in which we show gratitude for the ransom is by dedicating ourselves to Jehovah on the basis of our faith in the ransom and getting baptized.
Our baptism shows that we belong to Jehovah.
Since everything Jehovah does is influenced by love, it is his will that all his worshippers display love as their dominant quality.
We prove that we desire to be sons of our Father who is in the heavens by loving our neighbor.
The command to love our neighbor is second only to the command to love Jehovah.
We can show such love for neighbor by obeying the command to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom.
As we show love for fellow humans, we reflect God’s glory.
In fact, love for God is made perfect in us when we obey the command to love others, especially our brothers.
Before receiving this personal witness from God’s spirit, anointed Christians cherished an earthly hope.
They longed for the time when Jehovah would cleanse this earth, and they wanted to be part of that blessed future.
Perhaps they even pictured themselves welcoming back their loved ones from the grave.
They looked forward to living in the homes that they built and eating the fruitage of trees that they planted.
Why did their thinking change?
They did not become dissatisfied with that hope.
They did not change their mind because of emotional stress or turmoil.
They did not give up on this earth, as if they suddenly felt that they would find living forever on earth to be tiresome or boring; nor did they merely want to explore some new frontier in heaven.
Rather, they changed because of the operation of God’s spirit that not only called, or invited, them but also changed their thinking and hope.
Jehovah is the Supreme One, the Creator of all things, the One possessing infinite wisdom and power.
Job came to understand that.
After Jehovah questioned Job about His works of creation, Job replied: I know that you are able to do all things and that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you.
Though Jehovah can accomplish whatever he sets out to do—without assistance—he has from the very beginning lovingly invited others to work along with him to achieve his purpose.
God’s first creation was his only-begotten spirit Son.
Jehovah allowed his Son to share in all further works of creation, both spirit and material.
Thus, Jehovah honored his Son both by including him in the works of creation and by telling others about his Son’s important role.
Jesus loved to talk about God’s Kingdom.
According to the Bible record, he spoke more about the Kingdom than about any other subject—referring to it more than 100 times during his ministry.
The Kingdom was truly dear to his heart.
Shortly after his resurrection, Jesus met with more than 500 prospective Kingdom proclaimers.
Perhaps it was on that occasion that he gave the command to take the Kingdom message to people of all the nations—a daunting task back then! This great work, Jesus foretold, would be carried on right up to the conclusion of the system of things, and that has proved to be the case.
Quite likely you are having a share in the fulfillment of that commission and prophecy.
And our God has equipped us with every good thing to help us fulfill that commission.
History has demonstrated beyond any doubt the truthfulness of what the Bible says: I well know, O Jehovah, that man’s way does not belong to him.
It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.
No, Jehovah did not create humans with the ability or the right to direct their affairs independent of him.
In addition to showing how futile human rule is, God’s temporary permission of wickedness serves another long-range purpose.
It provides permanent testimony that only God’s rule can be successful.
After Jehovah destroys wickedness and those who cause it, if anyone ever again would challenge Jehovah’s way of ruling in love, there would be no need for God to permit the challenge to stand.
He could use what has happened in mankind’s history as the just reason to remove such rebels quickly, not allowing them to establish wickedness once again.
Paul focused on the more important things and slaved in God’s service, traveling back and forth between Syria, Asia Minor, Macedonia, and Judea.
Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead, I am pressing on toward the goal for the prize, wrote Paul.
Taking full advantage of his singleness, Paul succeeded in being in constant devotion to the Lord without distraction.
Like Paul, some servants of God choose to remain single so that they have fewer family responsibilities and can devote themselves to Kingdom service.
Married servants of God often have more extensive family responsibilities.
But whether single or married, all can throw off every weight and serve God with as few distractions as possible.
This may require cutting down on time-wasting habits and setting goals to increase the time spent in the service of God.
What are some ways that we can show our love for God?
Obviously, we can use our material things to support the Kingdom work locally and worldwide.
This is certainly a fine way to express love for Jehovah, whether we have much or little materially.
There are, however, other ways to show Jehovah that we love him.
Recall Jesus reminder to his followers not to be anxious about food and clothing but to keep on seeking first the Kingdom.
He said that the Father knows what we really need.
The degree to which we trust that promise is an indication of the depth of our love for Jehovah because love and trust go hand in hand.
We cannot truly love someone whom we do not trust.
So we might ask ourselves: Do the goals I pursue and my way of life reflect that I truly love Jehovah? Do my actions day in and day out show that I trust his ability to care for my needs?
Jesus was convinced that the Bible is God’s Word, which provides the best guidance in life.
Following Jesus example, we must read the Bible daily, study it, and meditate on what we learn.
Along with general Bible study, dig into topics about which you may have questions.
To illustrate, you might increase your conviction that the end of this system of things really is near by studying in detail the Scriptural proof that we live in the last days.
Strengthen your trust in the Bible’s promises for the future by investigating its many prophecies that have already come true.
Develop your confidence in the practical value of the Bible by considering examples of how the Bible improves people’s lives.
You can also imitate Jesus by meditating on the wonderful promises Jehovah has made to you.
See these as God’s promises not just to mankind in general but to you personally.
A mature servant of Jehovah promotes unity within the congregation.
It is our goal that God’s people be harmoniously joined together and that all members cooperate with one another.
According to Jehovah’s Word, to achieve this unity, we need humility.
A mature brother or sister has the humility to work for unity, even when facing the imperfections of others.
How do you react when confronted with the imperfection of a brother or sister in the congregation?
Or what if you personally are wronged by someone in the congregation?
Is it your inclination, or even your pattern, to build a wall, so to speak, that separates you from the offender?
Or do you try to construct a bridge across the gap between the two of you?
A mature Christian wants to—yes, strives to—build bridges, not walls.
Do you have the goal of promoting unity in the congregation?
For entertainment, many people view or practice things that the Bible identifies as violent, sexually immoral, spiritistic, or ungodly in other ways.
For instance, the Internet, television programs, movies, novels, and magazine articles often present violence and immorality in a favorable light.
Behavior once considered unacceptable has even been legalized in some places.
But that does not make such conduct acceptable to God.
In the first century, Jesus followers shunned unclean entertainment.
Because of this and their godly conduct in general, they were maligned and persecuted by others.
They are puzzled that you Christians do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery, wrote the apostle Peter, so they speak abusively of you.
Some may feel that it does not matter what we choose to do.
To make wise decisions that please Jehovah, however, we must consider the laws and principles found in his written Word and comply with them.
For instance, to have God’s approval, we must act in harmony with his law on blood.
Prayer will help us to make decisions that relate to Scriptural principles and laws.
Weighty personal decisions can have quite a bearing on our spiritual health and welfare.
Every choice we make will likely affect our relationship with Jehovah—either for good or for bad.
A good decision will strengthen our relationship with God, whereas a bad one may damage it.
Moreover, a poor decision could injure others spiritually by disturbing, or even stumbling, them or by disrupting the unity of the congregation.
Indeed, our personal decisions do matter.
Does spending our time preparing for God’s new world mean forfeiting a better or more fulfilling way of life today?
By no means! Serving Jehovah is the most satisfying way of life there is.
It is not a matter of servitude under duress just so that we can pass through the great tribulation.
It is the way we are designed to live, the way that yields the greatest joy.
Having Jehovah’s guidance and experiencing his loyal love are far better than life apart from intimacy with him.
Of course, we need not wait for the new world in order to enjoy spiritual blessings that result from wholehearted service to Jehovah—they are available to us right now! Indeed, some of us have been reaping such blessings for decades, and we know from experience that no other life course could produce greater satisfaction.
In our preaching work, we meet with varied responses—some favorable, some hostile.
Regardless of how people react, however, God’s Word shows the standard that his servants must maintain.
When we make a defense before everyone who demands of us a reason for our hope, we do so with a mild temper and deep respect because we are motivated by neighbor love.
We show love of neighbor even if our message is rejected by an angry householder who berates us.
We imitate Jesus: When he was being insulted, he did not insult in return.
When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the One Jehovah who judges righteously.
Whether we are with fellow believers or others, we show humility and apply the counsel: Do not pay back injury for injury or insult for insult.
Instead, repay with a blessing.
Jehovah helped the Israelites to defeat the Amalekites and the Ethiopians, and he gave Nehemiah and his associates the power to complete the rebuilding work.
God will similarly give us strength to stand firm against opposition, apathy, and anxiety so that we can carry out our preaching work.
We do not expect Jehovah to perform miracles for us.
Rather, we should do our part.
That includes our reading God’s Word daily, preparing for and attending the meetings weekly, feeding our mind and heart through personal study and family worship, and always relying on Jehovah in prayer.
Let us never allow other pursuits and activities to interfere with the means that Jehovah uses to strengthen and encourage us.
If you sense that your hands have dropped down in any of these areas, ask for God’s help.
Then see how his spirit energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.
Some get up early in the morning to read, meditate, and pray.
Others do so during their lunch break.
You might find that this can be done early in the evening or before you go to bed.
Some enjoy reading the Bible in the morning and again before retiring.
Thus they read it day and night, or regularly.
The important thing is to buy out time from less important things for daily meditation on God’s Word.
God’s Word repeatedly promises blessings to all who meditate on it and who strive to apply what they learn.
Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it, said Jesus.
Most important, meditating on spiritual things each day will help us to bring honor to the Grand Creator of our marvelous brain, and he will reward us with happiness now and everlasting life in his righteous new world.
We have ample reason to believe that Jehovah is active in people’s lives today.
Time and again, we have heard experiences of how individuals prayed for spiritual help and then received it.
While preaching from house to house on a small island in the Philippines, Allan met a woman who started to cry.
He states: Just that morning, she prayed to Jehovah that his Witnesses would find her.
God answered her prayer so quickly that she was visibly moved.
Within a year, she dedicated her life to Jehovah.
Many of God’s servants have seen evidence of his help when they broke free from such addictive habits as smoking, drug abuse, or the viewing of pornography.
Some say that they repeatedly tried to stop on their own but were not successful.
However, when they turned to Jehovah for help, he supplied the power beyond what is normal, and they finally conquered their weakness.
Genuine love and unity identify Jehovah’s servants as the ones who practice the true religion, for Jesus said: By this all will know that you are my disciples—if you have love among yourselves.
And the apostle John wrote: The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Whoever does not practice righteousness does not originate with God, nor does the one who does not love his brother.
For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.
Love that results in extraordinary unity marks Jehovah’s Witnesses as Christ’s true followers, the ones whom God is using to serve his purpose to have the good news of the Kingdom preached in all the inhabited earth.
The apostle Peter meant well when he urged Jesus to be kind to himself in order not to be killed.
Jesus, however, knew that Peter’s comment reflected faulty thinking.
To help him and the other disciples, Jesus gave frank counsel, stated the consequences of a self-sparing attitude, and outlined the blessings of a self-sacrificing spirit.
Peter learned the lesson.
Pray to Jehovah to give you insight so that you can understand where your teenager needs help.
For example, what might indicate that your child’s faith is wavering?
Perhaps his joy is waning, he is speaking critically of fellow believers, or he has become secretive.
Do not hastily conclude that these are signs of a double life involving serious sin.
On the other hand, do not ignore such signs or dismiss your teenager’s isolation as a mere phase.
Since cultures and religious beliefs vary greatly, we need to be discerning when it comes to choosing the right time to speak.
And there are many occasions when we may need to discern that.
For example, someone may offend us, even with well-intentioned words.
It would be prudent on our part to take time to reflect on whether the matter is serious enough to say something.
If we must speak, it would not be wise to approach the offender when we are upset and perhaps might speak a bit rashly.
Similarly, we need to be discerning when speaking about the truth to our unbelieving relatives.
We want them to come to know Jehovah, but we must be patient and perceptive.
Speaking the right words at the right time may help to open their hearts.
When we work along with those we love, we draw close to them and come to know their personality and their qualities.
We learn not only what they want to accomplish but also how they go about doing it.
Jesus worked along with Jehovah for perhaps billions of years, and they forged a strong, unbreakable bond of love and affection for each other.
They enjoyed a wonderful unity, always working together in full harmony.
In prayer, Jesus asked Jehovah to watch over his disciples.
The reason?
He prayed: So that they may be one just as we are one.
As we conform to God’s standards and share in the work of preaching, we come to understand his appealing qualities.
We learn why it is wise to trust in him and to follow his direction.
As we draw close to God, he draws close to us.
We also draw close to our spiritual brothers and sisters because we face similar challenges and joys and because we share the same goals.
Throughout the Scriptures, we see many examples of men of faith who were deeply moved by holy spirit; yet they did not have the hope of living in heaven.
John the Baptist was one such person.
Jesus highly praised him but stated that John would not be included in the heavenly Kingdom.
David was likewise moved by holy spirit.
He was a man of great spiritual depth and was even inspired to write sections of the Bible.
Still, at Pentecost, Peter said of David that he did not ascend to the heavens.
Holy spirit worked mightily in such ones, but it did not give them the special witness that they had been selected for heavenly life.
That did not mean that they were in some way unworthy or deficient.
It simply meant that Jehovah would resurrect them to life on a paradise earth.
In the dead of night, David and Abishai silently make their way through 3,000 sleeping troops.
At the center of the camp, the two men find King Saul fast asleep.
He has journeyed to the Judean wilderness in order to find David and kill him.
Abishai whispers: Let me pin Saul to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need to do it twice.
David’s reply is astonishing! Do not harm him, for who can lift his hand against the anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent?
It is unthinkable from Jehovah’s standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed of Jehovah! David understood what loyalty to God involves.
He had no intention of harming Saul.
Why not?
Because Saul was God’s anointed king over Israel.
Loyal servants of Jehovah respect those whom he appoints.
Indeed, Jehovah requires that all of his people cherish loyalty.
Naomi is determined to press on to her homeland, Israel.
With her is Ruth, who faces what may be the most important decision of her life.
She can either go home to her people in Moab or stick with her mother-in-law, Naomi, and travel to Bethlehem.
Ruth could easily have reasoned that she had a family there in Moab—a mother and other relatives who would take a young widow in and help provide for her.
Moab was her homeland.
Its culture was her culture, its language her language, its people her people.
Naomi could promise her no such advantages in Bethlehem.
In fact, she advised Ruth to stay in Moab.
Naomi feared that she could provide neither a husband nor a home for her daughters-in-law.
What would Ruth do?
Note the contrast between her and Orpah, who returned to her people and her gods.
Did Ruth want to return to the false gods of her people?
No, she did not.
Jehovah displayed his power through Jesus Christ in extraordinary ways.
The four Gospels provide faith-strengthening details about some of the miracles that Christ performed.
Likely, he performed many other miracles.
Yes, God’s power was manifested in Jesus.
For good reason, then, the apostle Paul could say about him: Christ is the power of God.
Yet, what bearing can Jesus miracles have on our life?
The apostle Peter said that Jesus performed miracles, or wonders.
The powerful works that Jesus did on earth were foregleams of even grander blessings to come under his kingly rule.
They foreshadow the miracles that Jesus will perform in God’s new world on a global scale! His miracles also give us tremendous insight into his personality and that of his Father.
Abraham had so much evidence to demonstrate the reality of what he hoped for that it was as if he could see what he had not actually beheld! Abraham’s faith in God’s promises strengthened his resolve to do the divine will.
Acting in faith, he left the city of Ur and refused to take up permanent residence in any of the cities of Canaan.
Like Ur, they had shaky foundations because of their ungodly governments.
For the rest of his long life, Abraham was awaiting the city having real foundations, whose designer and builder is God.
Abraham saw himself living in a permanent place governed by Jehovah.
Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and others like them believed in the resurrection of the dead and looked forward to life on earth under God’s Kingdom, the city having real foundations.
Reflecting on such blessings bolstered their faith in Jehovah.
Using the example of the human body, Paul focused on unity under the head of the congregation, Jesus Christ.
The apostle spoke of cooperating through every joint that gives what is needed.
How can each of us, whether young or old, strong or frail, contribute to the unity and spirituality of the congregation?
A key is to submit ourselves to and respect those whom Jesus has designated to provide direction in the congregation, the elders.
We may not always find this easy to do.
However, we can with confidence request God’s guidance.
His active force can help us to support the congregation arrangements wholeheartedly.
So if we on occasion do not feel inclined to follow the direction given, we should reflect on how our humbly cooperating will contribute to the unity in the congregation.
Furthermore, cooperating in matters like these will likely help all of us to grow in love.
Why does Jehovah not give us an immediate response to our every request?
Recall that he likens our relationship with him to that of children with a father.
A child cannot rightly expect a parent to grant every request or to do so right away.
Some of a child’s requests may be mere passing whims.
Others must wait till the time is right.
Still others may not be in the child’s best interests or in the best interests of others involved.
Furthermore, to concede immediately to a child’s every request would change the relationship to one of master and slave, the child being the master.
Similarly, Jehovah may in our best interests allow time to pass before his response to our prayers becomes evident.
That is his prerogative as our wise Creator, loving Master, and heavenly Father.
Fulfilling all our requests right away would distort the proper relationship between us and him.
Some might be confused about the difference between dedication and baptism.
For example, some young people say that they have made a dedication to Jehovah but are not ready to get baptized.
Does that make sense?
Making a dedication means telling Jehovah that you will serve him forever.
At baptism, a person shows others that he is dedicated.
Therefore, baptism is a public expression of a private dedication that you have already made in prayer to Jehovah.
Before you get baptized, you need to be sure that you understand what dedication means.
Simply stated, when you dedicate your life to Jehovah, you give up ownership of yourself.
You promise Jehovah that you will put the doing of his will ahead of everything else in your life.
Any promise should be taken seriously, but how much more so a promise made to Jehovah God!—.
Our loyalty to Jehovah may be challenged if someone in a responsible position misjudges us.
Jonathan may have faced such a challenge.
King Saul, the anointed of God, was aware of his son’s friendship with David, but he did not understand the reason for it.
Saul humiliated Jonathan in an angry outburst.
However, Jonathan did not retaliate.
He did not waver in his loyalty to God or to David, who would in time become Israel’s king.
In congregations of Jehovah’s people today, it is very unlikely that we would be treated unjustly.
However, those taking the lead among us are imperfect men and could misinterpret our actions.
If we are ever misjudged or misunderstood, let us remain loyal to Jehovah.
To avoid spoiling our useful habits, we must not have as close associates those who practice bad things.
This applies not only to associating with unbelieving wrongdoers but also to associating with those who claim to worship Jehovah but who deliberately violate his laws.
If such professing Christians engage in serious wrongdoing and do not repent, we do not continue to associate with them.
If we were to associate with those who do not obey God’s laws, we might have the tendency to do what they do in order to be accepted by them.
For example, if we were to have close association with sexually immoral people, we might be tempted to practice immorality.
That has happened to some dedicated Christians, and some of them were disfellowshipped because they were not repentant.
Unless they repent, their condition can become like that described by Peter.
During Family Worship sessions, we focus on spiritual matters, and this contributes to the unity of the family.
Practicing for the field ministry can equip the family to be better prepared to preach effectively.
And it is not hard to see that when members of a family share comments about God’s Word, they are drawn closer together—all love the same God and all are interested in doing his will.
What can married couples do to cooperate to Jehovah’s praise?
When both mates are faithful servants of Jehovah, they can rejoice in the unity that this affords them.
Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Elkanah and Hannah—all expressed their love for their mate.
We should make it a point to do the same.
That will unite us with our mate and draw us closer to our heavenly Father.
Satan is at war with the anointed remnant and the other sheep.
The Devil’s goal is to devour as many of Jehovah’s servants as he can in the short time that he has left.
Can we win our fight against Satan?
Yes! The Bible says: Oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Many scoff at the idea that Satan even exists.
To them, Satan and the demons are fictional characters of novels, horror movies, and video games.
Such people feel that no intelligent person believes in wicked spirits.
Now, do you think that it bothers Satan that he and his invisible cohorts have been relegated to the world of folklore?
That is not likely! After all, it is easy for Satan to blind the minds of those who doubt that he exists.
Promoting the idea that spirits do not exist is one of the many ways that Satan uses to mislead people.
Jehovah is fully aware of our limitations.
Therefore, he does not expect us to endure trials in our own strength but offers us his fatherly help.
Of course, at times, we might feel that we cannot go on anymore.
But Jehovah assures us that he will never allow his servants to suffer beyond their limit of endurance.
Yes, he will make the way out.
Therefore, we have good reason to trust that Jehovah’s assessment of what we can bear is right.
When relief does not immediately follow our prayers for help, let us wait on the One who knows just when to act in our behalf.
Remember that he too is exercising patience, for he is ever eager to come to our rescue.
Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor, and he will rise up to show you mercy.
For Jehovah is a God of justice.
Nearly 3,000 years ago, the prophet Elijah invited young Elisha to become his attendant.
Elisha promptly accepted the invitation and faithfully served the older man by caring for humble tasks.
Then, after some six years of training, Elisha learned that Elijah’s work in Israel was about to come to an end.
At that point, Elijah urged his well-trained companion to stop following him, but Elisha was determined to stay with his mentor as long as possible.
If you are a young brother, how can you imitate Elisha today?
Promptly accept assignments, including humble tasks.
View your teacher as a friend, and let him know how much you appreciate the effort he makes in your behalf.
Above all, be faithful in carrying out any assignment you are given.
Why is this so important?
Because only after you demonstrate that you are faithful and reliable will the elders feel assured that Jehovah wants you to be entrusted with added responsibilities in the congregation.
To have Jehovah as our one and only God, we should give him our exclusive devotion.
Our worship of him cannot be divided or shared with any other gods nor tinged with ideas or practices from other forms of worship.
We must bear in mind that Jehovah is not just one among many gods; nor is he even the highest and most powerful among them.
Only Jehovah is to be worshipped.
To give Jehovah exclusive devotion, we must be careful not to allow anything to take, or even to share, the place in our life that Jehovah alone should occupy.
What might such things be?
In the Ten Commandments, Jehovah made clear that his people must have no other gods besides him and that they must not practice any form of idolatry.
Today, idolatry can take many forms, some of which might be hard to recognize.
But Jehovah’s requirements have not changed—he is still one Jehovah.
When Peter asked whether we should forgive up to seven times, Jesus replied: I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times.
Clearly, Jesus meant that we should always be willing to forgive; this should be our first and predominant leaning.
It is wise to remember that since we all have faults, we may be offending others.
If we discern that we have done so, the Bible’s direction is to go to the one whom we have offended and try to reconcile matters.
We appreciate it when others do not hold our faults against us, so we should act the same way toward them.
If we practice forgiving others, Jehovah will forgive us.
Yes, when it comes to handling the faults of others, the Christian course is to imitate our merciful Father’s dealings with us when we make mistakes.
From his natural parents, Moses evidently learned about Jehovah and His purpose to free the Hebrews from slavery and give them the Promised Land.
As Moses thought deeply about what Jehovah had promised to do for the Israelites, his faith and his love for God grew.
Like other God-fearing humans, he could likely conceive of the time when Jehovah would set mankind free from death.
It is no wonder that Moses was moved to love the God who felt compassion for the Hebrews and for all mankind.
Faith and love motivated Moses throughout his life.
Even when Pharaoh threatened Moses with death, his faith, love for God, and likely a mental picture of a bright future strengthened him to face the threat courageously.
At a marriage feast in Cana of Galilee, Jesus performed his first miracle.
The number of guests may have been greater than expected.
But whatever the case, the wine ran out.
Among the guests was Mary, Jesus mother.
For years, she had no doubt pondered all the prophetic promises associated with her son, who she knew would be called Son of the Most High.
Did she believe that in him there were powers not yet revealed?
What is evident is that at Cana, Mary and Jesus felt compassion for the newly married couple and wanted to save them embarrassment.
Jesus knew that hospitality was a duty.
So he miraculously turned some 100 gallons 380 L of water into fine wine.
Was Jesus obligated to perform this miracle?
No.
He simply cared about people and was imitating his heavenly Father by being generous.
As members of the Christian congregation, how can we succeed in giving this invitation?
Only by being harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate.
To share the message of the Kingdom good news with as many people as possible, we need to carry out our preaching work in an organized manner.
Therefore, we receive directions.
The guidance given through congregations around the globe prepares us for a united effort.
After we meet for field service, we go forth to proclaim the Kingdom message to mankind.
By word of mouth and through millions of copies of Bible-based publications, we spread the message.
Do you strive to follow the direction to share in special preaching campaigns?
By doing so, you are joining millions of others in unitedly heralding the message of the angel flying in midheaven, mentioned at .
Experienced elders stress the importance of beginning to train brothers when they are young—in their early teens—by giving them assignments in the congregation that fit their age.
Such early training will help young ones to keep their eyes on spiritual goals when they reach the late teens and are bombarded with many distractions.
An elder will also stimulate a learner’s desire to serve by explaining to him not only what to do but also why to do it.
By giving reasons, elders will be imitating the Great Teacher, Jesus.
For example, before giving his apostles the commission to make disciples, Jesus gave them a reason why they should obey.
He stated: All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.
Then he added: Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations.
Before parting from the servants who accompanied Abraham and Isaac, Abraham said: You stay here with the donkey, but the boy and I will go over there and worship and return to you.
What did Abraham mean?
Was he lying to his servants, telling them that Isaac would return when Abraham knew that Isaac was to be sacrificed?
No.
The Bible gives us some insight into what Abraham was thinking.
Abraham reasoned that God was able to raise Isaac up even from the dead.
Yes, Abraham believed in the resurrection.
He knew that Jehovah had revived his reproductive powers and those of Sarah in their old age.
Abraham realized that nothing was impossible for Jehovah.
So he was confident that whatever happened on that challenging day, his beloved son would be restored to him so that all of Jehovah’s promises could be fulfilled.
No wonder Abraham is called the father of all those having faith!—.
The Bible says that Jehovah’s people, including young ones, will offer themselves willingly for his service.
So a person who is contemplating baptism needs to be sure that this is his or her personal desire.
That might call for self-scrutiny on your part.
Why?
Because your circumstance as a youth may be somewhat special.
For example, you may have been raised in the truth.
Over the years, you have likely seen many people get baptized—including some of your peers and perhaps even your siblings.
If that is indeed your situation, what should you be careful about?
Be alert that you do not come to view baptism as little more than a coming-of-age custom that all young people follow sooner or later.
What can you do to make sure that you will keep the right view of Jehovah’s arrangement of baptism?
Take time often to stop and think about the reasons why getting baptized is so important.
Although God had anointed Saul to be king, Saul later became disobedient and was rejected by Jehovah.
Since God did not immediately remove Saul from the throne, his misconduct tested his subjects and all who were close to him.
They faced the challenge of being loyal to God while the king, who sat on Jehovah’s throne, followed a wayward course.
Yet, Saul’s son Jonathan proved to be loyal to Jehovah.
We too can prove ourselves loyal to Jehovah by being in relative subjection to the superior authorities, as God requires, even if some seem unworthy of respect.
For example, a government official may be corrupt, but we still respect his position because we are in relative subjection to governmental superior authorities.
In fact, all of us can prove loyal to Jehovah by respecting those to whom he gives authority.
Our ability to form mental pictures of things we have not seen is a gift from God.
It allows us to make wise plans and to look forward to good things.
Jehovah can foresee future events, and in the Scriptures he often tells us ahead of time what will happen.
We may be able to form mental pictures of what will occur.
In fact, our ability to conceive of unseen things helps us to exercise faith.
When Hannah spent time thinking about what it would be like when she took her son Samuel to serve at the tabernacle, she had a basis for her mental picture.
It was based on what she had resolved to do, and this helped her to focus on her objective.
If we visualize what God has promised to do, we are thinking about something that will definitely happen.
No doubt, many faithful people of Bible times formed mental pictures of things God had promised.
When Jesus was born, Satan knew that this newborn child would grow up to become the promised Messiah.
Would Satan reason that taking the life of a baby was going too far?
Satan has no noble code of ethics.
And with regard to the child Jesus, Satan did not hesitate to act.
How?
King Herod was greatly upset when astrologers inquired about the one born king of the Jews, and he was determined to kill him.
To make sure that the job was done, he ordered the execution of all boys two years of age and younger who were living in Bethlehem and its districts.
Jesus escaped death in that unimaginable slaughter, but what does this tell us about our enemy Satan?
It is evident that the Devil places no value on human life.
He certainly does not have a soft spot for children.
Satan truly is a roaring lion.
Never underestimate his vicious disposition!
Some elders may find it hard to set aside time for training others.
Perhaps they think: Training is important, but it is not as urgent as other congregation matters that simply cannot wait.
If I have to postpone training for a while, the congregation will continue to function.
Though it is true that numerous matters require an elder’s immediate attention, delaying training may harm the spiritual well-being of the congregation.
Elders care for many important tasks that have to be handled promptly.
But if elders keep postponing necessary training, sooner or later the congregation will lack sufficient qualified brothers to care for all that needs to be done.
Clearly, then, we should guard against thinking that training is of low priority.
Elders who take a long-range view and invest their time in training less experienced brothers are wise stewards and a true blessing to the entire congregation.
Picture the Israelites in Bible times praising Jehovah during a festival at his temple in Jerusalem.
They would have prepared for the journey, cared for one another’s needs en route, and then been united in worship at the temple.
All of this called for cooperation.
As we continue our journey toward the new world, we too need to be harmoniously joined together and cooperating.
Think of what blessings await us! We have already left behind the disunity and confusion marking the present system of things.
We now see being fulfilled what both Isaiah and Micah foretold—God’s people are unitedly going up to the mountain of Jehovah.
Indeed, how elevated our form of worship is in the final part of the days.
But how great will be our happiness and joy when we live at the time when all mankind will be harmoniously joined together and cooperating!
Once a new Kingdom Hall is built, it needs to be kept clean and tidy to reflect the qualities and personality of the God whom we worship—a God of order.
The Bible associates holiness and spiritual cleanness with physical cleanliness.
Thus, if people desire to be acceptable to Jehovah, they must also practice good hygiene.
In harmony with these principles, we should always feel comfortable inviting interested people to our meetings, confident that the condition of the hall will complement the good news we share with them.
They will see that we worship a God who is holy and who will soon transform the earth into an uncontaminated paradise.
Whatever the local situation, our Kingdom Hall should be exemplary when it comes to being well-kept, since it bears the name of Jehovah and is a place of pure worship.
In referring to our daily bread, Jesus likely meant our immediate needs.
Thus, he went on to show how God clothes the wildflowers, and then he said: Will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith?
He concluded by repeating this important advice: Never be anxious about the next day.
This shows that rather than be materialistic, we should be content with our basic daily needs.
Such needs may include suitable accommodations, employment to provide for our family, and wisdom to cope with health concerns.
If we were to pray only for such physical needs, however, it would indicate an imbalance.
We have spiritual needs that are of much greater importance.
Man must live, said our Master, not on bread alone, but on every word that comes from Jehovah’s mouth.
So we should continue to pray that Jehovah will keep on feeding us with timely spiritual food.
Do we regularly petition God to help us maintain our integrity when we are faced with temptation?
Our upbringing or our past conduct may have developed in us a liking for practices that Jehovah condemns.
Even then, he can help us to bring about necessary changes so that we can continue to serve him acceptably.
King David recognized this.
After he had committed adultery with Bath-sheba, David implored Jehovah: Create in me a pure heart, and put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.
Sinful conduct may strongly appeal to our fallen flesh, but Jehovah can stir within us a willing spirit, the desire to obey him.
Even if wrong desires are deeply rooted and tend to crowd out our chaste thoughts, Jehovah can guide our steps so that we can obey his commandments and succeed in living by them.
He can prevent anything harmful from dominating us.
As children of the first man, Adam, we have all inherited sin and its penalty, death.
Not one of us can say, I do not need the ransom.
Even the most faithful servant of God is completely dependent on Jehovah’s undeserved kindness through Christ.
Each of us must recognize that we have been forgiven an enormous debt.
What should Jehovah’s love and mercy compel us to do?
If we are harboring some resentment against any of our brothers or sisters, we should imitate Jehovah, who is ready to forgive.
If we appreciate what Jehovah has done for us in canceling our own enormous debt, then we will want to forgive others from our heart.
We simply cannot receive the love and forgiveness of God unless we love and forgive others.
While it is true that forgiving will not change the past, it will certainly change our future for the good.
Jesus said the above words to help Peter and other disciples to imagine the future.
They could thus contemplate their role in the government that would rule over the earth and bring grand blessings to obedient mankind.
Jehovah’s earthly servants have always benefited from thinking about the fulfillment of divine promises.
Abel knew enough about God’s purposes to envision a better future, exercise faith, and embrace a reliable hope.
Abraham’s outstanding acts of faith were possible because he saw something about the fulfillment of God’s prophecy concerning the promised offspring.
Moses looked intently toward the payment of the reward, acting in faith and growing in love for Jehovah.
Our own faith in God and love for him can help us to envision what Jehovah has promised.
One of the best ways that you can grow in your love for Jehovah is to meditate on the greatest gift Jehovah has provided—the ransom sacrifice of his Son.
Thinking about the ransom and what it means for you will motivate you to respond appreciatively.
Your response to the ransom might be illustrated this way: Imagine that someone rescued you from drowning.
Would you simply go home, dry yourself off, and forget about what was done for you?
Of course not! You would certainly feel indebted to the person who rescued you.
The fact is, you would owe that person your life! We owe Jehovah God and Jesus Christ much more.
Because of this great act of love, we now have the incomparable prospect of living forever on a paradise earth!
Older ones in our midst remember when congregations had a congregation servant rather than a body of elders, when countries had a branch servant rather than a Branch Committee, and when direction was given by the president of the Watch Tower Society rather than by a clearly established Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Although all these devoted brothers were supported by faithful assistants, one person was basically responsible for making decisions in the congregations, at the branch offices, and at world headquarters.
During the 1970’s, adjustments were made to put the responsibility for oversight on groups of elders rather than on individuals.
These adjustments were based on increased knowledge about the pattern set in the Scriptures.
Instead of having the influence of one individual dominate, the composite good qualities of all the gifts in men whom Jehovah has provided benefit the organization.
Loyalty and neutrality are always issues for true Christians, not just in times of war.
Why?
Because all who are dedicated to Jehovah have promised him their love, loyalty, and obedience.
We want to abide by God’s righteous standards wherever we live and whatever our background, nationality, or culture.
Loyalty to Jehovah and to his Kingdom transcends any other attachment we may have.
Such loyalty requires that Christians remain separate from all conflicts and controversies of this world.
People who do not share our faith may feel a special loyalty to their country, tribe, or culture or even to their national sports team.
Challenges to such loyalties have resulted in competition and rivalry and, in extreme cases, bloodshed and genocide.
It would be all too easy to take sides in worldly issues and be drawn into controversy.
God’s Word counsels us not to be hasty when we need to make an important decision.
When we take the time to weigh carefully all the aspects or facts related to a decision, we will likely be more successful.
Before determining a course of action, a family head ought to take the time to research the Scriptures and Christian publications, as well as to consider the opinions or views of others in his family.
Recall that God urged Abraham to listen to what his wife had to say.
Elders too should take time to do research.
And if they are reasonable, modest men, they will not fear losing respect if new, relevant information comes to their attention that indicates a need to reconsider what they had already decided.
They should be ready to adjust their thinking and decisions when appropriate, and all of us do well to follow that example.
This can promote peace and order in the congregation.
Each of us can examine his heart to see if it is fully devoted to God.
Ask yourself, Am I determined to please Jehovah, to defend true worship, and to protect his people from any corrupting influence?
For example, what if someone close to you has to be disfellowshipped?
Would you take decisive action by ceasing to associate with that person?
What would your heart move you to do?
Like Asa, you can show that you have a complete heart by fully relying on God when you are faced with opposition, even some that may seem insurmountable.
You may be teased or ridiculed at school for taking a stand as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Or colleagues at work may taunt you for taking days off for spiritual activities or for not often working overtime.
In such situations, pray to God, just as Asa did.
Remain firm for what you know is right and wise.
Remember that God strengthened and helped Asa, and He will strengthen you.
Josiah was zealous in doing what pleased God.
Like Josiah, young ones should start to seek Jehovah from an early age.
Repentant King Manasseh may have taught Josiah about God’s mercy.
Young ones, draw close to faithful older ones in your family and in the congregation and learn how good Jehovah has been to them.
Also, remember that the reading of the Scriptures touched Josiah’s heart and moved him to take action.
Your reading of the Word of God may move you to take action that will increase your happiness and strengthen your friendship with God as well as spur you on to help others to search for God.
A study of the Bible may also help you to notice ways that you can improve in your service to God.
If you do, apply yourself, just as Josiah did.
It is up to each of us to make decisions, and the wise, right choices are based on sound Scriptural knowledge.
We should not give someone else the responsibility to make decisions for us.
Rather, we should personally learn what is right in God’s eyes and choose to do it.
How might we give in to the danger of letting others choose for us?
Peer pressure could sway us to make a bad decision.
Still, no matter how others try to pressure us, it is our responsibility to follow our Bible-trained conscience.
In many respects, if we let others make our decisions, we are essentially deciding to follow them.
It is still a choice, but a potentially disastrous one.
The apostle Paul clearly alerted the Galatians to the danger of letting others make personal decisions for them.
Some in the congregation wanted to make personal choices for others in order to alienate them from the apostles.
The apostle John warned that if anyone loves the things in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—then the love of the Father is not in him.
This means that we need to examine our heart constantly to see if it is being enticed by worldly entertainment, associations, and styles of dress and grooming.
Or the love of the world might involve efforts to attain great things, such as through the pursuit of higher education.
We stand at the threshold of the promised new world.
Thus, how important it is that we keep well in mind Moses powerful words at ! If we clearly understand and firmly believe that Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, we will do all we can to give him exclusive devotion, serving him as he approves.
Watching their associations is particularly important for single Christians who want to get married.
The Bible counsels God’s servants who are seeking a marriage mate to marry only in the Lord, that is, to marry only a dedicated, baptized worshipper of Jehovah who lives according to Scriptural teachings.
By marrying fellow believers, Christians gain companions who are dedicated to Jehovah and will help them maintain their integrity to him.
Jehovah knows what is best for his servants, and he has been consistent in stating his viewpoint regarding marriage.
Note his easily understood command to Israel through Moses.
With reference to the inhabitants of surrounding nations—people who did not serve Jehovah—the Israelites were instructed: You must not form any marriage alliances with them.
For they will turn your sons away from following me to serve other gods.
How can we train our conscience?
Key ways are by regularly and prayerfully studying the Bible, meditating on what we read, and then putting into practice what we have learned.
Obviously, this involves more than accumulating facts and learning rules.
Our study of the Bible should gradually give us an ever more precise picture of Jehovah, his personality, his qualities, and what he likes or dislikes.
Our conscience becomes attuned to the ways of Jehovah God.
This should stir our heart, moving us to want to become more and more like him.
However, if we cannot understand the conscientious decision of a fellow believer on some personal matter, we should not quickly judge him or feel that we ought to pressure him to change his mind.
Perhaps his conscience is still weak and in need of more training or is too sensitive on certain issues.
Courageously placing ourselves under the kindly scrutiny of a mature Christian may prevent us from rationalizing any wrong desires.
Talking about our weakness with a mature, spiritually qualified Christian may help us to identify blind spots.
This can help us to make the necessary adjustments in order to remain in Jehovah’s love.
Christian elders are especially qualified to help us.
Seeking assistance is essential if the source of any immoral desires is the unclean habit of viewing pornography.
The longer the delay in seeking help, the greater the risk that unclean desires will become fertile and give birth to sin that will hurt others and bring reproach on Jehovah’s name.
The desire to please Jehovah and to remain in the Christian congregation has moved many of his servants to accept loving help.
Woven throughout the fabric of Jesus preaching tours were evidences of his genuine concern for the human family.
In one instance, Jesus encountered a pitiful sight.
Right in front of him was a man with a frightful disease, leprosy.
Testifying to the advanced stage of the man’s illness, physician Luke describes him as being full of leprosy.
When he caught sight of Jesus, the leper fell facedown and begged him: Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.
The man had no doubt that Jesus possessed the power to heal him, but what he needed to know was, did Jesus have the desire to do so?
How would Jesus respond to this heartfelt request?
Jesus stretched out his hand, touched the leper, and with a voice reflecting both strength and tenderness, he said: I want to! Be made clean.
Then the leprosy vanished from him.
Yes, Jesus demonstrated how much he loved people.
How might we prepare now for life in God’s new world?
Well, suppose we were planning to move to another country.
How could we prepare for that change?
We might start learning the language of the people who live there.
Learning about their customs would be beneficial.
We might sample some of their foods.
To a certain extent, we would begin to live as if we were already residents of that land.
After all, that is the way we expect to live once we arrive there.
Similarly, we can prepare for life in the new world by living now, to the extent possible, as we expect to live then.
Independence and an unreasonable insistence on personal preference may be highly regarded by some, but what has been the result?
Failure to accept God’s direction has led to suffering, misery, even tragedy.
How we look forward to the time when all mankind will submit to Jehovah’s loving sovereignty!
It is up to each individual whether he will allow himself to be brought into temptation or not.
For his part, Jesus immediately rejected each temptation from the Devil by the use of a relevant quotation from God’s Word.
Thus, Jesus upheld God’s rightful sovereignty.
But Satan did not give up.
He waited until another convenient time.
Jesus continued to resist all of Satan’s efforts to break his integrity.
However, Satan attempts to ensnare Jesus followers, including you.
Because of the ongoing issue regarding God’s sovereignty, Jehovah allows the Tempter to use this world to tempt us.
God is not bringing us into temptation.
On the contrary, he has confidence in us and he wants to help us.
Out of respect for our free will, though, Jehovah does not automatically prevent us from falling into temptation.
We have to do two things—remain spiritually awake and persist in prayer.
Christians have to train their mind and conscience to respond appropriately when neutrality-related issues arise.
Take, for example, Mirjeta from a region of the former Yugoslavia.
She was raised to hate Serbians.
On learning that Jehovah is impartial and that Satan is responsible for inciting ethnic problems, she strove to rid herself of nationalistic sentiments.
Yet, when ethnic violence broke out in her area, old hatreds began to resurface in her, causing Mirjeta to find it difficult to preach to Serbs.
She realized, though, that she could not just sit back and hope that such unwholesome feelings would go away.
She begged Jehovah for help to overcome this challenge.
I have found that focusing on the ministry is the best help ever, she says.
In the ministry, I try to imitate Jehovah’s loving personality, and I have seen my negative feelings melt away.
Brothers traveling on behalf of the governing body shared the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders who were in Jerusalem.
As congregations observed those decrees, they continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.
What should we do when we receive direction from God’s organization today?
Jehovah’s own Book directs all of us to be obedient and submissive.
A critical or rebellious spirit has no place in God’s organization, for such an attitude could disrupt our loving, peaceful, and united congregations.
Of course, no loyal Christian would want to display a disrespectful and disloyal spirit like that of Diotrephes.
We might well ask ourselves: Do I contribute to the spirituality of those around me? Am I quick to accept and support the direction given by the brothers taking the lead?
The Greek verb translated reaching out means stretching to grasp something, perhaps something beyond your normal reach.
In using that word, the apostle Paul stressed that spiritual progress requires effort.
Imagine a brother thinking about his future in the congregation.
He may not now be serving as a ministerial servant, but he realizes that he needs to cultivate spiritual qualities.
First, he strives to qualify as a ministerial servant.
In time, he hopes to be spiritually qualified to serve as an overseer.
In each case, he works hard to meet the qualifications needed to care for added responsibility in the congregation.
In like manner, brothers and sisters who desire to serve as pioneers, as Bethelites, or as Kingdom Hall construction volunteers do well to stretch forward to attain their goals.
A great blessing that comes to us through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness is comfort for a distressed heart.
To Christians in Thessalonica, who were experiencing persecution, Paul wrote the words found in today’s text.
How comforting it is to be aware of the loving care that we receive from Jehovah because of his generous kindness! As sinners, on our own we would have no hope.
But Jehovah provides us with a wonderful hope.
Jesus promised his followers: This is the will of my Father, that everyone who recognizes the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life.
Yes, the hope of eternal life is a gift, a wonderful expression of God’s undeserved kindness.
Paul, who certainly appreciated that fact, said: The undeserved kindness of God has been manifested, bringing salvation to all sorts of people.
For a while, the apostle Peter harbored prejudice against non-Jews, but he gradually learned to eradicate negative views from his heart.
Likewise, if we detect any trace of prejudice or racial pride in us, we should make a conscious effort to root it out of our heart.
We might reflect on the fact that none of us deserve salvation; we are all imperfect humans, regardless of our nationality.
So why should we feel superior to anyone else?
We should have a view like that of the apostle Paul, who admonished his fellow anointed Christians that they were no longer strangers and foreigners, but members of the household of God.
Earnest effort to overcome prejudiced views regarding those who are of a different background will certainly help us to put on the new personality.
To keep our faith strong, Jehovah has kindly provided us with his complete Word, the Bible.
To be happy and to succeed, we must regularly read God’s Word, daily if possible.
Then, like pre-Christian worshippers of Jehovah, we need to keep meditating on God’s promises and be obedient to his requirements.
Jehovah has also blessed us with an abundant supply of spiritual food provided through the faithful and discreet slave.
Thus, by cherishing what we learn from the spiritual provisions that Jehovah has made available, we will be like the ancient examples of faith who had an assured expectation of their Kingdom hope.
Prayer also played a vital part in keeping the faith of pre-Christian witnesses strong.
Their faith was strengthened as they experienced God’s answers to their prayers.
You saw a lot of casual clothing, especially when it was hot, reported a Dutch newspaper regarding a meeting of church leaders.
That is not the case at the convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Indeed, Jehovah’s Witnesses are often commended for adorning themselves in respectable dress, with modesty and good judgment in the way that is proper for those professing devotion to God.
The apostle Paul was speaking about women, but the same basic standard applies to Christian men.
Appropriate standards of dress are important to us as Jehovah’s people, and they are important to the God we worship.
What the Scriptures say about dress and grooming leaves no doubt that the Sovereign of the universe has wholesome standards of attire for his true worshippers.
Therefore, our choice of dress and grooming should take into account what is pleasing to the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.
Some have chosen study projects that involved studying Bible prophecy or the Bible’s historical, archaeological, and scientific accuracy.
One fascinating prophecy to consider is .
That verse introduces the Bible’s primary theme, which is the vindication of God’s sovereignty and the sanctification of his name by means of the Kingdom.
That one verse, using figurative language, sets out how Jehovah will solve all the suffering that humans have experienced since Eden.
How might you study ?
One way would be to prepare a time line.
It could list key scriptures that show how God bit by bit shed light on the individuals and arrangement referred to in this verse and that prove that the prophecy will be fulfilled.
As you see the scriptures form a harmonious unit, you will surely conclude that the Bible prophets and writers must have been moved by holy spirit.
In his letters, Paul spoke highly of his fellow Christians.
He had traveled with some of them for years and undoubtedly knew their faults, but he said good things about them.
For instance, Paul described Timothy as his beloved and faithful child in the Lord, one who would genuinely care for the concerns of other Christians.
The apostle commended Titus to the Corinthian congregation as my companion and a fellow worker for your interests.
How encouraged Timothy and Titus must have been to learn what Paul thought of them! Paul and Barnabas risked their lives by going back to places where they had suffered violent attacks.
For instance, even though they had faced fanatic opposition in Lystra, they returned there in order to encourage new disciples to remain in the faith.
In Ephesus, after Paul faced an angry crowd, he encouraged the disciples there.
Jesus joyfully worked alongside his Father, rejoicing both in what he accomplished and in the knowledge that Jehovah was fond of him.
What, though, about us?
Jesus said that there is happiness both in giving and in receiving.
It brought us joy to receive the truth, and it brings us joy to share the truth with others.
As we share Bible truths with others, we see spiritually hungry ones filled with delight as they begin to understand and appreciate our God and the precious truths contained in his Word.
It touches our heart to see them make changes not just in their thinking but also in their way of life.
We realize that the work of sharing the good news is vitally important.
It opens the way to everlasting life for those who become reconciled to God.
What more joyful, satisfying work could we engage in than that of helping people chart a course that will result in their living forever?
It is vital that we resist being affected by the world’s strongly entrenched things.
These include its doctrines, philosophies, and harmful practices, such as committing immorality, using tobacco, and abusing alcohol and drugs.
And we must constantly fight against our fleshly weaknesses and discouragement.
Is it really possible to defeat such powerful opponents?
Yes, but not without a struggle.
Drawing on the example of a boxer of ancient times, Paul said of himself: The way I am aiming my blows is so as not to be striking the air.
Just as a boxer fights off his opponent, we must fend off our enemies.
Jehovah trains us and helps us in our fight.
He provides lifesaving instructions in his Word.
He also helps us through our Bible-based publications, Christian meetings, assemblies, and conventions.
Are you putting into practice what you are learning?
As a teacher, Jesus reached hearts because he loved Jehovah, God’s Word, and people.
Similar love will help parents reach the hearts of their children.
So parents, be good students of the Bible and of our study aids.
Take an interest in creation and in articles in our publications that discuss this topic.
Your doing so will broaden your knowledge, deepen your appreciation for Jehovah, and better equip you to teach your young ones.
When your heart is filled with Bible truth, you will want to discuss it with your family.
Do this not only when preparing for Christian meetings or during family worship but at any time.
Moreover, such discussions should not be forced but should be natural and spontaneous—a part of your everyday conversation.
A winegrower went to the marketplace early one morning to hire men to work in his vineyard.
The men he found agreed to the wage he offered and went to work.
The owner needed more workers, however, and returned to the marketplace throughout the day to hire more and more men, offering a fair wage even to those whom he hired at the end of the afternoon.
When evening came, he gathered the workers together to give them their wages, and he gave the same amount to each of them, whether they had labored many hours or just one.
When those first hired realized this, they complained.
The winegrower replied: Did you not agree to the wage I offered?
Do I not have the right to give all my workers whatever I want?
Are you envious because I am generous?
Jesus parable reminds us of one of Jehovah’s qualities that is often mentioned in the Bible—his undeserved kindness.
Although the Bible does not provide specific rules about the kinds and limits of love play that might be associated with natural sexual intimacy, it mentions displays of affection.
Christian marriage partners should treat each other with tenderness.
Strong love for God and neighbor will not allow anyone or anything to interfere with the marriage bond.
Some marriages have been strained or even ruined by a mate’s addiction to pornography.
Any tendency toward being attracted to this or toward sexual interests of any sort outside marriage should be firmly resisted.
Even giving the appearance of flirting with someone to whom one is not married is unloving and should be avoided.
Remembering that God is aware of all our thoughts and actions will reinforce our desire to please him and to remain chaste.
With such accurate knowledge, the Colossian Christians would be able to walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully.
This would enable them to continue bearing fruit in every good work, especially in the preaching of the good news.
To serve effectively, a worshipper of Jehovah must follow a routine of Bible study.
We do well to help Bible students grasp that fact.
Moreover, we ourselves must be convinced of its value.
In fact, we ourselves need to have good Bible study habits.
So you might ask yourself, When householders express opinions that are contrary to Scriptural teachings or they ask difficult questions, am I able to give answers that are based on the Bible?
If we tell others how much we have benefited from our personal study of the Bible, we may encourage them to obtain such benefits by being diligent students of the Scriptures.
Jehovah began choosing anointed ones after Jesus death and resurrection, and it seems that all in the first-century Christian congregation were anointed.
From the first century until the beginning of the last days, the vast majority of those who claimed to follow Christ were false Christians; Jesus likened them to weeds.
Even so, Jehovah continued to anoint some faithful ones throughout that time, and they proved to be like the wheat Jesus described.
During the last days, Jehovah has continued to select those who will make up the 144,000.
If he chooses to wait until late into that period to select some for that privilege, who are we to question his wisdom?
We must be careful not to react like the disgruntled workers who complained about the way their master dealt with the 11th-hour workers.
God does not make such requests of us today.
But he does ask us to obey him even when his commands are hard for us to comply with or we cannot comprehend the reasons for them.
Can you think of something that God asks of you that you find difficult to do?
For some, it may be the preaching work.
Perhaps they struggle with shyness, making it hard for them to approach strangers with the good news.
For others, it may be the challenge of standing out as different, perhaps at school or in the workplace.
Do you ever feel like Abraham, as if you are trudging up that slope in Moriah, facing a task that seems beyond you?
If you do, take courage from Abraham and his faith! Meditating on examples of faithful men and women can move us to imitate them and draw close to Jehovah as our Friend.
Because Saul was determined to kill David, Jonathan faced a conflict of loyalties.
Although he had made a covenant with David, Jonathan was also submissive to his father.
But Jonathan knew that God was with David and not with Saul.
Therefore, Jonathan put loyalty to David ahead of loyalty to Saul.
He warned David to hide and then spoke well of him to Saul.
If we are not careful, loyalty to a nation, a school, or a sports team can eventually choke out loyalty to God.
For example, Henry enjoys playing chess.
His school had a tradition of winning the championship, and he wanted to put forth his best effort.
But he admitted: Gradually, loyalty to the school began to take priority over my loyalty to God.
Weekend chess matches were crowding out my Kingdom service.
So I decided to give up being part of the chess team.
As a young person, there are ways in which you will be able to discern whether your decision to get baptized comes from your heart.
For example, your heartfelt desire to serve Jehovah will be reflected in your prayers.
How often you pray and how specific your prayers are may well reveal how close your relationship with Jehovah is.
An important way that Jehovah answers our prayers is by directing our attention to his Word.
Thus, our effort to study the Bible is yet another indication that we really want to draw closer to Jehovah and serve him from the heart.
So ask yourself: How specific are my prayers?
How regular is my personal study of the Bible?
And if your Christian family has a Family Worship evening, ask yourself: Do I willingly share in that arrangement?
Your answers to these questions will help you to see whether your decision to get baptized is your personal desire.
Brothers who are learning to serve in the congregation should be taught to think in terms of Bible principles.
For example, suppose an elder asks a brother to keep the entranceway to the Kingdom Hall clean in appearance and safe for walking.
He could consider and explain how the brother’s work to enhance the Kingdom Hall will adorn the teaching of our Savior, God.
He could also ask the learner to think of the elderly ones in the congregation and how carrying out his assignment will benefit them.
Having such conversations with the learner as part of his training will help him to focus more on people than on rules.
He will experience the joy that comes from seeing how brothers and sisters in the congregation benefit from the service he renders.
Further, the elder should commend the learner for the effort he makes to apply the suggestions.
Sincere commendation does for a learner what water does for a plant—it makes him thrive.
Abel likely gave much thought to that promise and realized that someone would be struck in the heel so that mankind could be lifted to perfection such as that enjoyed by Adam and Eve before they sinned.
Abel had faith based on God’s promise, and Jehovah therefore accepted his sacrifice.
Noah survived the Deluge because of his faith.
After the Flood, he was moved by faith to offer animal sacrifices.
Like Abel, he undoubtedly had faith that mankind would eventually be released from bondage to sin and death.
As he entered the dark post-Flood era during which Nimrod acted in opposition to Jehovah, Noah still had faith and hope.
Very likely, he would have been heartened to think about mankind as being set free from oppressive rule, inherited sin, and death.
We too can see such a wonderful time—and it is near indeed!—.
What a wonderful hope true Christians share! All of us, whether of the anointed or of the other sheep, hope to see the fulfillment of God’s original purpose and the sanctification of Jehovah’s name.
Such expectations are the most noble any human can cherish.
We also long for the promised reward of everlasting life, either as part of God’s new heavens or as part of his new earth.
In the meantime, we hope for the continued increase of the spiritual prosperity of God’s people.
Those who are part of Satan’s world also have some sort of hope, but they may doubt whether theirs will ever be realized.
For example, millions of gamblers may hope to win a lottery, but they could hardly feel sure about that.
Real faith, on the other hand, is the assured expectation of our Christian hope.
David might have concluded that Solomon was not qualified to oversee such an important project as building a house for God.
After all, the temple was to be exceedingly magnificent, and Solomon was at the time young and inexperienced.
Yet, David knew that Jehovah would equip Solomon to handle the work given to him.
So David focused on what he could do to assist, preparing materials in great quantity.
Likewise, older brothers today should not be disheartened when it becomes necessary to hand their assignments over to younger men.
Rather, it is in the best interests of the work when younger ones are trained to handle responsibilities.
Appointed men should have great satisfaction when the younger ones whom they have trained become qualified to take on the work.
There are many reasons why we should be thankful to Jehovah! We owe him our very life, for without him we would not even move or exist.
He has given us a very precious gift—his own book, the Bible.
We gratefully accept it as God’s message, even as the Christians in Thessalonica received God’s word and accepted it.
With the written Word of God in hand, we have drawn close to Jehovah and he has drawn close to us.
Our heavenly Father has granted us the wonderful privilege of being part of his organization.
How we appreciate such blessings! The psalmist put matters beautifully when he sang: Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.
Twenty-six times in , we find the refrain his loyal love endures forever.
By proving loyal to Jehovah and his organization, we will experience the truthfulness of those heartening words because we will live forever!
It was fitting for Christians in Rome to analyze what their focus in life really was.
Could it be that their lives were dominated by or centered on things of the flesh?
And it is fitting for us to consider the same about our lives.
What is of greatest interest to us, and to what does our speech gravitate?
What do we really pursue day in and day out?
Some may find that they are focusing on trying different types of wine, decorating the home, finding new clothing styles, making investments, planning vacation trips, and the like.
Such matters are not bad in themselves; they can be normal aspects of life.
For example, Jesus once made wine, and Paul told Timothy to take a little wine.
But did Jesus and Paul make wine a prominent aspect of their lives?
Was it their passion, what they constantly talked about?
No.
What about us? What is our key interest in life?
The apostle Paul recommended singleness; yet, he said the words above.
Paul added: If they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed with passion.
Getting married can help a person to avoid letting passion lead him to such a practice as masturbation or to sexual immorality.
In addition, age is a factor to consider, for the apostle stated: If anyone thinks he is behaving improperly by remaining unmarried, and if he is past the bloom of youth, then this is what should take place: Let him do what he wants; he does not sin.
Let them marry.
Nevertheless, a person should not be prompted to marry because of surges of passion that may come in youth.
He may not be mature enough to take on the responsibilities of married life.
Although the governing body had authority in the early congregation, they acknowledged that their Leader was Jesus.
Let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ, wrote the apostle Paul.
Instead of naming themselves after a prominent apostle, the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.
True, Paul acknowledged the importance of holding fast the traditions, or Scripturally based practices, given by the apostles and other men who took the lead.
Nevertheless, he added: But I want you to know that the head of every man including every member of the governing body is the Christ; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.
Yes, under his Head, Jehovah God, the invisible and glorified Christ Jesus was leading the congregation.
Jehovah uses the Christian congregation and its overseers to mold us on a personal level.
For example, if the elders discern that we are having spiritual problems, they try to help us—but not on the basis of human wisdom.
Rather, they humbly look to God, asking for insight and wisdom.
With our situation in mind, they act on their prayers by doing research in God’s Word and in our Christian publications.
This can equip them to render help tailored to our needs.
Understanding how God may be molding us can help us in our relationships with fellow believers and in our attitude toward people in our territory, including our Bible students.
God does not force individuals to make changes, but he reveals his righteous standards so that they can clean up their lives or make adjustments voluntarily.
Jehovah God created humans with free will, that is, the liberty to choose between one option and another.
God provided a valuable guide for the first man and woman and their future offspring—the conscience, an inner sense of right and wrong.
Used properly, the conscience can help us to do good and to avoid wrongdoing.
Our conscience thus is an evidence of God’s love for us and of his desire that humans be united in doing good.
Today, humans still have the faculty of conscience.
Though many have strayed far from the Bible’s standards of conduct, we find that some individuals often do what is good and abhor what is bad.
The conscience holds many individuals back from committing deeds of extreme wickedness.
Imagine how much worse world conditions would be if no one had a conscience! How grateful we can be that God has provided humans with a conscience!
In saying so, Paul was not minimizing the importance or value of discipline, for he continued: Yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
If we love Jehovah, we must guard against becoming complacent or resentful of his counsel.
In today’s me-first, self-centered generation, it is not easy to talk about counsel and discipline, let alone to accept such.
Even those who seem to accept counsel or discipline often do so begrudgingly.
Christians, though, are advised to stop being molded by this system of things.
We are to perceive and follow the perfect will of God.
Through his organization, Jehovah gives us timely counsel about many areas of life—our conduct with the opposite sex, our associations, and our recreation.
By willingly accepting and applying such direction, we show that we are grateful and that we truly love Jehovah from the heart.
This statement by the apostle John is truly worthy of our deep and appreciative reflection.
With the words see what sort of love the Father has given us, John was urging Christians to think about the nature and magnitude of God’s love for them, to consider how God loves them.
Comprehending Jehovah’s love in those terms will surely deepen our love for him and strengthen our relationship with him.
To some, though, God’s love for people is a foreign concept.
To them, God is to be feared and obeyed.
Or perhaps because of certain entrenched erroneous teachings, they feel that God is unloving, even unlovable.
On the other hand, there are those who believe that God’s love is unconditional and that he loves them regardless of what they do or fail to do.
As you studied the Bible, you learned that love is Jehovah’s paramount attribute and that his love moved him to give his Son as a ransom in our behalf.
Scientific research shows that saying words aloud during study makes them easier to recall.
The Creator of our brain knows this.
That is why he instructed Joshua to read His book of the Law in an undertone.
You will likely find that reading the Bible softly, or in an undertone, makes a deeper impression on your mind.
This may also help you to concentrate better.
While reading may be done with little effort, meditation requires concentration.
That is why the imperfect human brain is inclined to switch to easier, less demanding tasks.
Thus, the best time to meditate is when you are rested and in a stress-free environment with few distractions.
The psalmist found that a good time to meditate was while he was awake in bed during the night.
Jesus, who had perfect mental powers, knew the advantage of being in quiet places to meditate and pray.
According to Satan, no one serves Jehovah out of unselfish love.
Has Satan changed since he made that claim?
Not at all! When he was ousted from heaven, Satan was still called the accuser of our brothers .
, who accuses them day and night before our God! Satan has not forgotten the issue of integrity.
He is eager to see us surrender to our trial and withdraw our support of God’s sovereignty.
When you struggle with adversity, therefore, imagine this invisible scene.
Satan and his demons are on one side, pointing to your struggles and alleging that you will buckle under the pressure and give up.
On the other side are Jehovah, his reigning Son, the resurrected anointed ones, and myriads of angels.
They are cheering you on, delighted by your endurance and support of Jehovah’s sovereignty.
You can take personally Jehovah’s inspired request, mentioned in today’s text.
The first-century Christian congregation was made up of Jews, Greeks, Romans, and people of other nationalities.
They had different religious backgrounds, customs, and sensibilities.
Because of that, some had difficulty accepting the new way of worship or fully relinquishing their former ways.
The apostle Paul found it fitting to remind them that Christians have one God, Jehovah.
What about the situation in the Christian congregation today?
The prophet Isaiah foretold that in the final part of the days, people of all nations would flock to Jehovah’s elevated place of true worship.
They would say: Jehovah will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.
How happy we are to see this prophecy undergoing fulfillment before our eyes! The result is that many congregations have become multiracial, multicultural, and multilingual, giving praise to Jehovah.
Satan uses his world’s commercial system to seduce us into believing that having material things beyond our actual needs is necessary for the enjoyment of life.
He is adept at appealing to the desire of the eyes.
The world offers every kind of material thing, from the superb to the absurd, some of which look very enticing.
Have you ever purchased something, not because you needed it, but because it caught your eye in an advertisement or a store display?
Did you later realize that you could have lived the rest of your life without it?
Such nonessential things only complicate our life and weigh us down.
They can ensnare us and distract us from our spiritual routine of studying the Bible, preparing for and attending meetings, and sharing regularly in the ministry.
Remember, the apostle John warned: The world is passing away and so is its desire.
God’s people have used a variety of methods in order to reach as many as possible with the good news.
This was especially important when the workers were few.
In the early 20th century, newspapers were used to reach large audiences in areas where Jehovah’s people were few in number.
Each week, Charles Taze Russell would telegraph a sermon to a newspaper syndicate.
In turn, the syndicate retelegraphed the sermon to newspapers in the United States, Canada, and Europe.
It is estimated that by 1913, Brother Russell’s sermons were reaching 15,000,000 readers by means of 2,000 newspapers! After Brother Russell died, another effective method of spreading the good news began to be used.
On April 16, 1922, Joseph F.
Rutherford made one of his first radio broadcasts, speaking to an estimated 50,000 people.
Then, on February 24, 1924, the organization’s first radio station, WBBR, began broadcasting.
Some portions of the Bible were initially directed to one individual or group.
That is why, before reading God’s Word, we do well to pray for an open mind and for wisdom to discern the lessons that Jehovah wants us to learn.
As you read a Bible passage, take time to pause and ask yourself such questions as these: What does this tell me about Jehovah?
How can I apply this information in my life?
How can I use it to help others?
When we reflect on such questions, we will surely get more out of our Bible reading.
As an example, think about the Scriptural qualifications for Christian elders.
Since the majority of us do not serve as elders, we might initially think that this passage would have little application to our own life.
However, this list of qualifications can benefit all of us in a number of ways.
It has been said that man’s necessities are few, but his wants are infinite.
It seems that many cannot see the difference between material needs and wants.
What is the difference?
A need is something you must have because your life depends on it.
Food, clothing, and shelter—these are legitimate necessities.
A want is something you would like to have, but it is not essential for everyday living.
What people want may vary considerably, depending on where they live.
In developing countries, many may simply want to have enough money to buy a cell phone, a motorbike, or a small plot of land.
In wealthier lands, the urge may be to acquire a lavish wardrobe, a bigger house, or a more expensive automobile.
In any case, herein lies a real danger—becoming ensnared by materialism, wanting more and more things, whether we need them or not and whether we can afford them or not.
Many are so wrapped up in their mundane affairs of life that they are not conscious of their spiritual need.
They are engrossed in the material attractions of the world that foster the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes.
Instead of the world’s spirit, we welcome in our life the influence of God’s spirit by which Jehovah has given us a clear understanding of the events that lie ahead of us.
Yet, we realize that it does not take anything extraordinary to make a person spiritually drowsy—the ordinary things of life will do that if allowed to crowd out our spiritual activities.
Others may ridicule us for keeping on the watch, but that is no reason for us to lose our sense of urgency.
Instead, we must regularly associate with fellow Christians at our congregation meetings, where God’s spirit is present.
The apostle Peter wrote those words to encourage Christians to endure the hardships heaped on them by Satan.
The experiences of those who have endured teach us how to remain steadfast and remind us that our faithful course will be rewarded.
Perhaps you face bitter opposition, even persecution, from enemies of true worship.
Or you are a congregation elder or a circuit overseer who feels the weight of your heavy responsibilities.
Meditate on the example of Paul.
He faced numerous things of an external kind by vicious persecutors, and he felt daily pressure on account of his anxiety for the congregations.
Yet, he refused to give up, and his example strengthened others.
When you endure hardship, remember that your example is likely encouraging others to endure.
We cannot develop faith simply by our own willpower.
Faith is an aspect of the fruitage of God’s holy spirit.
Thus, we are wise to follow Jesus counsel about praying for more of that spirit because Jesus assures us that the Father will give holy spirit to those asking him.
Once our faith is established, we must continue to nourish it.
Our faith might be compared to a wood fire.
When the fire is started, it may come roaring to life in an intense blaze.
However, if nothing more is done to the fire, it will eventually die down to hot coals that, in turn, will become cold ashes if left alone.
But if you regularly feed the fire with more wood, it can be kept going indefinitely.
So, too, our faith can be kept alive if we regularly feed on God’s Word.
By progressively studying the Bible, we can develop a deep love for it and its Author, and that will become the basis for building more faith.
It is difficult to imagine the wonders that Jehovah has in store for anointed Christians when they are seated on thrones to rule with Christ in heaven.
They will make up the New Jerusalem, the bride of Christ.
They will share with Jesus in the healing of the nations, directing obedient humans to the means to become free from the burden of sin and death and raising them to perfection.
One of the greatest earthly demonstrations of Jehovah’s marvelous kindness will be the resurrection of humans from the Grave.
Faithful men and women of old who died before Christ’s sacrificial death, as well as all those other sheep who die faithful during the last days, will be brought back to life to continue serving Jehovah.
We can contribute to the spiritual cleanness of the congregation by following the direction found in God’s Word.
Consider the situation in ancient Corinth.
Paul had poured himself out preaching in that city, and he loved his fellow holy ones there.
But how troubling it must have been for him to have to address the problem of sexual immorality that was being tolerated in that congregation! Paul directed the elders to hand the immoral man over to Satan—in other words, to disfellowship him.
To preserve the congregation’s purity, the elders needed to clear out the leaven.
When we support the elders decision to disfellowship an unrepentant wrongdoer, we help to maintain the cleanness of the congregation and perhaps move the person to repent and seek Jehovah’s forgiveness.
When the Jewish exiles entered ancient Babylon, they saw a city filled with idols and found a people enslaved to wicked spirits.
Nevertheless, faithful Jews, such as Daniel and his three companions, refused to be molded by the world of Babylon.
Daniel and his companions were determined to give exclusive devotion to Jehovah as their Potter.
And they succeeded! Daniel lived in Babylon nearly all his life; yet, God’s angel said that he was a very precious man.
In Bible times, a potter might press the clay into a mold so that it would take on the shape he desired.
True worshippers today recognize Jehovah as the Universal Sovereign, the one having authority to mold peoples and nations.
God also has the authority to mold us personally.
However, he recognizes our free will and wants us to submit to him voluntarily.
About 6,000 years ago, God’s will was being done perfectly on earth.
That is why Jehovah could look upon the fine start he had given to mankind and say: It was very good.
Then Satan rebelled, and ever since, comparatively few humans have done God’s will on earth.
But today we are privileged to be alive at a time when about eight million Witnesses not only are praying for God’s will to take place on earth but also are striving to live in harmony with that prayer.
They do so by their way of life and by having a zealous share in the disciple-making work.
Until the enemies of God’s Kingdom are removed from the earth, we will continue to pray for God’s will to be done.
Then we will see God’s will taking place in an even more complete way as billions are resurrected on a paradise earth.
What a wonderful time to be alive to welcome back our dead loved ones!
Jehovah also causes his creation to become whatever he chooses.
In line with the meaning of his name, God caused Noah to be an ark builder, Bezalel to be a master craftsman, Gideon to be a victorious warrior, and Paul to be an apostle to the nations.
Yes, God’s name has great meaning to his people.
And the New World Bible Translation Committee would never undermine the name’s significance by omitting it from the Bible.
Over 130 language editions of the New World Translation honor God’s name by including it where it belongs in the sacred text.
In contrast, the current trend in Bible translation is to omit the divine name, substituting a title such as Lord or the name of a local god.
This is a prime reason why the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses has given priority to making available to as many people as possible a Bible that honors God’s name.
Reflecting his Father, Christ, the power of God, frequently opened his hand and satisfied the desires of his followers.
His doing so was not merely an expression of power.
He was guided by his heartfelt concern for others.
Consider .
Jesus disciples came to him to discuss the food situation.
Not only may they themselves have been hungry but they were concerned about the plight of the famished and weary crowd that had followed Jesus on foot from the cities.
What would he do?
With five loaves and two fish, Jesus fed about 5,000 men, as well as women and children! The crowds ate and were satisfied.
This suggests that there was an abundant supply of food.
Jesus kindly provided, not a mere taste of bread, but a meal that would sustain the crowds for their long journey back home.
And 12 baskets were filled with the leftovers!
Suppose a beloved relative is disfellowshipped.
From your study of the Bible, you know how disfellowshipped ones are to be treated.
Yet, upholding the disfellowshipping decision may at times seem very difficult, even impossible.
Can you trust that your heavenly Father will give you the fortitude you need to be resolute in abiding by the Bible’s direction about disfellowshipping?
Do you see here an opportunity for you to make your relationship with Jehovah stronger by forming a closer bond with him?
Does this suggest that we should not have strong love for our relatives?
Of course not! But our strongest love should be for Jehovah.
This is actually in the best interests of our relatives, whether they are presently serving Jehovah or not.
And if you are particularly troubled over the course of a disfellowshipped relative, pour out your heart to Jehovah in prayer.
Feeling good about the works of others and even having a degree of pride in ourselves can be healthy.
We are not expected to be ashamed of our family, culture, or the region where we grew up.
On the other hand, there is a kind of pride that can eat away at relationships and damage our friendship with Jehovah.
Such pride can cause us to resent and reject needed counsel rather than humbly accept it.
This type of pride is defined as inordinate self-esteem or a haughty attitude shown by people who believe, often unjustifiably, that they are better than others.
Jehovah hates arrogant pride.
But Satan must delight to see humans display boastful pride, for it echoes his own arrogance.
How Satan must have reveled in the boasting of such men as Nimrod, Pharaoh, and Absalom—all of whom fell victim to improper pride!—.
Shortly before the remaining ones of the 144,000 are taken to heaven, Gog will attack God’s people.
What reaction does this provoke?
On earth, God’s people will appear to be defenseless.
They will obey the instructions given in the days of King Jehoshaphat: You will not need to fight this battle.
Take your position, stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah in your behalf.
O Judah and Jerusalem, do not be afraid or be terrified.
In heaven, however, there is a different reaction.
Referring to the time when all the anointed are in heaven, tells us this about the enemies of God’s people: These will battle with the Lamb, but because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, the Lamb will conquer them.
Also, those with him who are called and chosen and faithful will do so.
Together with his 144,000 corulers in heaven, Jesus will come to the rescue of God’s people here on earth.
Our respect for the God who invites us to Christian meetings should be manifested in our decorum, dress, and grooming.
Respect also requires that we avoid extremes.
Jehovah wants his servants and other guests to feel comfortable at the Kingdom Hall.
At the same time, those in attendance would not want to detract from the meetings by being overly casual in their dress, by texting or talking during the meetings, by eating and drinking, and so on.
Parents should train their children to understand that the Kingdom Hall is not the place for running or playing.
Filled with indignation, Jesus threw out of God’s temple those who were introducing commercial activities.
Our Kingdom Halls too are places for pure worship and spiritual education.
So any business activities that have nothing to do with spiritual pursuits ought to be taken care of elsewhere.
Compare .
The Greek word translated devoting themselves implies enduring or persevering in a course with intense effort.
Under Roman rule and faced with opposition by the Jewish religious leaders, those early Christians did not find it easy to attend meetings.
Nevertheless, they persevered.
Many modern-day servants of Jehovah have shown deep appreciation for Christian meetings.
George Gangas, who served on the Governing Body for over 22 years, stated: To me, meeting with the brothers is one of life’s greatest pleasures and a source of encouragement.
He added: My innermost thought and desire is to attend the meetings.
Do you feel the same way about gathering together to worship Jehovah?
Then be determined to endure and persevere in your earnest efforts to attend meetings regularly.
You will thus show that you agree with King David, who said: Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell.
In the Bible, enduring means more than simply putting up with trials or adversity.
Endurance involves our mind and heart, or the way we react to hardships.
A person who endures manifests courage, steadfastness, and patience.
Endurance is the spirit which can bear things, not simply with resignation, but with blazing hope, says one reference work.
It is the quality which keeps a man on his feet with his face to the wind.
It is the virtue which can transmute the hardest trial into glory because beyond the pain it sees the goal.
Christian endurance is motivated by love.
Love for Jehovah motivates us to endure anything that is in harmony with his will.
Love for our brothers helps us to endure their imperfections.
Love for our marriage mate enables us to endure tribulation that even happily married couples experience and to strengthen the marital bond.
Down through history, Jehovah has provided specific instructions or directions.
For example, in the garden of Eden, Jehovah gave clear instructions that could guide the human family to everlasting life and happiness.
Had Adam and Eve obeyed his direction, they would have been spared tragic consequences—a life filled with pain and ending in their death with no hope.
But rather than obey, Eve listened to advice that seemed to come from a lowly animal.
Adam, in turn, listened to her voice, the voice of a mortal human.
Both of them turned their backs on their loving Father’s guidance.
Consequently, the human family in general was on a fatal path.
Today, Jehovah stands before his people, as it were, pointing them toward everlasting life, away from dangers.
More than that, he acts like a loving shepherd to his flock, calling out to the sheep proper direction and warnings so that they can avoid dangerous paths.
Through his written Word, Jehovah has given us a number of specific commands.
For example, he forbids sexual immorality, idolatry, stealing, and drunkenness.
Additionally, God’s Son, Jesus Christ, gave his followers this challenging, though thrilling, command: Go, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.
And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.
What a protection divine laws and commandments have proved to be! Obeying them has increased our self-respect, contributed to good health, and enhanced family happiness.
More important, our loyal adherence to Jehovah’s commands, including the command to share in the preaching work, has brought us his approval and blessing.
As we yield to the guidance of God’s holy spirit and align our thinking with Jehovah’s viewpoint as revealed in his Word, we will become more godly in our thoughts, words, and actions.
Even then, we will need to remain on guard against succumbing to our particular weaknesses.
If your spiritual progress seems slow, remember that such growth takes time.
The cultivating of spiritual qualities is an ongoing process.
We must be patient as we endeavor to let the Bible continue to produce positive changes in our life.
At first, we may need to discipline ourselves to do what is Scripturally right.
In time, though, thinking and acting in a godly way will likely become easier and more natural for us as our thoughts and actions progressively line up with those of Jehovah God.
Think about how the preaching of the good news fits in with Jehovah’s loving purpose for humankind.
He purposed that humans would inhabit the earth without ever dying; though Adam sinned, Jehovah did not change His mind.
Instead, he arranged for humans to be delivered from condemnation to sin and death.
Working along with that purpose, Jesus came to earth and sacrificed his life for obedient humans.
In order to become obedient, however, they had to understand what God required of them.
So Jesus also taught people what God’s requirements are, and he commanded his disciples to do the same.
By helping others to become reconciled to God, we share directly in his loving arrangement to rescue mankind from sin and death.
This also demonstrates our love both for our fellow man and for Jehovah, whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
If you have strong conviction, it is reasonable to expect that you will show it by your actions.
Young ones must also manifest holy acts of conduct.
To do so, you must be morally clean.
How are you doing in that regard?
For example, think about the past six months.
How have you demonstrated that your powers of discernment have been trained to distinguish right from wrong?
Can you think of specific occasions when you resisted temptation or peer pressure?
Does your conduct at school speak well of your faith?
Do you stand up for your faith rather than try to blend in with your classmates just to avoid ridicule?
Admittedly, no one is perfect.
Even longtime servants of Jehovah may at times feel timid about taking a public stand for their faith.
However, a person who is dedicated to Jehovah will rightly be proud to bear God’s name, and he shows this by his conduct.
Abner supported Saul’s efforts to kill David, even though Abner knew that God had chosen David to rule as king of Israel.
After Saul’s death, Abner could have shown humility and proved his loyalty to God by supporting David, not Saul’s son Ish-bosheth.
Later, when Abner had relations with King Saul’s concubine, he may have been seeking the throne for himself.
Similarly, lack of humility prevented David’s son Absalom from being loyal to God.
Why, Absalom acquired for himself a chariot and horses and 50 men to run before him! He also stole the people’s loyalty.
Like Abner, Absalom sought to kill David, even though he knew that Jehovah had appointed David as Israel’s king.
The examples of Abner and Absalom make it clear that inordinate ambition can easily cause a person to become disloyal to God.
Surely, no faithful servant of Jehovah would pursue such a selfish and wicked course.
Seeing Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, just as Jesus had prophesied, Christians in Judea, and especially those living in Jerusalem, had to act decisively.
Jesus had warned them that they would need to flee as soon as they saw these events start to unfold.
In the 28 years since Jesus had uttered that prophecy, the faithful Jewish Christians living in Israel had already faced much opposition and persecution successfully.
Yet, Paul knew that they were about to be confronted with one of the most challenging tests of their faith.
He wanted them to be prepared for whatever might come their way.
They would need exceptional endurance and faith—faith strong enough to preserve their lives.
So Paul was prompted by Jehovah’s spirit to write those dear brothers and sisters a letter designed to meet their special needs.
That letter is now known as the book of Hebrews.
Do you find that it is often a challenge to come up with delightful words?
If so, you may need to enlarge your vocabulary.
One way to do this is to take note of how words are used in the Bible and in our Christian publications.
Learn the meanings of unfamiliar expressions.
More important, learn how to use words in a way that helps others.
Regarding the relationship between Jehovah and his firstborn Son, we read: Jehovah has given me Jesus the tongue of those taught, so that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word.
Taking time to meditate on what we are going to say can help us to find the right words.
We could ask ourselves, Will these words really convey what I want to say? What effect will my choice of words have on my listener?
Do those of the other sheep need to know the names of all those who are anointed today?
The short answer is no.
Why not?
Because even if someone has received the heavenly calling, that person has received only an invitation, not a final confirmation of the reward.
That is why Satan raises up false prophets to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.
No one can know whether an anointed Christian will receive his heavenly reward until Jehovah judges that person to be worthy of such a prize.
Jehovah makes this determination and gives him the final sealing either sometime before he dies faithful or sometime before the outbreak of the great tribulation.
It would be pointless, then, for anyone now living on earth to try to ascertain who among God’s servants will eventually be part of the 144,000.
We cannot properly accept God’s love without recognizing our obligation to love our brothers.
How can we demonstrate our love in practical ways?
Consider the example of Jesus.
During his earthly ministry, he gave special attention to lowly ones.
He reached out to those with physical infirmities—the lame, the blind, the deaf, and the speechless.
Jesus took pleasure in teaching spiritually hungry ones, those who were viewed by the Jewish religious leaders as accursed people.
He loved these lowly ones and worked hard to minister to them.
Can you consider the brothers and sisters in your own congregation?
No doubt you will see some who could benefit from your love.
Perhaps there are elderly ones who need help.
We must let God’s love move us to reach out and express our love for our brothers.
For your relationship with Jehovah to be real, you must be convinced that he is hearing prayers.
Consider this: From his prehuman existence, Jesus observed firsthand Jehovah’s response to the prayers of His human servants.
Then, during his earthly ministry, Jesus used prayer as his means of communicating his feelings to his Father in heaven.
Would he have done so—even spending an entire night in prayer—had he thought that Jehovah was not really listening?
Would he have taught his disciples to pray had he thought that prayer was nothing more than a psychological crutch?
Clearly, Jesus knew that prayer is real communication with Jehovah.
We too can have confidence that Jehovah is the Hearer of prayer.
When you pray humbly in the presence of your children, they will learn to rely on Jehovah.
Ana, who lives in Brazil, states: When there were problems, such as when my grandparents were ill, my parents would ask Jehovah to give them the strength to cope with the situation and the wisdom to make good decisions.
Even when under terrible pressure, they left their problems in Jehovah’s hands.
As a result, I learned to rely on Jehovah.
When you pray with your children, do not pray just for them.
Ask Jehovah to help you too—perhaps to help you speak to your employer about getting time off for a convention, to give you courage to witness to your neighbor, or to help you in other ways.
Humbly rely on God, and your children will learn to do so too.
As parents, your example of faith is very important.
Your children will observe what you do, and it certainly will affect them for the good.
So as parents, keep building your own faith.
Let your children see how real Jehovah is to you.
When a couple in Bermuda have anxious moments, they pray with their children that Jehovah guide them, and they encourage their children to pray on their own.
We also tell our older daughter, Have complete trust in Jehovah, keep busy in Kingdom service, and do not worry too much.
When she sees the outcome, she knows that Jehovah is helping us.
This has done wonders for her faith in God and in the Bible.
In the end, of course, children have to develop their own faith.
As parents, you can plant and water.
Only God can make it grow.
So pray for his spirit, and work hard to teach your precious children, for by doing so, you give Jehovah much to bless.
Even if we had a difficult childhood or if our present circumstances seem hopeless, we need to keep contending and persevering.
We can trust that if we do so, Jehovah will bless us.
Think of a situation that you are facing and that may be a trial for you.
Perhaps it is some type of injustice, prejudice, or ridicule.
Or the trial you face may be that someone falsely accuses you, perhaps out of jealousy.
Rather than drop your hands in defeat, remember what enabled Jacob, Rachel, and Joseph to continue serving Jehovah with joy.
God strengthened and blessed them because they kept on showing deep appreciation for spiritual things.
They kept on contending and acting in harmony with their earnest prayers.
We are living close to the end of the present wicked system of things; thus, we have strong reason to hold on to the firm hope set before us! Are you willing to exert yourself to gain Jehovah’s favor?
Less than a century after the Christian congregation was established, a foretold apostasy began to develop.
Thereafter, it became increasingly difficult to identify who was truly serving God at his spiritual temple.
Only centuries later did the time arrive for Jehovah to clarify matters by means of his newly enthroned King, Jesus Christ.
By 1919, those approved by Jehovah and serving at his spiritual temple were clearly identified.
They had been spiritually refined in order to make their service to God even more acceptable to him.
What the apostle Paul had foreseen centuries before in a vision began to be fulfilled in a limited way.
We find Paul’s vision described at .
What Paul saw in a supernatural vision was referred to as a revelation.
It involved a future event, not something that existed in his day.
In 1914, war broke out between nations of Europe—a war that spread and engulfed the whole world.
By the time it ended in 1918, terrible food shortages had been experienced and there was a flu epidemic in which more people died than were killed in the war.
Thus the sign that Jesus had given to identify his invisible presence as earth’s new King started to be fulfilled.
Ample evidence points to the year 1914 as the time when a crown was given to the Lord Jesus Christ.
He went out conquering and to complete his conquest.
He cleansed the heavens in a war against Satan and his demons, who were hurled down to the vicinity of the earth.
Ever since, mankind has experienced the truthfulness of the inspired words of today’s text.
As Christians we are encouraged by visualizing our hope, whether it is heavenly or earthly.
Can you see yourself enjoying the things that God has promised?
Contemplating what you may do as God fulfills his promises undoubtedly brings joy to your heart.
Perhaps you see yourself living on earth forever.
Think about cooperating with others in making this globe into a paradise.
Your neighbors love Jehovah, even as you do.
You are healthy, energetic, and have a bright outlook.
Those supervising the work of restoration make life a pleasure because they genuinely care about you.
And you are happy using your talents and skills because everything you do is benefiting others and honoring God.
For example, you are helping newly resurrected ones to come to know Jehovah.
No, this is not a dreamworld.
This appealing mental picture is based on Scriptural truths about the future.
As servants of Jehovah, we are not among those who are misled into thinking that Satan does not exist.
We know that the Devil is real, for it was Satan who spoke to Eve through a serpent.
Satan taunted Jehovah regarding Job.
It was Satan who tried to tempt Jesus.
And after the birth of God’s Kingdom in 1914, it was Satan who began to wage war with the remnant of anointed ones.
That war still rages as Satan seeks to destroy the faith of the remnant of the 144,000 and the other sheep.
To win the battle, we must take our stand against Satan and remain firm in the faith.
Satan is anything but humble.
In fact, for a spirit creature to have the audacity to challenge Jehovah’s sovereignty and set himself up as a rival god is the epitome of pride and presumptuousness.
Therefore, one way that we can take a stand against Satan is by shunning pride and cultivating humility.
If we maintain our Christian integrity, we may well witness one of the greatest miracles of all time—the miracle of surviving the great tribulation.
Soon after the war of Armageddon, more miracles will occur, restoring humans to good health.
Imagine watching people discard eyeglasses, canes, crutches, wheelchairs, hearing aids, and the like.
Armageddon survivors will have work to do.
They can move forward with zest to make our planet, a gift from God, into a global paradise.
Jesus healings in the past encourage the great crowd today, reinforcing their joyous prospect of being healed of all ills.
Those healings reflected his deep feelings and showed just how much love God’s firstborn Son has for mankind.
Jesus compassion paints a touching portrait of Jehovah’s concern for each one of his servants.
Jesus miraculously provided a large amount of fine wine, enough for a sizable group.
It is of interest that when the Devil tempted Jesus to turn stones into loaves of bread, Christ refused to use his miraculous power to satisfy his personal desires.
But he did use his power to respond to and satisfy the needs of others.
How can we imitate Jesus unselfish concern for others?
He encouraged God’s servants to practice giving.
Can we show the noble quality of generosity by inviting others to our home to share a meal and a spiritual feast?
Can we be generous with our time after a meeting, aiding someone in need, such as by listening to a brother practice his talk?
What help might we be able to offer to those needing assistance in the ministry?
We show that we have learned from Jesus by generously providing material and spiritual things to others as we are able.
Circuit overseers around the world have noted that in many congregations, more needs to be done to train brothers—younger and older—to help care for the flock.
This presents a challenge.
Why is that the case?
If you are a Christian elder, you no doubt realize that personal training is important.
You know that more brothers are needed to keep existing congregations spiritually strong and to allow new congregations to be formed.
You also know that God’s Word urges you to teach others.
Even so, you may find it hard to do so.
After you have taken care of family needs, job requirements, congregation responsibilities, and other urgent matters, there just seems to be no time left to train others in the congregation.
Yet, training is needed in order for them to share the workload.
And as that is accomplished, everyone will benefit.
Bible accounts highlight the privilege we have of showing brotherly affection and serving one another.
The Son of God gave everything, including his life, in ministering to others.
Dorcas abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy.
Mary, a sister in Rome, worked hard in behalf of those in the congregation.
How can we help new ones grasp the importance of helping their brothers and sisters?
Mature Witnesses can invite new ones to come along when visiting the sick and the elderly.
If appropriate, parents can take their children on such visits.
Elders can work with others in making sure that our dear older ones have good food and that their homes are maintained.
In these ways, younger ones and those newly associated learn to perform acts of kindness for others and to appreciate that all in the congregation should feel loved.
A newly appointed brother should not feel that as soon as he receives some responsibility in the congregation, he needs to use it to change course—to do things in a way that is completely different from the way they were done before.
The need for change is determined, not by one’s desire for change, but by the needs of the congregation and the direction we receive from Jehovah’s organization.
So if you are appointed, reassure your fellow believers and show respect for experienced elders by continuing to use their Bible-based methods.
However, as you gain experience, you will no doubt share in applying changes that will help the congregation to stay in tune with Jehovah’s progressive organization.
In fact, Jehovah may in time move all you faithful learners to do even greater works than those of your teachers.
If you were one of the disciples who experienced that, you would never forget that day.
There would be no question in your mind that you were anointed by holy spirit, especially if you also received the miraculous gift of speaking in a foreign language.
But do all those who are anointed by holy spirit receive their anointing in the same spectacular manner as that first group of about 120 disciples did?
No.
The rest of those who were present in Jerusalem that day received their anointing at their baptism.
There was no tongue as if of fire above their heads.
Furthermore, not all anointed Christians receive their anointing at their baptism.
The Samaritans received their anointing by holy spirit sometime after their baptism.
On the other hand, in an exceptional instance, Cornelius and his household were anointed by holy spirit even before they were baptized.
Modestly, anointed ones acknowledge that they do not necessarily have more holy spirit than those with an earthly hope.
They do not claim to have special knowledge or revelations; neither do they try to prove that they are in some way superior.
They would also never suggest to others that these too have been anointed and should start partaking; rather, they would humbly acknowledge that it is Jehovah who does the calling of anointed ones.
Anointed Christians do not expect any special honor from others.
Jehovah’s spirit bore witness to them personally.
No announcement was made to the world.
So they are not surprised if some people do not readily believe that they have truly been anointed by holy spirit.
In fact, the Scriptures advise against quickly believing someone who claims to have a special appointment from God.
Even when someone says something offensive, responding with gracious words can have positive results.
For example, the teenage son of a single mother was leading a double life.
A well-meaning Christian sister said to the mother: It’s too bad you have failed at child training.
The mother thought for a moment and responded: It’s true that things are not going well right now, but his training is a work in progress.
Talk to me after Armageddon; then we will know for sure.
This mild response helped to maintain peace between the sisters, and it encouraged the son, who overheard the conversation.
He realized that his mother had not given up on him.
This moved him to stop his bad associations.
In time, he got baptized, and he later served at Bethel.
Whether in the company of our brothers, our family, or strangers, we should always let our words be gracious, seasoned with salt.
Every year thousands of young people around the world get baptized.
Christian parents and elders in the congregation want to make sure that such young ones make a decision that is not only voluntary but also well-founded.
The steps of dedication and baptism are the start of a life during which Christians will experience blessings from Jehovah but also opposition from Satan.
Therefore, Christian parents take time to teach their children what is involved in being a disciple of Christ.
In the case of young ones who have no Christian parents, the elders in the congregation will lovingly help them to count the cost of discipleship.
Just as it takes planning to complete a building project successfully, so it requires preparation to serve Jehovah faithfully to the end.
The Mosaic Law was given to one nation—fleshly Israel.
In contrast, spiritual Israel would be made up of people from many nations and backgrounds.
The Mosaic Law governed fleshly Israel in the Promised Land with laws carved on stone.
For spiritual Israel, the law of the Christ was mainly based on principles inscribed on hearts.
The law of the Christ would apply to and benefit Christians wherever they lived.
Spiritual Israel would benefit greatly from guidance from God through his Son.
Just prior to the establishment of the new covenant, Jesus gave two significant commands.
One dealt with the preaching work.
The other focused on the conduct of Jesus followers and how they were to treat fellow believers.
These directives were for all Christians; thus they apply to all true worshippers today, whether their hope is heavenly or earthly.
More than once, Jehovah stepped in and protected Abraham and Sarah, even doing so miraculously.
Those experiences strengthened Abraham’s faith.
Can we build a friendship with Jehovah?
We can indeed! The needed knowledge and experience are readily available.
Abraham had only a fraction of the abundant riches of wisdom now contained in the Bible.
God’s Word is full of treasures that can deepen our knowledge about the Maker of heaven and earth and help us to build respect and love for him.
As such feelings move us to obey God, we gain experience because we see how obeying him works out.
We find that his counsel protects us and that he blesses and strengthens us.
We learn that wholehearted service to God brings fulfillment, peace, and joy.
As we grow in such knowledge and experience, our faith in Jehovah and our friendship with him grow as well.
Those words reveal that Mary knew the inspired Scriptures well.
Her words seem to echo some that were spoken in prayer by Hannah, the mother of the prophet Samuel.
By one estimate, Mary made some 20 references to the Scriptures in her speech.
Clearly, she was a woman who spoke freely about spiritual things.
Mary drew liberally from the treasure trove in her heart, a storehouse of precious truths that she had learned from her greatest Friend, Jehovah God.
Like Mary, we may at times find that we receive assignments from Jehovah that seem challenging.
Like her, let us humbly put ourselves in Jehovah’s hands, trusting in him to act in our best interests.
We can imitate Mary’s faith by listening carefully to what we are learning about Jehovah and his purposes, by meditating on spiritual truths, and by joyously telling others about what we have learned.
If you are crushed by the discouraging words of a friend or family member, are plagued by a serious illness, or are grieved by the death of a loved one, you can find comfort in the example of Job.
Although he was unaware of the source of his troubles, Job did not give up in despair.
Why not?
For one thing, he feared God.
Job was determined to please Jehovah in favorable and unfavorable circumstances.
With God’s help, Job reflected on the wondrous things Jehovah had already accomplished by means of His holy spirit.
Job became even more confident that Jehovah would end his trials at the right time.
And that is precisely what happened.
Jehovah removed Job’s tribulation and restored his prosperity.
Jehovah gave him double what he had before.
Job lived a long and satisfying life.
We show caution by recognizing dangers early, and we remain innocent by not letting them lead us into compromise.
We must exercise caution when political issues are brought up.
For example, when presenting the Kingdom message, avoid either praising or criticizing the policies of a political party or leader.
Try to establish common ground with the householder by focusing on the underlying problem rather than on any proposed political solution.
Then, show from the Bible how God’s government will solve the problem completely and permanently.
If such volatile issues as same-sex marriage or abortion come up, defend God’s standards and explain how we follow these in our own lives.
During the discussion, remain strictly neutral on the political aspects of these topics.
We take no position regarding what laws should be enacted, repealed, or changed, and we do not pressure others to agree with our view.
An elder should start his training of another brother by taking time to develop a relaxed atmosphere and a bond of friendship with him.
The specific steps an elder takes will differ somewhat from land to land, depending on local circumstances and customs.
Yet, no matter where you live, if you as a busy elder set aside time to spend with a learner, you are telling him, in effect, You are important to me.
That unspoken message will be clearly understood and deeply valued by willing learners everywhere.
A successful teacher is someone who not only loves to train another person but also loves the person he is training.
Compare .
That crucial aspect of a teacher’s disposition is quickly discerned by a learner and greatly affects the way he responds to the training he receives.
Therefore, dear elders, as you give training, be more than a teacher—be a friend.
Suppose clarifying details concerning King Azariah King Uzziah had not been included in God’s Word, as is the case with other abbreviated Bible accounts?
Would you be inclined to question the righteousness of God?
Or would you reason that the Bible contains enough information to assure us that Jehovah always does what is right and is, in fact, the very standard of what is right and what is wrong?
As we get to know Jehovah better as a Person, our love and appreciation for his ways will grow to the point that we do not need an explanation for everything he does.
Be assured that such appreciation will grow in proportion to your efforts to study and meditate on God’s communication through his written Word.
This, in turn, will strengthen your relationship with Jehovah, making it ever more real.
By giving a list of qualifications for overseers, Jehovah reveals that he has a high standard for those who serve in an appointed capacity.
He expects them to set a good example, and he holds them accountable for the way they treat the congregation, which he purchased with the blood of his own Son.
Jehovah wants us to feel safe in the care of the appointed undershepherds.
From that standpoint, the Scriptural qualifications for Christian elders remind us of how much Jehovah truly cares for us.
In fact, each Christian can learn from the qualifications listed in these verses, as most of them involve things that Jehovah asks of all Christians.
For instance, all of us should be reasonable and sound in mind.
As elders prove to be examples to the flock, we can learn from them and imitate their faith.
To acquaint ourselves with Jehovah’s thinking, we need to make personal study a priority.
When reading or studying God’s Word, we might ask ourselves, What does this material reveal about Jehovah, his righteous ways, and his thinking?
We need to have an attitude like that of the psalmist David, who sang: Make me know your ways, O Jehovah; teach me your paths.
Cause me to walk in your truth and teach me, for you are my God of salvation.
In you I hope all day long.
As you meditate on a Bible passage, you might consider questions like these: How can I apply this information in my family?
Where can I apply it?
At home?
At work?
At school?
In the ministry?
Once we have determined where the material can be applied, it may become easier to perceive how we can put it to work.
Reflecting on that verse may help you to appreciate in a very personal way that Jehovah loves and cares for you.
Be assured that you do matter to Jehovah.
We should value the Bible highly because God communicates with us primarily by means of it.
Meaningful and compassionate communication between parents and their children is essential to building mutual trust and developing a feeling of being loved.
What can we expect of Jehovah?
Although we have never seen him or heard his voice, he speaks to us through his inspired Word, and we need to listen.
Jehovah desires to guide us, his dedicated people, and to protect us from harm.
He also wants us to know him and to put our trust in him.
How can we fight Satan and win?
Jesus told his disciples: By your endurance you will preserve your lives.
Nothing that any human can do will cause us permanent harm.
Nobody can take away our precious friendship with God unless we allow that to happen.
Even the death of Jehovah’s servants does not score a victory for Satan, for Jehovah will see to it that they are resurrected! On the other hand, Satan’s prospects are bleak indeed.
After the destruction of his ungodly system, Satan will be abyssed for 1,000 years.
At the end of Jesus Thousand Year Reign, Satan will be released from his prison for a short time to make a final attempt to mislead perfect mankind.
After that, the Devil will be destroyed.
Satan faces certain doom, but that is not true of you! Take your stand against Satan, firm in the faith.
You can fight Satan and win!
How will the great tribulation begin?
The book of Revelation answers by describing the destruction of Babylon the Great.
How appropriate that all false religion is likened to a prostitute! The clergy have prostituted themselves with the leaders of this wicked world.
Instead of loyally supporting Jesus and his Kingdom, they have given their support to human rulers and have compromised godly principles just to gain political influence.
They stand in stark contrast with the clean, virginlike anointed ones of God.
But who will destroy the harlotlike organization?
Jehovah God will put his thought into the hearts of the ten horns of the scarlet-colored wild beast.
These horns represent all the present political powers that give support to the United Nations, an organization pictured by the scarlet-colored wild beast.
Despite what Satan did in Eden, Jehovah held out hope for mankind in the first Bible prophecy.
God would send one who would crush the Devil and provide the means for obedient mankind to enjoy the prospect that the first human pair lost—that of living forever on the earth in keeping with Jehovah’s original purpose.
The rebellion of Adam and Eve had an impact on their marriage and on all marriages thereafter.
For example, Eve and her female descendants would experience much pain during pregnancy and childbirth.
Women would have a longing for their husbands, but men would dominate their wives, even abusively, as we see in many marriages today.
The Bible requires that husbands exercise headship in a loving way.
In turn, wives are to submit to the headship of their husbands.
Because of cooperation between God-fearing mates, situations that cause friction are kept to a minimum or eliminated entirely.
Our being able to conceive of events that we have not lived through can help us to imitate Jehovah’s wisdom and foresee the probable results of our actions.
If Jehovah chooses to do so, he can foresee in detail the results of certain actions.
We do not have that degree of foresight, but we do well to think about what could happen as a result of what we are about to do.
To imitate God’s wisdom, we would do well to think about or even visualize the likely consequences of our actions.
If we are courting, for example, we need to recognize the power of sexual attraction.
Never would we make plans or do anything that could endanger our precious relationship with Jehovah! Instead, let us act in harmony with these inspired words: The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, but the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.
If you struggle with temptation to engage in sexual immorality, what can you do?
Acknowledge your weakness.
Pray to God for strength.
Avoid situations that could lead to immorality.
And when a temptation arises, reject it without delay.
Jesus set a powerful example for us in resisting temptations.
He was not fooled by Satan’s promises, nor did he have to take time to weigh the pros and cons.
Rather, he immediately responded with the words: It is written.
Jesus knew God’s Word, and that made it possible for him to act quickly and quote scriptures in the face of temptation.
To fight Satan and win, we must not allow ourselves to be tempted to engage in sexual immorality.
This does not mean that the Devil kills all people directly.
However, his murderous spirit has permeated this world.
Moreover, because Eve believed Satan’s lie and Adam disobeyed God, sin and death spread to all mankind.
In that sense, the Devil has had the means to cause death.
He is what Jesus called him—a murderer.
What a powerful enemy we have in Satan! When we oppose Satan, we align ourselves against not only him but all those who side with him in the issue of universal sovereignty.
That number includes a sizable group of other spirit rebels, or demons.
Time and again, the demons have demonstrated their superhuman strength, causing great misery to those whom they have tormented.
Never underestimate the power of such wicked angels or that of the ruler of the demons.
Without help from Jehovah, we could never win our fight against Satan.
We can imitate Jesus gracious speech by being kind, courteous, and considerate of others feelings.
Seeing the effort a crowd made to hear him speak, Jesus was moved with pity and started to teach them many things.
Even when he was being insulted, Jesus did not resort to harsh speech.
Speaking with mildness and tact can be a challenge when our listener is someone whom we know very well.
We might feel at liberty to be very frank.
That can be true whether we speak with a family member or a close friend in the congregation.
Did Jesus feel that his close relationship with his disciples granted him liberty to speak harshly to them?
Not at all! When his closest followers continued to argue over who was greater, Jesus corrected them with kind words and an illustration of a young child.
Elders can imitate Jesus example by giving counsel in a spirit of mildness.
Loyalty is almost universally admired.
However, we would miss a vital lesson if we were to admire Jonathan’s loyalty to David without taking into account his loyalty to God.
Why did Jonathan view David as a friend rather than a rival?
Loyalty to God had first place in Jonathan’s heart.
Indeed, loyalty to Jehovah was the very basis for his loyalty to David.
And both men loyally lived up to their sworn oath.
As Christians, we do not merely admire loyalty in others; we ourselves are loyal to family members, friends, and fellow worshippers.
But what loyalty should take first place in our heart?
Why, it is loyalty to the One who gave us life! Maintaining that loyalty gives us true joy and satisfaction.
But if we are to prove loyal to God, we must stick to him even through difficult trials.
Picture an elderly man trudging up a mountainside.
He is making what must be the hardest journey of his life.
It is not his age that makes this trek so daunting.
Abraham may be about 125 years old, but he is still vigorous.
Following him is a younger man, perhaps 25 years of age.
It is his son Isaac, who is carrying firewood.
Abraham has a knife and the means to start a fire.
Jehovah has asked him to sacrifice his own son! Abraham was facing what was likely the greatest test of his faith.
Abraham did not obey God blindly.
Instead, he obeyed because he could see.
With eyes of genuine faith, he saw that his heavenly Father, Jehovah, never asks His faithful servants to do anything that will result in their lasting harm.
Abraham knew that if he obeyed Jehovah, his God would bless him and his beloved son.
On what was that faith based?
On knowledge and experience.
Much of what is produced by this world’s media can be spiritually dangerous to Christians.
Such material is not designed to build faith in Jehovah and his promises.
Instead, it reflects Satan’s evil world and its goals.
Therefore, we need to exercise great caution so that we do not choose material that could arouse worldly desires.
In contrast with what the world produces, the material produced by Jehovah’s organization in these last days encourages conduct that leads to eternal life.
How blessed we are to have magazines, brochures, books, videos, and Web pages that promote true worship! God’s organization also provides regular meetings in more than 110,000 congregations worldwide.
At those meetings and at assemblies and conventions, we consider Bible-based material that builds faith in God and his promises.
Having regular communication with Jehovah is a vital part of drawing close to him.
How can you communicate with God?
You talk to Jehovah by means of your frequent prayers to him.
And you allow Jehovah to talk to you, as it were, when you regularly read his written Word and meditate on it.
When you are specific in your prayers, you become more keenly aware of Jehovah’s answers, even though they may be subtle.
Answered prayers will make Jehovah more real to you.
In addition, the more you express your innermost concerns to Jehovah, the closer he will draw to you.
Developing a closer relationship with Jehovah is a lifetime pursuit.
We must take steps to draw close to God if we want him to take corresponding action toward us.
By all means, then, let us remain in regular communication with our God by means of Bible study and prayer.
As a result, our ever-growing relationship with Jehovah will enable us to meet our trials successfully.
Personal interests and pleasures will have their place in God’s new world.
After all, why did Jehovah create us with a hunger for personal accomplishment and wholesome pleasures if he did not intend to have us satisfy these desires to the full?
In this and other ways, Jehovah will always satisfy the desire of every living thing.
Recreation and relaxation have their place, but the pleasure derived from them is increased when we put our relationship with Jehovah first.
It will also be that way in the earthly Paradise.
How wise it is for us to learn to keep personal interests in their proper place while we seek first the Kingdom and focus on the spiritual blessings now available to Jehovah’s people! In the coming Paradise, we will attain happiness on a level that we have never before experienced.
May we show the intensity of our desire for the real life by preparing for it now.
For the composite sign of Christ’s presence to serve its purpose, the fulfillment of it would have to be obvious enough to command the attention of those who have been obeying Jesus counsel to keep on the watch.
And that has been the case since 1914.
From that time onward, the features of the sign have been undergoing fulfillment.
Clearly, we are now living in the conclusion of the system of things—a limited period of time leading up to and including the destruction of this wicked system.
Why, then, should Christians today keep in expectation?
Out of obedience to Jesus Christ, we remain in expectation.
Also, we recognize the sign of his presence.
Our expectations are based, not on a naive readiness to believe anything, but on solid Scriptural evidence that compels us to remain vigilant, awake, watchful and, yes, in expectation of this wicked system’s end.
The war of Armageddon will lead to the magnifying of Jehovah’s holy name.
At that time, all goatlike ones will depart into everlasting cutting-off.
The earth will finally be cleansed of all wickedness, and the great crowd will pass through the final part of the great tribulation.
With these exciting events ahead of us, what should each of us now be doing?
The apostle Peter was inspired to write: Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion, as you await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah Therefore, beloved ones, since you are awaiting these things, do your utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.
Let us, then, be resolved to remain spiritually clean, supporting the King of Peace.
How might we see Jehovah’s hand in our lives?
Consider: Perhaps you feel that the way you received the truth was clearly at God’s direction.
Have you ever attended Christian meetings, heard a part, and said: That was just what I needed?
Or you may have experienced an answer to a prayer.
Maybe you decided to expand your ministry and were amazed at how Jehovah helped to work things out for you.
Or have you ever experienced leaving a job for spiritual reasons and then seen the truth of God’s promise: I will never abandon you?
By being spiritually alert and pure in heart, we can discern how Jehovah has helped us in many ways.
How can we be pure in heart?
We must be clean on the inside and stop any wrong conduct.
As we cultivate stronger spirituality and manifest upright conduct, we put ourselves among those who can see God.
God’s servants have long understood that training contributes to success.
The patriarch Abram mobilized his trained men to rescue Lot—and the men succeeded.
In King David’s day, the singers for God’s house were trained in song to Jehovah and brought praise to God.
Today, we are fighting a spiritual war against Satan and his followers.
Also, we are exerting ourselves in our effort to bring praise to Jehovah.
Hence, like God’s servants in the past, to be successful we need to be trained.
In the congregation, Jehovah entrusts the elders with the responsibility of training others.
Before teaching a less experienced brother a set of skills, an elder may discern the need to share some nourishing Scriptural thoughts with him so as to make his heart more responsive to the training he will receive.
The wind and waves surrounding Peter as he walked on the water might be compared to the trials and temptations we face in our life of dedication to God.
Even when these are severe, we can stand firm with Jehovah’s support.
Recall that Peter did not sink because of a gust of wind or a big wave.
Think back on the sequence of events: Looking at the windstorm, he became afraid.
Peter lost his focus on Jesus, and then his faith wavered.
We could begin to sink if we were to begin looking at the windstorm, focusing on its power and doubting that Jehovah will support us.
We should take seriously the possibility that our faith could diminish, for the Bible refers to a weakening of faith or loss of faith as the sin that easily entangles us.
As Peter’s experience shows, our faith can quickly weaken if we focus on the wrong things.
Although Jesus disciples repeatedly argued about who was the greatest among them, Jesus did not give up on them.
He also did not ignore it when they failed to respond to his counsel.
Lovingly and mildly, Jesus reproved them at a suitable time and place.
Show your love for your children by disciplining them.
It is sometimes enough to explain why a certain course is right or wrong.
At other times, a child may fail to apply what you say.
When that happens, imitate Jesus.
At a fitting time and place, discipline your child lovingly and mildly through patient guidance, training, and correction.
My parents never disciplined me in anger or without explaining why I was being disciplined, says Elaine, a sister in South Africa.
As a result, I felt secure.
I knew my boundaries, and I understood what was required of me.
Whether people agree with us or bitterly oppose us, few would deny that as a group Jehovah’s Witnesses are well-known for their preaching activities.
It may even be that you have met people in your ministry who have stated that while they disagree with our beliefs, they respect us for the work we do.
As we know, Jesus foretold that the good news of the Kingdom would be preached in all the inhabited earth.
Many religious groups feel that they are preaching the Gospel, or good news.
However, their efforts are often limited to personal testimonies, church services, or programs broadcast through the media—whether by means of television or on the Internet.
Others point to their charitable activities or their endeavors in the fields of medicine and education.
How do these claims measure up when compared with what Jesus commanded his disciples to do?
What work must endurance complete?
It helps us to be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.
Trials often reveal our weaknesses, aspects of our personality that we need to refine.
If we endure those trials, however, our Christian personality becomes more complete, or sound.
For example, we may become more patient, appreciative, and compassionate.
Because endurance completes the vital work of molding us as Christians, do not compromise Scriptural principles to bring an end to tests that come your way.
For instance, what if you struggle with unclean thoughts?
Rather than give in to temptation, prayerfully reject such desires.
You will thus fortify your self-control.
Are you facing opposition from an unbelieving family member?
Instead of yielding under pressure, be determined to maintain your pattern of wholehearted worship.
Remember: To have God’s approval, we must endure.
We know that taking undue pride in tribe, culture, or nation puts us at odds with Jehovah’s view of human rule and the human family.
Of course, God does not expect us to renounce our culture.
In fact, cultural differences illustrate the marvelous diversity of the human family.
Still, we must remember that in God’s sight, all people are equal.
Taking undue pride in our place of origin is at the heart of nationalism and could be the first step on a path to compromise.
Christians are not immune to such pride, for even some in the first-century congregation discriminated against their brothers because of their nationality.
How can we tell if undue pride is taking root in us?
Suppose a brother or sister from another land offered you a suggestion.
Would you reject it, immediately thinking, We do things better around here’?
Instead, we should all apply the inspired counsel of today’s text.
Many of the problems addressed in our publications for young people are not unique to them.
All of us need to defend our faith, control our emotions, reject harmful peer pressure, and avoid unwholesome associations and entertainment.
These topics and many others have been addressed in material designed for teenagers.
Should adult Christians feel that it is demeaning for them to read publications directed to young people?
Not at all! Although the material is presented in a way that appeals to youths, the information is based on timeless Scriptural principles, and all of us can benefit from these spiritual provisions.
Besides helping young people to deal with problems, our publications help them to grow spiritually and draw close to Jehovah.
Here, too, adult Christians can benefit.
Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.
What a powerful statement! That reminder fortified the Israelites to confront the challenges facing them as they entered and took possession of the Promised Land.
Our taking those words to heart will empower us to face the great tribulation just ahead and contribute to the Paradise to follow.
Let us go on rendering exclusive devotion to Jehovah by loving and serving him whole-souled and putting forth earnest effort to maintain oneness in the Christian brotherhood.
If we continue to do so, we can look forward with confidence to seeing fulfilled what Jesus said about those whom he will judge as sheep: Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.
Since 1914, human governments have become rivals to God’s Kingdom, which will soon execute judgment on the nations by destroying them.
God lets the world’s political structure remain because it provides a measure of stability that, in turn, helps us to preach the good news of the Kingdom.
God even directs us to pray concerning those in authority, especially when their decisions might affect our worship.
We appeal to government authorities for fair treatment, as the apostle Paul did.
Although the Bible teaches that God’s adversary, Satan, has authority over political systems, it does not say that he directly controls each leader or official.
We should therefore avoid implying that a particular official is controlled by the Devil.
Instead, when dealing with governments and authorities, we speak injuriously of no one.
Jesus listeners were anxious about things they ought not be anxious about.
Jesus said to stop that—and for good reason.
Needless anxiety or worry, even about legitimate concerns, can divide a person’s mind and distract him, shutting out the more important spiritual matters of life.
Jesus was so concerned for his disciples that he warned them about this dangerous tendency four more times in his Sermon on the Mount.
Jesus was well-aware of people’s day-to-day needs.
More than that, he knew of the difficult conditions facing his disciples who centuries later would live during the last days, characterized by critical times hard to deal with.
Such conditions include unemployment, inflation, food shortages, and abject poverty that many experience.
Yet, Jesus also realized that life means more than food and the body than clothing.
The expression spiritual paradise has become a part of our theocratic vocabulary.
It describes our unique, spiritually rich environment, or condition, which allows us to enjoy peace with God and with our brothers.
Of course, we should not conclude that the terms spiritual paradise and spiritual temple are the same.
The spiritual temple is God’s arrangement for true worship.
The spiritual paradise serves to identify clearly those who have God’s approval and who are today serving him at his spiritual temple.
How exciting it is to know that since 1919, Jehovah has allowed imperfect humans to work with him in cultivating, strengthening, and expanding the spiritual paradise on earth! Do you see yourself playing a part in this marvelous work? Are you moved to continue working with Jehovah in glorifying the place for his feet’?
Marriage is very much a part of life.
A review of its origin and purpose can help us to have a proper view of this relationship and enjoy its intended blessings more fully.
After God created the first man, Adam, the animals were brought to him so that he could name them.
But for man there was no helper as a complement of him.
God therefore caused Adam to fall into a deep sleep, took a rib from him, built it into a woman, and brought her to the man.
Thus, marriage is of divine origin.
Jesus confirmed that it was Jehovah who stated: A man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh.
God’s use of a rib from Adam in creating the first woman could have impressed on the first human couple the closeness of their union.
There was no arrangement for divorce or for having more than one mate at the same time.
Our enemies may attack us when we least expect it and kick us when we are at our lowest point, so we must ever remain alert.
The encouragement not to let ourselves be conquered by the evil shows that we can defeat evil.
We can do so if we keep on fighting against it.
In contrast, we could be overcome by Satan, his evil world, and our imperfect flesh if we let our guard down and quit fighting.
Never allow Satan to intimidate you into dropping your hands in defeat! To be successful, those who are contending must not lose sight of their reason for struggling.
To gain God’s approval and blessing, they should keep focused on the assurance that we read at : Whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.
The Greek verb translated earnestly seeking is a form that implies intensity and concerted effort.
Serious problems that persist in marriage may lead one mate or both mates to consider separation or divorce.
Separating from one’s marriage partner should not be viewed lightly.
Though separation may seem to be the answer when serious difficulties arise, it often causes more problems.
After repeating what God had stated about a man leaving his father and his mother and sticking to his wife, Jesus said: What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.
This also means that neither a husband nor a wife should put apart what God has yoked together.
Jehovah views marriage as a lifelong bond.
Bearing in mind that all of us will render an account to God should move marriage mates to make earnest efforts to resolve problems quickly so that these do not become more serious.
Children tend to have a vivid imagination.
So parents, try to use illustrations liberally in your teaching.
Effective illustrations can strengthen a child’s faith in the accuracy of the Bible.
For example, consider today’s text.
How might you show that this scripture was inspired?
You could just state facts.
Instead, why not stimulate your child’s imagination?
Bring up the fact that Job lived long before telescopes and spaceships.
Your child’s job could be to show how difficult it might be for some to believe that a very large object, such as the earth, could sit on nothing.
The child could use a ball or a stone to illustrate the point by showing that objects with mass have to rest on something.
Such a lesson would impress on your child that Jehovah had facts recorded in the Bible long before humans could prove them.
God’s Word provides practical guidance that can help us to make wise choices that will bring glory to God.
Still, what we wear involves some personal preference.
Our individual tastes vary, as do our financial resources.
But our clothes should always be neat, clean, modest, appropriate to the occasion, and acceptable locally.
We must admit that it is not always easy to make a decision that shows good judgment, that is sensible, and that takes all factors into account.
Many stores cater to popular fashions, so it may take more time and effort to find modest skirts, dresses, and blouses or suits and slacks that are not too tight.
Yet, fellow believers will likely note and appreciate the results of our sincere efforts to find attractive and appropriate clothing.
And the satisfaction we have of bringing glory to our loving heavenly Father more than makes up for any inconveniences that we may face to dress so as to glorify him.
When Daniel and his companions were exiled, the Babylonians tried to assimilate them into their culture by teaching them the language of the Chaldeans.
Moreover, the court official in charge of their training gave them Babylonian names.
The name given to Daniel referred to Bel, the main divinity of Babylon.
King Nebuchadnezzar likely wanted to impress Daniel with the idea that his God, Jehovah, had been subjected by Babylon’s god.
Although Daniel was offered food to eat from the king’s delicacies, he resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself.
Because he kept studying the sacred books in his mother tongue, he maintained his spiritual health while living in a foreign land.
Thus, some 70 years after his arrival in Babylon, he was still known by his Hebrew name.
Faith involves much more than a mental understanding of God’s purpose.
It is a powerful motivating force that impels a person to act in harmony with God’s will.
Faith in God’s means of salvation moves a believer to share the good news with others.
Our prospect of enjoying eternal life in God’s new world depends on our having faith and keeping it strong.
The need to keep our faith healthy can be likened to a plant’s need for water.
Unlike an artificial plant, a living plant keeps changing.
A live plant either withers because of a lack of water or continues to thrive with a regular supply of moisture.
If deprived of sufficient water, a once healthy plant will eventually die.
So, too, our faith.
It will wither and die if neglected.
But if we give it due attention, our faith will stay alive and keep growing, and we will be healthy in faith.
Just like Jesus early followers, we meet together to learn and to be encouraged.
Even experienced servants of God need encouragement.
Consider Joshua.
He had served God faithfully for many years.
Yet, Jehovah told Moses to encourage him, saying: Commission Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him, because he is the one who will cross over before this people and he is the one who will cause them to inherit the land that you will see.
Joshua was about to take on the huge responsibility of leading the Israelites in the conquest of the Promised Land.
He would face setbacks and at least one military defeat.
No wonder Joshua needed to be encouraged and strengthened! So let us personally encourage elders, including circuit overseers, who work hard to care for the flock of God.
What methods did Jesus and his disciples use to preach the good news?
They went to the people wherever they could be found—in public areas and in private homes.
The preaching work included searching for deserving ones from house to house.
This systematic method showed impartiality.
What has been the record of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
They are the only ones who preach that Jesus has been ruling as King since 1914.
As Jesus instructed, they place a high priority on the preaching work.
The book Pillars of Faith—American Congregations and Their Partners notes: Jehovah’s Witnesses never forget that their primary task is delivering a spiritual message about the coming end of the world and the necessity for salvation.
Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to deliver that message, using methods that Jesus and his disciples used.
When we base our decisions on Jehovah’s thinking, we draw closer to him.
We enjoy his approval and blessing.
This, in turn, strengthens our faith in our heavenly Father.
Therefore, let us be guided by Bible laws and principles, for they reveal God’s mind on matters.
Of course, we will always have something new to learn about Jehovah.
With diligent effort, however, we can even now acquire the wisdom, knowledge, and discernment needed to make wise decisions.
The ideas and plans of imperfect humans come and go, but the psalmist fittingly reminds us: The decisions of Jehovah will stand forever; the thoughts of his heart are from generation to generation.
Clearly, we can make the best personal decisions when our thoughts and actions are in harmony with the thinking of our all-wise God, Jehovah.
A few years ago, most congregations considered the book Draw Close to Jehovah at the Congregation Bible Study.
Did not that study of God’s qualities, along with the heartfelt comments of your brothers and sisters, strengthen your love for your heavenly Father?
We also increase our knowledge of God’s Word by paying careful attention to talks, demonstrations, and Bible readings.
Meetings teach us to apply Bible principles in all aspects of our life.
The Watchtower Study, for example, is tailored to the needs of God’s people.
Has a Watchtower Study motivated you to reevaluate your goals, to forgive a fellow Christian, or to improve the quality of your prayers?
The midweek meeting educates us for the ministry.
We learn how to preach the good news and how to teach Scriptural principles effectively.
Have you ever thought about the personal conflicts recorded in the Bible?
Consider just the first few chapters of Genesis.
Cain kills Abel ; Lamech kills a young man for striking him ; the shepherds of Abraham Abram and Lot quarrel ; Hagar despises Sarah Sarai, who becomes upset with Abraham ; Ishmael is against everyone and everyone’s hand is against him.
Why does the Bible mention such conflicts?
Well, one reason is that it helps imperfect humans learn why they need to keep peace.
It also shows us the way we can do this.
We benefit from reading Bible accounts about real people struggling with real problems.
We learn about the results of their efforts and may thus be able to apply such points to some situations we encounter in life.
Indeed, all of this helps us to consider how we should or should not deal with similar issues.
Jephthah realized that he would need God’s help to free Israel from the Ammonites.
He promised Jehovah that if He gave him the victory, he would offer to Jehovah, as a burnt offering, the first one who came out of his house when he returned home from the battle.
What did that offering involve?
The sacrificing of humans is something detestable to Jehovah.
Thus, it is clear that Jephthah did not intend to sacrifice anyone literally.
Under the Mosaic Law, a burnt offering was given entirely to Jehovah, so Jephthah evidently meant that he would devote the person to the exclusive service of God.
This promise implied permanent service at the tabernacle.
Jehovah accepted Jephthah’s terms and blessed him with a resounding victory.
When Jephthah returned from battle, who went out to meet him but his beloved daughter, his only child! Then came the test.
Would he keep his word?
When we face problems that seem too much for us to deal with, it may be easy to see the need to rely on Jehovah.
But what do we do when we have to cope with smaller issues of daily life?
Do we resort to human thinking by trying to solve them in our own way?
Or do we look for Bible principles and try to apply them, thus showing that we rely on Jehovah’s way to solve problems?
For example, on occasion you may face some opposition from your family regarding attending meetings or an assembly.
You ask Jehovah to direct you and help you discern the best way to handle the situation.
Or what if you lose your job, and you are having difficulty finding another?
When speaking with a prospective employer, would you still inform him that you will be attending weekday meetings regularly?
Whatever the problem may be, we do well to heed the words of the psalmist who said the words of today’s text.
For some illnesses, there may be no known cure.
So it is wise to be cautious when it comes to treatments that feature stunning claims but that are promoted merely with hearsay testimonials.
Paul was inspired to write: Let your reasonableness become known to all men.
Reasonableness also holds us back from devoting so much time to health care that spiritual matters are forced into the background.
Were we to allow health care to become the main focus of our life, we would run the risk of becoming self-centered.
Spiritual matters are most important, and with regard to health, our expectations should remain reasonable.
On matters like health care, each of us should be willing to make a personal decision and accept the responsibility that comes with it.
Solomon’s bad associations undermined his wisdom and caused him to fall away from true worship.
What a warning that is for Christians who might think about marrying someone who does not love Jehovah! What if someone becomes a worshipper of God while married to an unbeliever?
The Bible says: You wives, be in subjection to your husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives.
Those words are addressed to Christian wives, but the same words apply to a husband who becomes a worshipper of Jehovah while married to an unbeliever.
The Bible’s counsel is clear: Be a good mate, and live up to God’s high standards for marriage.
Many unbelieving mates have accepted the truth because of observing a husband or a wife who changed after complying with God’s requirements.
Has your upbringing or environment exposed you to national or regional loyalties?
Do any such feelings still linger in your heart?
Christians should not allow nationalistic fervor to taint their view of others.
But what if you realize that you do have negative thoughts toward people of other nations, cultures, languages, or races?
Then it would certainly be profitable to meditate on how Jehovah views nationalism and prejudice.
Researching these and related topics may prove to be a worthwhile project.
Then petition Jehovah for help to embrace his point of view on these matters.
We should do this because sooner or later, all of Jehovah’s servants will find themselves in situations in which their conscience obliges them to stand out as different from those around them—whether colleagues, classmates, neighbors, relatives, or others.
Yet, stand out we must!
What will happen after the destruction of false religious organizations?
It will be a time to reveal what is really in our heart.
The majority of mankind will seek refuge in human organizations that are likened to the rocks of the mountains.
Figuratively speaking, however, God’s people will flee to the refuge that Jehovah provides.
In the first century, the interval was not a time for a mass conversion of Jews to Christianity.
It was a time for action and obedience on the part of those who were already Christians.
Similarly, we cannot expect that the future interruption in the great tribulation will result in an influx of new believers.
Rather, it will be an opportunity for all true believers to prove their love for Jehovah and give their support to Christ’s brothers.
Jehovah hears our pleas and understands us even when no one else does.
His response to our prayers is a beautiful expression of his enduring love for us.
We can learn much from prayers recorded in God’s Word.
At times, therefore, we may find it very beneficial to consider such prayers during family worship.
Reflecting on how Jehovah’s servants of the past expressed their deepest thoughts to God may help us to enrich our own prayers.
For instance, consider Jonah’s contrite prayer from the belly of a huge fish.
Review Solomon’s heartfelt prayer to Jehovah at the inauguration of the temple.
Meditate on the model prayer that Jesus offered for our benefit.
Above all, regularly let your petitions be made known to God.
As a result, the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.
It is a dangerous fantasy to imagine oneself becoming very wealthy while paying little attention to God.
Jesus related a story to illustrate the sad state of a person who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.
Jehovah rejoices when we do things that please him.
How happy we are when we have his approval because we have stored up treasures in heaven! And a good relationship with Jehovah is unquestionably the most valuable treasure we can have.
Imagine the extent of our anxiety if we were consumed by efforts to store up treasures on the earth.
Jesus used an illustration to show that the anxiety of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches can choke the word of the Kingdom.
Jehovah gives us his powerful holy spirit, which can strengthen us and help us to resist temptation.
God also forewarns us through his Word and the congregation about situations that we must avoid, such as spending excessive time, money, and energy on nonessential material things.
Former pioneers Espen and Janne have two children to care for.
We often pray to Jehovah, says Espen, that we may not fall into temptation now that we are unable to spend as much time as we previously did in theocratic activities.
We ask Jehovah to help us maintain our spirituality and zeal for the ministry.
Another temptation that has come to the fore in modern times is the viewing of pornography.
Some have given in to this temptation by allowing their minds to dwell on what is bad.
But we can resist, even as thousands of our brothers have done.
Many people can recite the Lord’s Prayer from memory.
In our door-to-door ministry, we often refer to this prayer to help householders understand that God’s Kingdom is a real government that is going to bring wonderful changes to our earth.
Or we may refer to the first request in the prayer to show that God has a personal name, which is to be sanctified, or treated as holy.
Did Jesus intend that this prayer be repeated word for word every time we pray, as is done by many in Christendom?
No.
Just before Jesus provided this prayer as a pattern, he said: When praying, do not say the same things over and over again.
On a later occasion, he restated this prayer but used different wording.
Thus Jesus helped us know what sort of things we need to ask for and in what order of importance.
Hence, it is fitting to call it the model prayer.
The universe truly is a marvel of organization.
Surely, then, we should expect that Jehovah wants his worshippers to be well-organized.
In fact, to that end God has provided the Bible for our guidance.
Living without the help of God’s organization and his standards would result in unhappiness and misery.
The people of ancient Israel were a model of organization.
Under the Mosaic Law, for example, there were women who were organized to serve at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
Later, King David organized the Levites and the priests into effective divisions.
The first-century Christian congregation was organized, and it benefited from the direction of the governing body, initially made up of the apostles.
Counsel and instructions were also provided by means of inspired letters.
How grateful we should be that Jehovah used his holy spirit to reveal the truth to us and to enable us to exercise faith in the good news! We should never cease thanking Jehovah for drawing us to himself through his Son, the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith.
To show our appreciation for such undeserved kindness, we should keep strengthening our faith through prayer and study of God’s Word.
We should keep exercising our faith in Jehovah’s promises.
We must do this in ways that are clearly evident to others.
For example, we keep on preaching about God’s Kingdom and sharing in the work of making disciples.
We also keep working what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.
And we work hard to strip off the old personality with its practices.
As the early Christian congregation grew, a situation that apparently involved discrimination arose.
Greek-speaking Jews complained that their widows were not being treated fairly.
To settle this issue, the apostles appointed seven men to make sure that nobody was neglected.
These men all had Greek names, which seems to indicate that the apostles wanted to ease any tensions over background that might have existed among the early Christians.
Whether we realize it or not, we are all deeply influenced by our culture.
Moreover, we likely hear neighbors, fellow workers, or schoolmates make derogatory remarks about those of another background, tribe, or skin color.
How deeply are we affected by such biased views? And how do we react when someone makes fun of our nationality—maybe by exaggerating some feature of our culture?
Faithful ones mentioned in died before the promised offspring, Jesus Christ, opened the way to heavenly life.
Nevertheless, they will be resurrected to perfect human life in an earthly paradise.
says of some who lived in pre-Christian times: In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them.
One of these was Abraham.
Did he keep clear in mind the happy hope of life under the promised offspring?
Jesus gave a clear answer to that question when he said to his opposers: Abraham your father rejoiced greatly at the prospect of seeing my day, and he saw it and rejoiced.
The same was true of Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, and many others who focused their hope on the future Kingdom, whose designer and builder is God.
Although Noah and his three sons each had only one wife, polygamy was practiced in patriarchal times.
In many cultures, sexual immorality became a way of life, even being incorporated into religious rites.
When Abram Abraham and his wife, Sarai Sarah, obeyed God and moved to Canaan, that land was filled with practices that made a mockery of marriage.
Jehovah therefore decreed that Sodom and Gomorrah be destroyed because inhabitants of those cities practiced or condoned gross sexual immorality.
Abraham took the proper lead in his family, and Sarah set a fine example by submitting to her husband’s headship.
Abraham made sure that his son Isaac married a worshipper of Jehovah.
Similar concern for true worship guided Isaac’s son Jacob, whose sons became the forefathers of the 12 tribes of Israel.
Jehovah in his undeserved kindness grants us the blessing of approaching his heavenly throne in prayer.
He has afforded us this privilege through his Son, by means of whom we have this freeness of speech and free access with confidence through our faith in him.
Free access to Jehovah in prayer is indeed a wonderful expression of his undeserved kindness.
Paul encouraged us to approach Jehovah freely in prayer, so that we may receive mercy and find undeserved kindness to help us at the right time.
At any time that we are plagued with trials or turmoil in our life, we can cry out to Jehovah for his merciful help.
Undeserving as we are, he answers our call, often through fellow Christians, so that we may be of good courage and say: Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid.
What can man do to me?
’—.
Soon after the Israelites were miraculously released from slavery in Egypt, the Amalekites attacked them.
Following Moses direction, courageous Joshua led the Israelites into battle.
In the meantime, Moses took Aaron and Hur to a nearby hillside from which they could see the battlefield.
Moses put into action a plan that proved to be the key to their success.
Moses kept his hands and the rod of the true God lifted up toward heaven.
As long as Moses did that, Jehovah empowered the hands of the Israelites to fight successfully against the Amalekites.
However, when Moses hands became heavy and began to drop down, the Amalekites started to win.
Acting with decisiveness, Aaron and Hur took a stone and put it under Moses, and he sat on it.
Then Aaron and Hur, one on each side, supported his hands, so that his hands remained steady until the sun set.
Yes, God’s mighty hand enabled the Israelites to win the battle.
Those prophetic words are undergoing fulfillment in these last days.
Why, during the 2015 service year, 8,220,105 Kingdom publishers were active in the world field! The last part of that prophecy should affect all Christians personally, for our heavenly Father says: I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.
Like passengers in a vehicle gaining speed, we sense the increased momentum in the disciple-making work.
How are we personally reacting to that acceleration?
Are we doing all we can as zealous Kingdom publishers?
Many brothers and sisters are applying to serve as regular or auxiliary pioneers.
And do we not rejoice to see so many answer the call to serve where the need is greater or participate in other areas of theocratic activity?
Whether we are brothers or sisters, we certainly have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
Notice that this is a personal request not purely for my bread for the day but for our bread for the day.
Victor, a circuit overseer in Africa, explains: I often sincerely thank Jehovah that my wife and I don’t have to be seriously concerned about where our next meal will come from, nor do we have to worry about who will pay the rent.
Our brothers kindly look after us every day.
But I do pray that those helping us will manage to handle the economic pressures they face.
If we have sufficient food for many days, we can think of brothers who live in poverty or who are affected by disasters.
We should not only pray for them but also act in harmony with our prayers.
For example, we can share what we have with fellow worshippers in need.
We can also regularly contribute to the worldwide work, knowing that such funds are used wisely.
As we, like Paul, busy ourselves in the preaching work, we trust that Jehovah will see to it that all other necessary things will be added to us.
As Kingdom preachers, we have been entrusted with the good news, and we are considered by Jehovah to be his fellow workers.
By being as active as possible in God’s work, we will find it easier to wait for relief.
Let us, then, use the present time to strengthen our relationship with God.
If any situation makes us anxious, use it to draw closer to Jehovah.
Yes, by being immersed in God’s Word, by praying continually, and by staying absorbed in spiritual activities, let us trust that Jehovah can and will see us through our present circumstances as well as everything else that lies ahead.
You no doubt agree that the Bible contains God’s message for mankind in general.
But does the Bible also convey how you in particular can draw closer to Jehovah?
Indeed it does.
How?
As you regularly read and study the Bible, consider your response to what it says and give thought to how you can apply it to your circumstances; then you are allowing Jehovah to talk to you through his Word.
This draws you into a closer relationship with him.
For example, read and meditate on Jesus words to stop storing up for yourselves treasures on the earth.
If you feel that you are already focusing your life on Kingdom interests, you sense Jehovah’s commendation.
On the other hand, if you see a need to simplify your life and to focus more on Kingdom interests, Jehovah has alerted you to an area where you can work at drawing closer to him.
Forward-looking elders share in a timely fashion with younger brothers the experience they have acquired during their years of faithful service.
Elders who train others are a blessing to the flock.
They strengthen the congregation’s defenses.
How?
The efforts of elders to train others result in more brothers who will be ready to help the congregation to stand firm and united, not only now but especially when turbulent times come during the great tribulation.
Therefore, dear elders, we appeal to you to make training a regular feature of your ministry today.
Of course, we understand that the time you spend on caring for important congregation activities may already make you feel stretched to the limit.
Hence, you may need to take some of that time and use it for training.
Doing so would be a wise investment.
When we treasure our friendship with Jehovah, we strive to please him in every aspect of our life, including our thoughts.
We desire to have a pure heart by focusing our minds on what is chaste, virtuous, and praiseworthy.
Granted, Jehovah makes allowances for our imperfect nature.
He knows that we are prone to improper desires.
But we recognize that it saddens him when we nurture wrong thoughts instead of doing all we can to reject them.
Reflecting on this fact makes us ever more determined to keep our thoughts chaste.
An important way to show our complete reliance on Jehovah is by making our fight against unclean thoughts a matter of prayer.
When we draw close to Jehovah in prayer, he draws close to us.
He generously gives us his holy spirit, thus strengthening our resolve to resist immoral thoughts and remain chaste.
Did Jesus mean that there would always be poor people on the earth?
No, he meant that there would be poor people as long as this corrupt system of things lasts.
Today the basic needs of hundreds of millions of people go unmet because of unjust human rule.
Yet, relief is in sight! Jesus miracles give us confidence in his ability and his desire soon to use his authority for our good.
Though we cannot perform miracles, we can enthusiastically draw people’s attention to God’s inspired Word.
Bible prophecies guarantee better times ahead.
As dedicated Witnesses of Jehovah who possess this precious knowledge about the future, do we not sense that we have a debt toward others?
May meditating on this move us to tell others the good news of God’s Kingdom.
Undoubtedly, we rejoice that God has promised immortality in heaven to faithful anointed ones and everlasting life on earth to Jesus loyal other sheep.
Of course, neither immortal life in heaven nor eternal life on earth will be plagued by the suffering common today.
Jehovah is aware of the pain we experience, even as he knew how the Israelites suffered as slaves in Egypt.
Indeed, during all their distress it was distressing to him.
Centuries later, the Jews were afraid because of enemy opposition to the rebuilding of the temple, but God said: Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.
Just as a mother has tender feelings for her baby, Jehovah is moved to act lovingly in behalf of his people.
In a sense, Jehovah can put himself in the place of others, and he has given us that ability.
We must consider that all of us are some 6,000 years removed from the human perfection that existed in Eden.
Imperfect people are prone to make mistakes.
Therefore, it would not be good to expect too much of fellow believers and to let their faults rob us of the joy that comes from being part of God’s people in these last days.
An even greater mistake would be to allow the faults of others to stumble us and cause us to leave Jehovah’s organization.
Were that to happen, we would lose not only the privilege of doing God’s will but also the hope of life in God’s new world.
To maintain our deep joy and firm hope, we want to keep clearly in mind the comforting promise of Jehovah: Look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart.
Do not let the faults of others prevent you from obtaining such blessings.
There is no real or true God but Jehovah; no other god is like him.
Thus, Moses was reminding the Israelites that their worship of Jehovah must be exclusive.
They were not to follow the peoples around them, who worshipped various gods and goddesses.
Some of those false gods were viewed as ruling over certain parts of nature.
Others were separate forms of a particular deity.
For example, the Egyptians worshipped the sun-god Ra, the sky-goddess Nut, the earth-god Geb, the Nile-god Hapi, and numerous sacred animals.
Many of these false gods were dealt devastating blows by Jehovah through the Ten Plagues.
The prominent Canaanite god was Baal, the god of fertility, who also appeared as the god of the sky, rain, and storm.
In many places, Baal was the local patron deity as well.
The Israelites were to remember that their God, the true God, is one Jehovah.
By choosing to do God’s will and by working hard to do so, we show our depth of love for Jehovah and our desire to please him.
We also demonstrate our support of his sovereignty.
Satan has challenged the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty, so our voluntary and vigorous efforts to uphold it are undoubtedly of special value to our benevolent and appreciative heavenly Father.
However, if Jehovah completely relieved us of the need to exert ourselves to fight our imperfect tendencies so as to please him, any claim of loyalty and support of his sovereignty would be meaningless.
Thus, Jehovah tells us to put forth earnest effort in developing godly qualities.
He expects us to work hard to control our thoughts and feelings.
Having made a genuine effort in this regard, we feel all the more satisfied when we realize that the Bible is still changing our life.
Who really are preaching the good news of the Kingdom today?
With full confidence, we can say: Jehovah’s Witnesses! Why can we be so confident?
Because we are preaching the right message, the good news of the Kingdom.
By going to the people, we are also using the correct methods.
Our preaching work is being done with the right motive—love, not financial gain.
Our work has the greatest scope, reaching out to people of all nations and languages.
And we will continue to do this work without letup, year in and year out, until the end comes.
We truly marvel at what is being accomplished by God’s people in these exciting times in which we live.
But how is it possible for all of this to happen?
The apostle Paul answers in today’s text.
May all of us continue to be energized by our loving Father as we do our very best and fully accomplish our ministry.
Two brothers were greeted by a certain sister in a way that one of them considered inappropriate.
When the two brothers were alone, the offended brother began to criticize the sister for what she had said.
However, the other brother reminded him that she had served Jehovah loyally in difficult circumstances for 40 years; he was sure that she meant no harm.
After considering this for a moment, the first brother responded, You are right.
As a result, the issue went no further.
What does this experience show?
The way you react to situations that have the potential for causing offense lies in your own hands.
A loving person covers over minor transgressions.
Jehovah considers it beauty on your part to overlook an offense.
So the first thing to ask yourself when somebody treats you in a way that could seem unkind or disrespectful is: Can I overlook this? Do I really need to make an issue of it?
At our meetings, our Grand Instructor directs us through the pages of his Word, the Bible.
Even unbelievers who attend our meetings may conclude: God is really among you.
Jehovah blesses meetings with his holy spirit and actively directs the Scriptural teaching program.
At our meetings, then, we are listening to Jehovah’s voice and sensing his loving care.
Consequently, we draw close to him.
Jesus said: Where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.
As head of the congregation, Christ walks among the congregations of God’s people.
Think of it! Jehovah and Jesus are actively involved in strengthening us at Christian meetings.
How do you think Jehovah feels when he observes our eagerness to draw close to him and his Son?
The battle was grueling.
Israelite soldiers led by Judge Gideon had chased their enemies—the Midianite army and its allies—all night for a distance of some 20 miles 32 km! The Israelites knew that this was no time to give up.
So to eliminate the enemy, they kept up the pursuit and subdued Midian.
We too are fighting a relentless battle.
Our enemies include Satan, his world, and our own imperfections.
Some of us have battled for decades, and with Jehovah’s help, we gained victories.
At times, though, we may get tired of battling our enemies and of waiting for the end of this system of things.
Indeed, we have not yet won the complete victory.
Jesus warned that we who live in the last days would face severe trials and cruel mistreatment, but he also said that gaining the victory would depend on our endurance.
We can learn a lesson from ancient times about the importance of being watchful.
Back then, many larger cities—such as Jerusalem—were surrounded by high walls.
The walls provided physical protection from invaders as well as elevated vantage points from which to watch the surrounding landscape.
Day and night, watchmen were stationed on the walls and at the gates.
They were to alert the city’s inhabitants of any approaching danger.
It was a life-and-death matter that the watchmen remain awake and attentive at their posts.
Jewish historian Josephus relates that in 70 C.
, the Roman forces were able to take possession of the Tower of Antonia, adjoining the city wall of Jerusalem, because the guards at the gates were asleep! From there, the Romans rushed the temple and set fire to it, resulting in the finale of the greatest tribulation that Jerusalem and the Jewish nation had ever experienced.
From the beginning of creation, unity of purpose was evident.
Father and Son collaborated, and they produced the variety of life we observe today.
Cooperation continued to mark God’s works.
We see this quality in the building of the ark in Noah’s day; the erecting, dismantling, and moving of the tabernacle as God’s people journeyed in the wilderness; and even in the playing of music and blending of voices in harmonious praise to Jehovah at his temple.
All those endeavors depended on cooperation.
This pattern of working together characterized the early Christian congregation under its head, Jesus Christ.
The apostle Paul explained that, even though individual anointed Christians had different gifts and shared in different ministries and different activities, all were part of one body.
Jonathan must have been astonished by the way young David faced the giant Goliath.
Now David stood before Jonathan’s father, King Saul of Israel, with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
Jonathan probably admired David for his courage.
It was clear that God was with David, and Jonathan and David became bound together in close friendship.
In fact, they made a covenant because Jonathan loved David as himself.
For the rest of his life, he was loyal to David.
Jonathan’s attachment to David endured, even though God had chosen David to be Israel’s next king.
Jonathan became concerned about David when Saul was seeking to kill him.
To encourage his friend, Jonathan traveled into the Judean wilderness at Horesh.
There, Jonathan helped David find strength in Jehovah, saying the words of today’s text.
One who is somewhat younger can realize what it means to do what is right and to be dedicated to his Creator.
Thus, baptism is an important and appropriate step for a young person who has manifested considerable maturity and has made a dedication to Jehovah.
What does it mean to be mature?
Maturity involves more than physical growth.
The Bible says that mature people have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
Thus, mature people know what is right in Jehovah’s eyes and are resolved in their heart to stick to it.
As a result, they are not easily swayed to do what is wrong; nor do they always have to be prodded to do what is right.
Really, it is only reasonable to expect that a young person who gets baptized will uphold God’s standards even when parents or other adults are not present.
Being imperfect, we are prone to make mistakes.
Thankfully, though, Jehovah does not deal with us according to our sins, provided that we are repentant and in faith approach him humbly on the basis of Jesus ransom sacrifice.
Yet, as David told Solomon, for our daily worship to be acceptable to Jehovah, we have to serve him with a complete heart.
Serving God with a complete heart involves full devotion that does not end.
In the Bible, the word heart usually refers to a man’s inner self.
It encompasses his desires, thinking, disposition, attitudes, abilities, motivations, and goals.
So a person who serves Jehovah with his whole heart does not just go through the motions of worshipping Jehovah.
What about us?
Well, if we, though being imperfect humans, continue to be fully devoted to God without hypocrisy, we will be serving God with a complete heart.
It would be wrong to exalt individuals, even if they are anointed brothers of Christ.
Speaking about Christian elders, the Bible encourages us to imitate the faith of those who take the lead, but it never commands us to elevate any human as our leader.
True, the Scriptures speak of some as being considered worthy of double honor.
However, such ones are worthy of honor, not because they are anointed, but because they preside in a fine way and work hard in speaking and teaching.
Therefore, it would be embarrassing for those with a heavenly calling if others were to give them undue praise or attention.
Worse still, if they received special treatment, anointed Christians might find it difficult to remain humble.
None of us would want to cause one of Christ’s brothers to stumble!—.
This special operation of holy spirit becomes like a down payment, a guarantee or, a pledge of what is to come.
An anointed Christian gains an inner conviction because of this token.
That person is sure of his invitation.
But whether he finally receives his reward in heaven or not depends on his proving faithful to his calling.
Peter explained it this way: Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to make your calling and choosing sure for yourselves, for if you keep on doing these things, you will by no means ever fail.
In fact, in this way you will be richly granted entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Each anointed Christian must, therefore, struggle to remain faithful.
If he does not, his heavenly calling, or invitation, will be of no value to him.
The original-language expression translated hospitality means kindness to strangers.
This phrase may remind us of the examples of Abraham and Lot.
Both men showed kindness to visitors whom they did not know.
These visitors turned out to be angels.
Do we too extend hospitality to others by inviting them to our home for a meal or for some association and encouragement?
We would not need to make elaborate or expensive arrangements to be considered hospitable; nor would we want to invite only those who might repay us in some way.
Our goal should be to encourage, not to impress! Even though we may not know our circuit overseer and his wife very well, do we eagerly show them hospitality? With our busy schedules as well as the stresses of daily living, how important it is that we do not forget hospitality!
God’s firstborn Son was the earliest and most complete expression of Jehovah’s unfathomable wisdom.
He was wisdom personified, a master worker alongside his Father.
We can only imagine the joy and satisfaction that he experienced as his Father prepared the heavens and established the foundations of the earth.
However, though appreciating these inanimate things, God’s firstborn Son was especially fond of the sons of men.
Yes, Jesus has a fondness, or tender affection, for mankind that stretches back to his prehuman existence.
Later, as proof of his loyalty and love for his Father, as well as of his deep love for the sons of men, God’s Firstborn willingly emptied himself and came to be in the likeness of men.
He did so in order to provide a ransom in exchange for many.
What love he has for the human family!
At one time, he enjoyed a fine standing with Jehovah.
At some point, however, this spirit creature began to desire the worship of humans.
Rather than dismiss that improper desire, he nurtured it and let it grow until it gave birth to sin.
We know that creature as Satan, who did not stand fast in the truth.
He rebelled against Jehovah and became the father of the lie.
Since his rebellion, Satan has proved to be Jehovah’s greatest enemy, and he certainly has not been a friend of mankind.
The titles given to Satan reveal the depth of his corruption.
Satan means Resister, indicating that this wicked spirit creature does not support God’s sovereignty; rather, he hates it and aggressively fights it.
More than anything else, Satan wants to see the end of Jehovah’s sovereignty.
Studying the Scriptures does more than reveal areas in which we can improve spiritually.
It also deepens our appreciation for Jehovah’s endearing ways, causing us to love him even more.
And when our love for God grows, his love for us intensifies, thus strengthening our bond with him.
For us to draw close to Jehovah, however, it is essential that we study with the right objective.
says: This means everlasting life, their coming to know you, the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
Thus, our objective should be not merely to take in knowledge but to come to know Jehovah better as a Person.
As we come to know Jehovah more intimately, we will not be unduly disturbed if certain Bible accounts leave us wondering why he acted as he did.
Recently, a group of elders who are successful in helping brothers to grow spiritually were asked what approach they use when training others.
Though the circumstances of these brothers vary greatly, the advice they gave was strikingly similar.
What does this indicate?
That Bible-based training is applicable to learners everywhere in every congregation—just as it was in the apostle Paul’s day.
A teacher needs to create the right conditions for training.
Just as a gardener needs to cultivate, or loosen, the soil before sowing seeds, so a teacher needs to prepare, or encourage, the heart of a learner before teaching him new skills.
So how do teachers create the right conditions for training others?
By following an approach similar to that taken by Samuel when he was preparing Saul to lead Israel.
The clergy of Christendom are not preaching God’s Kingdom.
If they do speak about the Kingdom, many refer to it as a feeling or a condition in the heart of a Christian.
They do not help people to understand that God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government with Jesus Christ as Ruler, that it is the solution to all mankind’s problems, and that it will soon remove all wickedness from this earth.
Rather, they prefer to remember Jesus at Christmas and Easter.
They seem to have no idea of what Jesus will accomplish as earth’s new Ruler.
They have also lost sight of what should be the motive for preaching.
It should not be to collect money and construct elaborate buildings.
The Word of God should not be commercialized.
Those preaching the Kingdom message should not seek personal gain for the work that they do.
Suppose you are drawn to a certain style of dress that could possibly disturb some in the congregation.
Yet, you may know of no specific Bible law that forbids it.
What is Jehovah’s mind on the matter?
The apostle Paul offered this inspired counsel: The women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive clothing, but in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God.
In principle, this counsel applies equally to Christian men.
As devoted servants of Jehovah, we are concerned not only with our personal preferences but with the effect that our dress and grooming could have on others.
Modesty and love move us to take into account the opinions of fellow believers in order to avoid distracting or even offending them.
Adam lost his sonship when he rebelled against his Maker.
Nonetheless, throughout the generations a great cloud of Adam’s descendants have chosen to uphold God’s sovereignty.
By humbly submitting to their Creator, they have demonstrated that they wanted him, not Satan, to be their Father and Potter.
Their loyalty to God calls to mind the words of our day’s text.
Today, all who worship Jehovah in spirit and truth endeavor to reflect the same humble, submissive attitude.
They consider it an honor to address Jehovah as Father and to submit to him as their Potter.
Do you see yourself as soft clay in God’s hands, willing to be molded into a vessel that is desirable in his eyes? Do you similarly see each of your spiritual brothers and sisters as a work in progress, being molded by God?
Jealousy and hatred moved Jephthah’s half brothers to drive him away, illegally depriving him of his rightful inheritance as firstborn.
Yet, he came to their aid when they pleaded for his help.
The fight to defend Jehovah’s name was more important to Jephthah than any personal conflicts.
He was determined to be faithful to Jehovah, resulting in good for himself and for others.
Will we allow Jephthah’s example to touch our hearts?
Perhaps we have experienced disappointment or ill-treatment from certain Christian brothers.
If so, we should not allow such challenges to hold us back from attending Christian meetings or serving Jehovah and being with the congregation to the full.
In imitation of Jephthah, we too can allow divine standards to help us overcome negative circumstances and continue to be a force for good.
We must endure, not for a time, but to the end.
To illustrate: Imagine a ship that capsizes.
To survive, the passengers must swim to shore.
The swimmer who gives up only a few yards from shore faces the same fate as the swimmer who gave up much earlier.
Similarly, we are determined to endure until we reach the new world.
Our life depends on our enduring.
We have an attitude like that of the apostle Paul, who twice stated: We do not give up.
We can be absolutely confident that Jehovah will help us endure to the end.
We share Paul’s conviction as expressed at : We are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us.
For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Ask Jehovah for the wisdom to recognize and deal with situations that could cause you to violate your Christian neutrality.
If you are imprisoned or otherwise punished because of your resolute stand for true worship, pray for the strength to defend your faith with boldness and to endure whatever persecution may come.
Jehovah can strengthen you by means of his Word.
Meditate on verses that will help you maintain your neutrality under test.
Commit them to memory now, so that they can sustain you if you do not have access to a Bible later.
God’s Word can also reinforce your hope in future Kingdom blessings.
This hope is essential if we are to endure persecution.
Select passages that describe blessings that you especially hope to enjoy, and visualize yourself experiencing those blessings in Paradise.
Jehovah’s faithful servants on earth, his Witnesses, make up an organization that is indeed exceptional.
True, it is composed of humans who are imperfect and who have their faults.
Still, God’s holy spirit has been moving his global congregation to grow and prosper.
When the last days of the present system began back in 1914, God’s servants on earth were relatively few in number.
But Jehovah blessed their preaching work.
During the following decades, millions of new ones learned Bible truths and became Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Jehovah actually pointed forward to this outstanding growth, saying the words of today’s text and adding: I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.
That prophetic statement has certainly come true in these last days.
Thus, the number of God’s people on earth is now greater than the entire population of many nations.
For Jesus, it was unthinkable that his heavenly Father would provide food for the birds but not take care of the same basic needs of humans.
He will not put the food in our mouths, but he may bless our efforts to grow the food we need or to earn the money to buy our daily provisions.
In cases of need, he may motivate others to share what they have.
Although Jesus did not mention providing shelter for the birds of heaven, Jehovah has provided them with the instincts, skills, and materials needed to make nests for themselves.
Jehovah can likewise help us find adequate housing for our families.
When saying the words found in today’s text, Jesus no doubt had in mind that he would soon give his life in behalf of mankind.
Compare .
Jesus did not die for the birds of heaven, but he did die for us so that we might enjoy unending life.
After serving in a foreign-language field for over three years, Serge and his wife, Muriel, noticed that their 17-year-old son lacked joy in theocratic activities.
When we realized that this situation had hindered our son from making spiritual advancement, explains Serge, we decided to move back to our former congregation.
What factors might influence parents to move back?
First, they should determine whether they really have enough time and resources to instill love for Jehovah in their children while at the same time teaching them a foreign tongue.
Second, they may notice in their children a lack of interest in spiritual activities or in the foreign-language field in which they are serving.
In such circumstances, Christian parents might consider moving back to a congregation that uses the language their children best understand until their children take a firm stand for the truth.
Without doubt, Noah’s neighbors must have asked him why he was building such a colossal structure.
Did Noah keep quiet or tell them to mind their own business?
By no means! His faith moved him to witness boldly and to warn his contemporaries of God’s coming judgment.
Quite likely, Noah repeated to the people the exact words that Jehovah had spoken to him: I have decided to put an end to all flesh, because the earth is full of violence on account of them I am going to bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy from under the heavens all flesh that has the breath of life.
Everything on the earth will perish.
Also, Noah no doubt explained to the people the only means of escape, repeating God’s command: You must go into the ark.
Thus, Noah further exercised his faith by being a preacher of righteousness.
After serving God for years, a Christian could begin to set his or her mind on the things of the flesh.
That does not refer to a Christian who occasionally thinks about food, employment, recreation, or even romance.
Those are aspects of life for the average servant of God.
Jesus enjoyed food, and he fed others.
He saw the need for refreshment.
And Paul wrote about the proper place for passion or intimacy within marriage.
The Greek word that Paul used means to set one’s mind or heart upon something, to employ one’s faculty for thoughtful planning, with the emphasis upon the underlying disposition or attitude.
Those who live according to the flesh allow their life course to be determined basically by their sinful human nature.
One scholar says about that word at : They set their minds on—are most deeply interested in, constantly talk about, engage and glory in—the things pertaining to the flesh.
Anyone can act immodestly if he allows himself temporarily to be overcome by fleshly desires.
Selfish ambition, envy, and uncontrolled anger have led many to presumptuous acts.
Bible characters like Absalom, Uzziah, and Nebuchadnezzar succumbed to such works of the flesh and were humbled by Jehovah for their presumptuousness.
There are other reasons, though, why someone may act immodestly.
Consider, for example, the following Bible accounts: .
Were the seemingly presumptuous actions of Abimelech and Peter motivated by sinful desires?
Or were these individuals simply unaware of all the facts, or were they caught off guard?
Since we cannot read hearts, it is both wise and loving to avoid jumping to conclusions about other people’s motives.
describes the time—from 1914 to early 1919—when the anointed sons of Levi would undergo a period of refinement.
During that time, Jehovah God, the true Lord, accompanied by Jesus Christ, the messenger of the covenant, came to the spiritual temple to inspect those serving there.
After receiving needed discipline, Jehovah’s cleansed people were ready to take up a further assignment of service.
In 1919, a faithful and discreet slave was appointed to provide spiritual food to the household of faith.
God’s people were now free of the influence of Babylon the Great.
Since that time, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, his people have constantly been growing in knowledge of God’s will and in love for their heavenly Father.
How grateful they are for his blessing!
We love Jehovah because he first loved us.
As one expression of his tender love, Jehovah has taken the initiative to bless his loyal servants.
The more we love our God, the stronger our faith becomes, not only that he exists, but that he unfailingly rewards those whom he loves.
Being a rewarder is an integral part of who Jehovah is and what he does.
Our faith is not complete unless we are firmly convinced that God will reward those who earnestly seek him, for faith is the assured expectation of what is hoped for.
Yes, faith involves the certain expectation of God’s promised blessings.
As shown in today’s text, Jehovah invites us to reach out for his blessing.
We show our deep appreciation and gratitude when we accept Jehovah’s generous offer.
Like the needy widow, many of our modern-day fellow believers trust that if they seek first the Kingdom, Jehovah will make sure that they have what they need.
Consider a brother named Malcolm.
Over the decades that he and his wife served Jehovah, they experienced ups and downs.
Life is unpredictable at times, uncertain, and even hard to deal with, he said.
But Jehovah blesses those who lean on him.
Malcolm’s advice?
Pray to be as productive and as active in Jehovah’s service as you can be.
Focus on what you can do, not on what you cannot do.
As this system of things goes from bad to worse, we can expect to face increasingly greater difficulties.
So it is more important than ever that we do not allow ourselves to be paralyzed by such challenges.
Rather, we need to cultivate strong trust in Jehovah while taking whatever appropriate action we can.
Satan wants us to slave for Riches rather than for Jehovah.
Those who spend most of their energy accumulating material things end up with a life that is, at best, shallow because it appeals to selfish gratification or that is, at worst, spiritually empty and full of grief and frustration.
It is as Jesus described in his illustration of the sower.
When the Kingdom message is sown among the thorns .
, the desires for everything else make inroads and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
As we near the end of this system of things, now is not the time to amass more and more material things for ourselves.
We should not expect that any of our possessions, regardless of how treasured or valuable they may be, will survive with us through the great tribulation.
True contentment is based on our trust in Jehovah.
It allows us to have a balanced view of material possessions.
It helps us to realize that our relationship with Jehovah and our Christian brothers is far more important than anything that money can buy.
A contented person does not complain, grumble, or find fault; nor does he succumb to feelings of envy and greed—feelings that can stifle the development of brotherly love.
Rather, contentment promotes a generous spirit.
Also, our trust in Jehovah gives us courage, no matter what challenges we may face.
This courage, in turn, allows us to have a positive attitude and to build up and comfort our fellow believers.
Even when the world faces the great tribulation, we will be able to stand up straight and lift up our heads, knowing that our deliverance is near.
If we are ill, we can look to God for comfort, wisdom, and support, as did true worshippers in the past.
Still, we know that an individual living in David’s day who showed consideration to a lowly one did not keep living without end.
Hence, when David wrote the above, he could not have meant that such a considerate individual would be kept alive miraculously, thus gaining everlasting life.
We can take those inspired words to mean that God would help the loyal considerate one.
How?
David explained: Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed; during his sickness you will completely change his bed.
Yes, an individual who showed consideration to a lowly one could be certain that God was aware of him and his faithful course.
And the recuperative power of his God-given body might help him to get better, to recover from his sickness.
Paul was not here referring to just any type of prisoner.
He was speaking about those brothers who were imprisoned for their faith.
Paul himself had been in prison bonds for some four years by the time he penned those words to the Hebrew Christians.
He commended the brothers for having expressed sympathy for those in prison.
Those Hebrew Christians were physically separated from Paul.
So how could they keep him in mind?
They could do so by their fervent prayers in his behalf.
Today, we may likewise be separated physically from our brothers who have been thrown into prison.
We may not be able to give them the practical help that is provided by the Witnesses who live near the prison.
But we can show our sympathy and brotherly affection by constantly remembering these faithful ones and mentioning them in our prayers, pleading to Jehovah in their behalf.
In the past, the English New World Translation followed the pattern of some other English Bibles that use the Hebrew expression Sheol in verses such as .
That verse used to read: There is no work nor devising nor knowledge nor wisdom in Sheʹol, the place to which you are going.
Translators of many non-English editions faced this problem: The term Sheol is unknown to most of their readers, it is not found in their dictionaries, and it sounds like some geographic location.
Accordingly, for the 2013 revision, approval was given to make the meaning of Sheol and the corresponding Greek term Hades clear by translating them accurately as the Grave.
Obsolete English expressions were also replaced, and a concerted effort was put forth to make the text clear and easy to understand without sacrificing accuracy.
Applying what had been done in other languages sharpened the English text.
We need time to meditate as we prepare to conduct a Bible study.
With each student in mind, we might think of a viewpoint question or an illustration to help the student make progress.
Time spent in this way can be most refreshing, as pondering over these things strengthens our own faith and helps us to conduct our Bible studies with greater effectiveness and enthusiasm.
The same is true when we prepare our heart to go out in the field service.
Reading a chapter from the Bible book of Acts will stir up like a fire our enthusiasm for the ministry.
Meditating on Bible verses we intend to use that day and the publications we plan to offer will help us carry out our privilege of service.
Think about the people in the territory and what may arouse their interest.
All such preparation will move us to witness effectively with a demonstration of spirit and power from the Word of God.
Ask yourself: What may tempt my child to look at pornography?
Does he know why it is so dangerous?
Am I approachable so that he will come to me for help if he is ever tempted to look at pornography?
Even while your children are quite young, you could say to them: If you ever come across an immoral website and you feel tempted to look at it, please come and talk to me.
You don’t have to be ashamed.
I want to help you.
Insight will also help you to choose your own entertainment prudently.
What we as parents approve of in the way of music, movies, or books sets the tone for the family, says a father named Pranas.
You can say a lot about a lot of things, but your children will watch what you do and imitate you.
If your children see you carefully choosing clean entertainment, they will probably be moved to make similar choices.
It would reflect a serious lack of love and trust for us to make decisions without taking God’s will into consideration.
Once in the days of Samuel, Israel was badly defeated in battle by the Philistines.
God’s people were in dire need of help and protection.
What did they do?
Let us take the ark of Jehovah’s covenant with us from Shiloh, so that it may be with us and save us from the hand of our enemies, they decided.
The outcome?
The slaughter was very great; on Israel’s side, 30,000 foot soldiers fell.
Moreover, the Ark of God was captured.
It might have seemed that in taking the Ark with them, the Israelites were looking to Jehovah for help.
Really, though, they had not sought Jehovah’s direction; they were following their own ideas, and the result was disastrous.
What can you do to build and maintain strong faith?
Do not be satisfied with only what you learned up to the point of your baptism.
Take note of fulfilled prophecies in the Bible because these can provide you with powerful reasons for having faith.
You can also use God’s Word as a measuring rod to see if your faith matches the description of what is expected of those who have strong faith.
The apostle Paul told fellow Christians that they could have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith.
As we associate with fellow worshippers, we can build up one another’s faith, especially when we are with those who have already demonstrated the tested quality of their faith.
Bad associations destroy faith, but good associations build it.
That is one reason why we are counseled not to forsake our meeting together.
Servants of Jehovah want to train their conscience.
They want the proddings of their conscience to agree with the standards of right and wrong, good and bad, as reflected in God’s Word.
A properly trained conscience exercises a powerful influence for good in the Christian congregation.
However, training and using our Christian conscience is not just a mental activity.
The Bible links a good conscience to faith and love.
Paul wrote: The objective of this instruction is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
As we train our conscience and respond to it, our love for Jehovah will deepen and our faith will be strengthened.
In fact, the way we use our conscience reveals the depth of our spirituality, the quality of our heart, and the intensity of our desire to please Jehovah.
Indeed, this inner voice reflects what sort of person we truly are.
Jehovah is the Creator of all humans.
That is why the Bible calls Adam a son of God, and Jesus taught his followers to address God as our Father in the heavens.
Being the Life-Giver, Jehovah is our Father; the relationship between him and us is that of a father to his children.
Simply put, Jehovah loves us the way a devoted father loves his children.
Human fathers, of course, are imperfect.
Try as they may, they do not fully reflect the way Jehovah expresses his fatherly love.
In fact, some individuals have dark memories of growing up in family situations that have left them with deep emotional or psychological scars.
That is painful and sad, even tragic.
To be sure, Jehovah is not a father like that.
Knowing how Jehovah loves and cares for us will surely draw us closer to him.
The Lamb is Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.
The Bible tells us that he is far superior to all men who are or have been kings.
It explains: He is the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords, the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see.
Indeed, what other king has ever voluntarily died as a ransom for our sins?
Do you not feel moved to join with myriads of heavenly creatures in proclaiming: The Lamb who was slaughtered is worthy to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.
Honoring Jehovah and Christ is not optional.
Our everlasting life depends on our doing so.
Although Hezekiah was the son of one of Judah’s worst kings, he grew up to be one of the very best.
Hezekiah set about righting the terrible wrongs that his father had committed.
He did so by cleansing the temple, atoning for the people’s sins, and destroying pagan idols in a vigorous and far-reaching campaign.
When he faced daunting challenges, such as the threat of attack on Jerusalem by the Assyrian king Sennacherib, Hezekiah showed profound courage and faith.
He relied on God for salvation and strengthened his people by word and example.
Later, when Hezekiah needed correction for showing a haughty attitude, he humbled himself and repented.
Clearly, Hezekiah did not let his past ruin his present or deprive him of a future.
Rather, he showed that he was Jehovah’s friend and a fine example to imitate.
Kindness can help you to deal with a conflict of loyalties.
For example, you may have definite knowledge that a certain fellow believer is guilty of serious misconduct.
You may feel loyal to him, especially if he is a close friend or a relative.
But if you were to cover up the wrongdoing, you would be disloyal to God.
Of course, your loyalty to Jehovah should come first.
Be kind yet firm.
Urge your friend or relative to seek the help of the elders.
If he or she does not do so within a reasonable period of time, loyalty to God should move you to report the matter to the elders.
In doing this, you are being loyal to Jehovah and kind to your friend or relative, for Christian elders will try to readjust such an individual with mildness.
The examples of faithful servants of Jehovah can give us the wisdom and strength we need to endure.
For instance, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refused to worship an image representing the Babylonian State.
Reading about their determination has given Witnesses today the courage to refuse to worship the flag of the nation in which they live.
Also, Jesus stayed completely separate from the political and social conflicts of the world.
Noting the effect that his example would have on others, he urged his disciples to take courage.
Support also comes from the brothers and sisters in your congregation.
Members of the congregation will encourage you if they are aware of the challenges you are facing.
Ask them to pray in your behalf.
Of course, if we want our brothers to support us and pray for us, we should do the same for them.
Jehovah’s people have always treasured occasions to meet together.
Immediately after the Christian congregation was formed, followers of Jesus began devoting themselves to associating together.
You likely share their desire to attend congregation meetings regularly.
Nevertheless, all Christians face obstacles.
Secular work, a busy schedule, or fatigue because of our daily routine can make it difficult to attend meetings.
Appreciating the value of the meetings can motivate us to try to overcome these obstacles and maintain a healthy pattern of meeting attendance.
Granted, some of our fellow believers are unable to attend meetings regularly because of circumstances beyond their control, such as serious illness.
Elders may assist these infirm ones to benefit from spiritual programs, perhaps by helping them to tie in by telephone hookup or by recording the meetings for them.
Jephthah’s thorough grasp of Israel’s history gave him a clear picture of what was right and what was wrong in Jehovah’s eyes.
Godly principles that were embedded in the Mosaic Law molded Jephthah’s thinking as well as his heart.
He knew that Jehovah disapproved of holding grudges; rather, God required that His people love one another.
The Law also taught that a person must not ignore the needs of others, even of someone who hates him.
Examples of faithful ones like Joseph, who showed mercy to his brothers—even though they began to hate him—may also have influenced Jephthah’s response.
Meditating on such examples would have helped Jephthah to choose a course of action that was pleasing to Jehovah.
The conduct of his brothers no doubt hurt him deeply, but he would not hold back from serving Jehovah and His people.
God’s people have always used their ability to speak—to use language—to praise Jehovah and to make his will known to others.
In recent times, a significant way to promote pure worship by the use of language has been through Bible translation.
There are thousands of Bible translations, but they vary in how faithfully they convey the message from the original texts.
In the 1940’s, the New World Bible Translation Committee established principles of translation that have been followed in over 130 languages.
These are: 1 Sanctify God’s name by restoring it to its rightful place in the Scriptures.
2 Translate the original inspired message literally where possible, but convey the correct sense when a word-for-word rendering would distort the meaning.
3 Use easy-to-understand language that encourages reading.
Imagine what life would be like if God did not have love for mankind.
We merely have to look at the awful history of this world with its human rulerships under its unloving and wrathful god, Satan the Devil.
This shows us how horrible the future would be if the universe were to function without the operation of God’s love.
When rebelling against Jehovah’s rule, the Devil challenged the rightfulness and righteousness of God’s universal sovereignty.
In effect, Satan claimed that his rule would be better than that of the Creator.
Though Jehovah permitted Satan to try to prove his side of the issue, such permission was temporary.
In his great wisdom, Jehovah has allowed enough time to pass to expose very clearly the inadequacy of any rule other than his.
The miserable record of mankind shows that neither humans nor Satan can provide what we need in the way of good rulership.
Our efforts to serve God—through prayers, meeting attendance, field service, and other aspects of our worship—are in vain if we refuse to make peace with others.
We cannot be friends of God unless we are willing to forgive the shortcomings of others.
Every Christian needs to think carefully and honestly about being forgiving and having peaceful relations with others.
Do you forgive fellow believers freely?
Are you happy to fellowship with them?
Jehovah expects his servants to be forgiving.
If your conscience tells you that you have improvements to make in this regard, prayerfully seek Jehovah’s help in order to make them! Our heavenly Father will hear such humble prayers and answer them.
If it is not possible to know with certainty the names of all spiritual Israelites on earth today, how can members of the other sheep go with them?
Notice what the prophecy in Zechariah states concerning the figurative ten men.
These ones would take firm hold of the robe of a Jew, saying: We want to go with you, for we have heard that God is with you people.
Although only one Jew is mentioned here, in both instances the pronoun you refers to more than one person.
This spiritual Jew must, then, be a composite person, not just one individual! So it is not necessary to identify every spiritual Jew and then go with him or her.
Rather, we need to identify these ones as a group and then support them as such.
In no way do the Scriptures encourage us to follow an individual.
Jesus is our Leader.
What does it mean for us to show brotherly love?
The Greek term used by Paul, phi·la·del·phiʹa, literally means affection for a brother.
Brotherly love is the type of affection that involves a strong, warm, personal attachment, such as to a family member or a close friend.
We do not pretend to be brothers and sisters—we are brothers and sisters.
Our strong feeling of attachment to one another is summed up nicely in these words: In brotherly love have tender affection for one another.
In showing honor to one another, take the lead.
Combined with principled love, a·gaʹpe, this type of love promotes close companionship among God’s people.
Christianity embraces all believers, no matter what their nationality.
As brothers, we have been taught by Jehovah to have brotherly affection for one another.
Our love for Jesus moves us to work whole-souled in the preaching and disciple-making work.
During the Memorial season, we will have the opportunity to serve as an auxiliary pioneer and spend 30 or 50 hours in the preaching work.
Could you arrange your circumstances to do so?
One 84-year-old widower did not feel that he could auxiliary pioneer because of his age and poor health.
Nonetheless, the pioneers in his area rallied to his aid.
They provided transportation and carefully chose territory that he could work, so that he could meet his 30-hour goal.
Could you reach out and help someone share in the joy of auxiliary pioneering during the Memorial season?
Of course, not all of us may be able to auxiliary pioneer.
Even so, we can use whatever time and energy we have to increase our sacrifice of praise to Jehovah.
If we have accomplished something worthwhile, could it be that Jehovah is leaving us alone to put us to the test, allowing what is in our heart to surface?
For example, a brother may have worked hard to prepare a talk and give it before a large audience.
Many praise him for what he has done.
How will he react to the praise?
When praised, we do well to apply Jesus words: When you have done all the things assigned to you, say: We are good-for-nothing slaves.
What we have done is what we ought to have done.
We can learn from Hezekiah’s experience.
A haughty attitude surfaced in that he did not respond appreciatively to the good done to him.
Our meditating on how much God has done for us will help us to avoid an attitude that Jehovah hates.
We can speak appreciatively of Jehovah who loyally supports his people.
It is not always easy to understand the pain that others are experiencing.
Many people face difficulties that we have never known.
Some are challenged physically because of injury, disease, or aging.
Others are coping with emotional trials because of depression, panic attacks, or the aftereffects of abuse.
Still others are part of a religiously divided family or a single-parent household.
Everyone faces some problem, and often it is one we ourselves have not experienced.
In such a case, how can we imitate God’s love?
By listening intently until we understand the other person’s feelings, at least to some extent.
This will move us to imitate Jehovah’s love by acting according to the need.
The need is different with each individual, but we may be able to provide spiritual encouragement and some other practical help.
Jehovah wants us to live comfortably—a fact that becomes clear when we consider the beautiful surroundings that he provided for Adam and Eve.
But Satan can exploit our desires with the deceptive power of riches.
Many think that money will make them happy or that material possessions are the key to success.
Such thinking is pure deception, and it can cause us to lose the most valuable possession we have—our friendship with Jehovah.
Jesus warned his followers: No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other.
You cannot slave for God and for Riches.
If we slave exclusively for Riches, we have stopped serving Jehovah, and that is precisely what Satan wants us to do! May we never let money or the things it can buy eclipse our friendship with Jehovah.
To fight Satan, we must maintain a balanced view of material things.
The danger of disregarding this counsel is illustrated in , where we read about a young man who goes for a stroll near the house of an immoral woman.
They engage in sexual immorality.
If only he had stayed far away from her! Might we at times show a similar lack of good judgment, perhaps straying into dangerous situations that could awaken wrong desires?
For example, at night, television networks may relax their restrictions on program content.
What if we occasionally channel surf?
Or perhaps we might aimlessly follow links on the Internet or frequent chat rooms and sites that carry invitations to view pornography or offer other sexual services.
Could it be that in such circumstances we would be confronted with something that would arouse improper desires and undermine our fight to remain chaste?
The Source of Christ’s power is Jehovah himself, so we have reason to believe that Almighty God is fully capable of controlling the forces of nature.
Consider a few examples.
Before the Flood, Jehovah stated: In just seven days, I will make it rain on the earth for 40 days and 40 nights.
Similarly, at , we read: Jehovah drove the sea back with a strong east wind.
And we read at : Jehovah hurled a strong wind at the sea, and there was such a violent storm on the sea that the ship was about to be wrecked.
It is encouraging to know that Jehovah can control the elements.
Clearly, planet Earth’s future is in good hands.
How wonderful it is to think of the time when no natural forces will kill or maim, for the tent of God will be with mankind! We can be assured that the power of God exercised through Christ will control the forces of nature during the Millennium.
What a pleasure it is to offer practical, appealing, and attractive literature in the ministry! And when we use the latest technology to spread the truth, such as by means of the jw.
org website, we reflect Jehovah’s interest in providing people everywhere with the guidance most of them lack but so desperately need.
Not to be overlooked is the wisdom behind the adjustment that allowed us to have a Family Worship evening or more time for personal study.
We also appreciate advances made in assembly and convention programs.
We often say that they get better every year! And we certainly rejoice over the increased training being provided by our many theocratic schools.
In all these adjustments, Jehovah’s hand is clearly seen.
He progressively enhances the beauty of his organization and of the spiritual paradise that we enjoy even now!
Why did Jesus use the word debts, whereas on a later occasion, he spoke of sins?
Over 60 years ago, The Watchtower nicely explained: A sin of transgression against God’s law puts us in debt to him.
For our sin God could demand and exact our lives.
He could withdraw his peace from us, breaking off all peaceful relations with us.
We owe him love, expressed in obedience; and when we sin we fail in paying our debt of love to him, for sin is unloving toward God.
Our daily need for forgiveness highlights the only legal basis on which God can cancel our sins—Jesus ransom sacrifice.
Though this ransom was paid nearly 2,000 years ago, we should cherish it as if it were a gift given today.
The ransom price for our lives is so precious that nothing any imperfect human could do for us would come near to paying it.
Jehovah is the God who supplies endurance and comfort.
He alone fully understands not only the problems we face but also the way our environment, emotions, and even our genetic makeup affect us.
He is thus the best one to equip us to endure.
How will God answer our prayers for strength to endure?
When we ask Jehovah to help us cope with trials, he will make the way out.
Does Jehovah maneuver matters to remove the trial?
Perhaps.
Often, however, he makes the way out so that we may be able to endure it.
Yes, Jehovah strengthens us so that we may endure fully with patience and joy.
And since he knows our physical, mental, and emotional limits so intimately, Jehovah will never allow a situation to develop to a point that we cannot remain faithful.
We must remain neutral in order to be loyal subjects of God’s Kingdom.
Otherwise, how could we have a clean conscience when we preach the good news that only God’s Kingdom can solve mankind’s problems?
Additionally, unlike false religions that divide their members by meddling in politics, true worship preserves our international brotherhood by helping us to remain neutral.
As Satan’s system nears its end, we can expect the issue of neutrality to become more prominent.
The world is filled with people who are not open to any agreement and headstrong, so it will only become more divided and polarized.
In some countries, our brothers have already faced unexpected challenges to their neutrality because of a rapidly changing political environment.
Do you see why we need to strengthen our resolve now to remain neutral?
If we wait until we face a challenging situation, we might compromise and violate our neutral stand.
Most differences between Christians can and should be resolved privately by the individuals concerned.
However, Jesus noted that some situations might require congregation involvement.
What would be the outcome if an offender refused to listen to his brother, to witnesses, and to the congregation?
He should be treated just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.
Today, we would say that he should be disfellowshipped.
The seriousness of this step indicates that the sin was not a small disagreement.
Rather, it was 1 a sin that could be settled between the individuals concerned but it was also 2 a sin serious enough to merit disfellowshipping if not settled.
Such sins might involve a measure of fraud or might include damaging a person’s reputation through slander.
The three steps Jesus outlined, as recorded at , are applicable only where these conditions exist.
God’s Word tells us to be obedient to human governments, yet it also teaches that we must obey God rather than men.
Is this a contradiction?
Not at all! The principle of relative subjection helps us to understand and obey these commands.
Jesus summarized this principle when he said the words of today’s text.
We submit to the authority of the government under which we live by obeying its laws, respecting its officials, and paying the taxes it levies.
However, if government authorities tell us to disobey God, we respectfully refuse to comply.
We remain neutral in the world’s political affairs.
Thus, we do not oppose human governments that Jehovah allows to function; nor do we promote patriotic or nationalistic activity.
We do not lobby, vote in political elections, run for government office, or try to change governments.
No doubt all of us have our favorite portions of the Bible.
Some especially enjoy the Gospels, which paint a beautiful picture of Jehovah’s personality as reflected in his Son.
Others are fond of parts of the Bible containing prophecy—perhaps Revelation, with its preview of the things that must shortly take place.
And who among us has not found comfort in the Psalms or drawn practical lessons from the book of Proverbs?
The Bible truly is a book for everyone.
Because we love the Bible, we also love our Bible-based publications.
For instance, we appreciate the spiritual food we receive in the form of books, brochures, magazines, and other literature.
We know that these provisions from Jehovah help us to stay spiritually alert, well-fed, and healthy in faith.
This proved especially important in recent history when the nations engaged in deadly wars on a shocking scale.
For instance, some 55 million people were killed in World War II alone.
However, Jehovah’s Witnesses did not participate in that global slaughter.
This has helped them to remain clean from the blood of all men.
The progress of God’s people is taking place in a very hostile world, which the Bible says is controlled by Satan, the god of this system of things.
He manipulates the political elements of this world, as he does the world’s mass media.
But he cannot stop the preaching of the good news.
However, knowing that he has only a short time left, Satan tries to turn people away from true worship, and he uses various means to do so.
Throughout the earth, there are millions who worship Jehovah and bear witness to his name and purpose.
How should each worshipper of Jehovah view his fellow Witnesses?
The apostle Peter wrote: Now that you have purified yourselves by your obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.
Peter also told fellow believers: Above all things, have intense love for one another.
Because we have intense love for our fellow servants of Jehovah, we make up a unique worldwide organization.
Moreover, because we love Jehovah and obey his laws, he supports us with the most powerful force in the universe, his holy spirit, or active force.
This enables us to enjoy wonderful unity as a truly international brotherhood.
Our words may be just what our hearer truly needs, but unless we discern the best time to speak, their meaning could be lost.
For example, in March 2011 an earthquake and tsunami devastated parts of eastern Japan, wiping out entire cities.
More than 15,000 lost their lives.
Although Jehovah’s Witnesses in the area suffered along with their neighbors, they took advantage of every opportunity to use the Bible to comfort those who were mourning.
However, many of the local people have deep-rooted Buddhist beliefs and little or no knowledge of Bible teachings.
Our brothers discerned that immediately following the tsunami was not necessarily the best time to tell the grief-stricken victims about the resurrection hope.
Instead, they used their gift of speech to focus on giving emotional support and explaining from the Bible why such terrible things happen to innocent people.
God’s provisions to help us remain like soft clay include his Word, the Christian congregation, and the field ministry.
As water softens clay, daily Bible reading and meditation can help us be malleable in Jehovah’s hands.
Jehovah required that the kings of Israel write for themselves a copy of God’s Law and read it daily.
The apostles realized that reading the Scriptures and meditating on them was essential for their ministry.
They quoted from and referred to the Hebrew Scriptures hundreds of times in their writings and encouraged the people to whom they preached to do the same.
Today, we too see the importance of reading God’s Word daily and prayerfully meditating on it.
Doing so helps us to remain humble before Jehovah and be malleable in his hands.
The Gibeonites wisely recognized Israel’s backer to be the true God.
Rahab too perceived God’s hand in the events of her day.
After learning about how Jehovah rescued his people, she told two Israelite spies: I do know that Jehovah will give you the land.
Even though taking such a stand was fraught with danger, she expressed faith that Jehovah could deliver her and her family.
These and many other examples in the Bible help us to understand what it means to see God or to see his hand in matters.
As we come to know him, we too can see his hand because we perceive his qualities and actions with the eyes of our heart.
Surely we want to be like those past and present who have clearly seen Jehovah supporting his people.
Although Martha was the only woman mentioned by name as being one whom Jesus loved, he also had pure unselfish love for other godly women, such as his dear earthly mother, Mary, and Martha’s sister, Mary.
Why, then, is Martha mentioned in this way in the Gospel account?
Jesus loved Martha not only for her hospitable and industrious nature but, no doubt, because of her spirituality.
She was a woman who truly believed Jesus teachings.
Martha had remarkable faith in Jesus as the promised Messiah.
At the same time, like all of us, she was not perfect.
On one occasion while Jesus was being entertained in her home, Martha presumed to tell Jesus what he should do to correct a situation she thought to be wrong.
Lord, said Martha, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things?
Tell her to come and help me.
By continuing to ponder over spiritual things, we will maintain our enthusiasm for the truth.
Thus we will be a source of refreshment to our brothers and to the interested ones we meet in the field service.
Meditating deeply on God’s greatest gift, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus, will help us to cherish the privilege of having a close relationship with our Holy Father, Jehovah.
Mark, a South African who spent three years in prison because of his Christian neutrality, said: Meditation can be compared to an exciting adventure.
The more we meditate on spiritual things, the more we discover new things about our God, Jehovah.
At times when I’m feeling a little discouraged or anxious about the future, I pick up the Bible and meditate on a passage of Scripture.
I feel that it really calms me down.
When appropriate, explain to your children the reasons behind a rule or a decision you make.
If a teenager understands your thinking on the matter, he is more likely to obey you from a willing heart.
Giving reasons helps teenagers to trust you because they see that your decisions are not arbitrary or capricious but reasonable, says Barry, who raised four children.
A teenager is also maturing into an adult with his own power of reason.
Barry explains: Teenagers need to learn to make sensible decisions based on reason rather than emotion.
When you humbly give reasons for your decisions, your adolescent can sense that you recognize that he is progressing toward maturity, and he learns to make his own decisions with his power of reason.
A young sister in France said: Teachers in my school are quite astonished that there are students who still believe in the Bible.
As a young servant of Jehovah or as someone learning about Him, do you feel under pressure to conform to popular beliefs, such as evolution, rather than believe in a Creator?
If so, there are steps you can take to strengthen your faith and keep it strong.
One step is for you to use your God-given thinking ability, which will keep watch over you.
It will protect you from secular philosophies that could destroy your faith.
Genuine faith is based on accurate knowledge about God.
So as you study God’s Word and our Christian publications, do not just skim over the material.
Use your thinking ability so that you get the sense of what you read.
Holy spirit is able to mold us in a number of ways.
For instance, it can help us to develop a Christlike personality, which is characterized by the fruitage of God’s spirit.
An aspect of that fruitage is love.
We love God and want to obey him and be molded by him, recognizing that his commandments are not burdensome.
Holy spirit can also give us the strength to resist the molding influence of the world and its bad spirit.
The apostle Paul, who as a young man was deeply influenced by the proud spirit of Jewish religious leaders, could later write: For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.
So let us, like Paul, keep on asking for holy spirit.
Jehovah will not ignore the sincere petitions of the meek.
Paul realized that we could not accept the extraordinary love of Christ without being compelled, or moved, to live for him.
When our minds fully comprehend what Jehovah has done for us and our hearts are moved by his love, we desire to live our lives whole-souled for Christ Jesus.
How do we show that desire?
Those who love Jehovah are compelled to imitate Christ’s example, following his steps closely.
Through our obedience, we prove our love for God and Christ.
Jesus said: Whoever has my commandments and observes them is the one who loves me.
In turn, whoever loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him.
So ask yourself: In what areas am I doing well in following in the steps of Christ Jesus?
In what areas could I improve?
This self-examination is vital, as we are constantly being pressured to follow the ways of this world.
Do you feel that you have more than average zeal in the ministry?
Are you a keen student of God’s Word who loves to delve into the deep things of God?
Have you seen Jehovah’s special blessing on your ministry?
Do you have a burning desire to do Jehovah’s will?
Do you have a deep inner feeling of responsibility to help others spiritually?
Have you seen proof that Jehovah has personally intervened in your life?
If you answer these questions with a resounding yes, does this mean that you now have the heavenly calling?
No, it does not.
Why not?
Because these are not unique feelings experienced only by those who have the heavenly calling.
Jehovah’s spirit works with equal force in those who have the hope of living forever on earth.
In fact, if you are wondering whether you have received the heavenly calling, that would in itself indicate that you have not received it.
The letter of James explains that true Christian faith is not just a matter of believing; action is involved.
Show me your faith without the works, wrote James, and I will show you my faith by my works.
James goes on to show the clear difference between mere belief and the exercising of one’s faith.
The demons believe that God exists, but they have no true faith.
Rather, they faithlessly work against the fulfillment of God’s purposes.
By contrast, referring to another ancient man of faith, James asks: Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works after he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
You see that his faith was active along with his works and his faith was perfected by his works.
Then to drive home the point that faith must be shown by works, James adds the words of today’s text.
Science has revealed much about the universe and our earthly home, and it has brought us advantages in various aspects of life.
But there are many questions science has not been able to answer.
For instance, astronomers cannot tell us exactly how the universe came into existence or why we are on planet Earth with its abundance of life.
Also, people in general cannot explain why mankind has a strong desire to live forever.
Why are there so many important but unanswered questions?
Partly because numerous scientists and others tend to promote godless thinking and endorse the theory of evolution.
But in his own Book, Jehovah answers questions weighing on the hearts of people everywhere.
We are dependent on the consistent and reliable laws of nature established by Jehovah.
Electricians, plumbers, engineers, pilots, surgeons—all of them depend on these laws in order to do their work.
In some cases, a Christian is married to one who is not yet a servant of Jehovah.
Under those circumstances, the Bible gives good reasons why they should remain together.
Whether the unbelieving mate realizes it or not, he or she is sanctified because of being married to a believer.
Any children born to them are considered holy and thus have a standing with God.
Nearly every congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses has married couples in which the Christian has been instrumental in saving his or her mate.
The apostle Peter counsels Christian wives to be in subjection to their husbands, so that if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives, because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect.
Most imperfect humans are strongly influenced by the spirit of Satan’s world.
That is why people tend to idolize certain men or women rather than just show them appropriate honor and respect.
They place religious and political leaders, sports figures, entertainment stars, and other celebrities on pedestals, often considering them to be almost superhuman.
Hence, young and old alike look to them as role models, perhaps imitating their mannerisms, dress, or conduct.
True Christians refrain from such a distorted view of honoring humans.
Christ is the only human who ever lived whom we can consider a perfect role model.
God would not be pleased if we extended to humans more honor than they are due.
We need to bear in mind this basic truth: All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.
Truly, no human warrants the kind of honor that borders on idolatry.
This reconciliation enables us to be at peace with Jehovah.
Paul links this privilege to Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, stating: Now that we Christ’s anointed brothers have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we also have obtained access by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand.
What a blessing this is! All of us are unrighteous by nature.
But the prophet Daniel foretold that during the time of the end, those having insight, the anointed remnant, would be bringing the many to righteousness.
By their preaching and teaching work, they have brought millions of other sheep into a righteous standing before Jehovah.
However, this has been possible only through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness.
This unnatural union of materialized angels and women produced violent hybrids known as Nephilim.
Moreover, man’s wickedness was great on the earth.
Jehovah brought about the Flood of Noah’s day in order to destroy the wicked.
At that time, people were so occupied with the daily affairs of life, including marriage, that they did not take seriously what Noah, a preacher of righteousness, said about the impending destruction.
Jesus compared conditions then with what we would see in our day.
Today, most people refuse to listen to the good news of God’s Kingdom that is being preached throughout the earth for a witness to all the nations before this wicked system is brought to its end.
Let us take to heart the lesson that even family-matters, such as marriage and the raising of children, should not be allowed to crowd out our sense of urgency as to Jehovah’s day.
Because we are living deep in the last days, we are experiencing critical times hard to deal with.
Yet, keeping spiritually strong will do much to offset this world’s negative influences.
In today’s text, Paul was not telling married couples to neglect their marital duties.
In view of the reduced time, however, they needed to give priority to spiritual matters.
Although we are living in very trying times and marital relationships are failing all around us, it is possible for us to make marriage happy and successful.
Indeed, married Christians who stick with Jehovah’s people, apply Scriptural counsel, and accept the guidance of Jehovah’s holy spirit can preserve what God has yoked together.
The need for shepherds in the Christian congregation is great, and those who will do such work in the future need ongoing training.
Paul told Timothy: The things you heard from me that were supported by many witnesses, these things entrust to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
Timothy learned by serving alongside the apostle, an older man.
Then Timothy applied Paul’s methods in his own ministry and other aspects of sacred service.
Paul did not leave Timothy’s training to chance.
He had the young man accompany him.
Elders can imitate Paul’s example by taking qualified ministerial servants along on shepherding calls when appropriate.
Elders thus give such brothers an opportunity to observe firsthand the teaching, faith, patience, and love required of Christian overseers.
This procedure contributes to the training of future shepherds of the flock of God.
One circumstance that many have faced is the struggle to overcome a fleshly weakness.
Others have had to put forth determined effort to maintain a positive view of the ministry.
Or in your case, it may be the need to keep enduring, even though you have poor health or are lonely.
We should also not overlook the struggle some have to forgive someone who has offended them or has sinned against them.
No matter how long we have been serving Jehovah, all of us must fight against things that might hinder our service to God, who rewards the faithful.
If you realize that you have to some extent been affected in a negative way, by all means pray for holy spirit.
Prayer and holy spirit can give you energy to pursue the course that you know to be right and that Jehovah can bless.
Act on your prayers.
Try to read a portion of the Bible each day, and make time for personal study as well as regular Family Worship sessions.
Have people said to you that they believe in evolution because it is based on science whereas belief in God is based on faith?
Many hold this view.
But it is good for us to keep this in mind: No matter what someone believes about God or about evolution, some type of faith is involved.
How so?
None of us have seen God or observed something being created.
And no human—whether he is a scientist or not—has observed one kind of life evolve into another kind.
No one has watched a reptile evolve into a mammal, for example.
Hence, all of us must examine the evidence and use our thinking ability to reach sound conclusions.
Regarding creation, the apostle Paul wrote: God’s invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.
Jehovah lovingly made provisions for the foreigners living in Israel, such as the right to glean food.
Rather than order the Israelites to respect foreigners, Jehovah appealed to their empathy.
They knew how it felt to be a foreigner.
Even before they were reduced to slavery, the Hebrews were likely shunned by the Egyptians because of racial pride or religious prejudice.
The Israelites had experienced a bitter life as foreign residents, but Jehovah expected them to treat the foreigner like a native among them.
No doubt, Jehovah is equally concerned about people from a foreign background who attend meetings in our congregations.
If we reflect on the challenges that they are facing, such as discrimination or the language barrier, we will look for ways to show them kindness and fellow feeling.
Many of us had to make significant changes prior to our baptism in order to bring our life into harmony with the Bible’s basic requirements.
After baptism, we discerned the need to continue making changes—more subtle ones—so as to imitate God and Christ more closely.
For instance, we may have noted in ourselves a critical spirit, a fear of man, a tendency toward harmful gossip, or some other weakness.
Has making progress in this regard proved to be harder than we expected?
Remember, we are still imperfect.
It is therefore unrealistic to expect that after baptism—or even after many years in the truth—we will no longer make mistakes, experience setbacks, or be troubled with wrong motives and inclinations.
Certain tendencies might persist for years.
As much as we look forward to the Paradise ahead, the primary blessings in the new world will be spiritual.
How deeply satisfying it will be to know that Jehovah’s name has been sanctified and his sovereignty vindicated! We will be thrilled to see Jehovah’s original purpose for mankind and the earth being fulfilled.
And just think how much easier it will be to draw closer to Jehovah as we approach, and finally reach, perfection! These blessings can be ours, for Jesus assures us that with God all things are possible.
But if we expect to live in that new world—and to keep living beyond Christ’s Thousand Year Reign—we must act now to get a firm hold on everlasting life.
We must live in expectation of the end of this wicked world, and we need to take positive steps right now to prepare for life in the new world.
The world abounds with people and societies motivated by a spirit of independence that fosters pride, egotism, and rivalry.
Anyone who allows himself to be swept along by this spirit is, in effect, accepting Satan’s argument that it is the course of wisdom to pursue one’s own interests regardless of how doing so may affect others.
Such a selfish course leads to strife.
In contrast, Jesus taught people to seek peace, even if such a course would seem detrimental to their own interests.
In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus gave excellent advice about handling disagreements or potential conflicts.
For instance, he urged his disciples to be mild-tempered, to be peacemakers, to eliminate causes for anger, to settle matters quickly, and to love their enemies.
Most young children are eager to learn, and they tend to be humble.
Accordingly, wise parents can strive to inculcate knowledge of the truth and love for it in the minds and hearts of their little ones.
Of course, to succeed, the parents must first impress the truth on their own hearts, making the truth their way of life.
When parents do this, their children not only hear the truth but also experience it.
Moreover, they learn to view parental discipline as an expression of love that reflects Jehovah’s love.
When we humbly submit to Jehovah and make such submission our way of life, he will view us as very precious, just as he did the prophet Daniel.
What is more, Jehovah will continue to mold us by means of his Word, spirit, and organization.
Jehovah wants us to be concerned not only about our own spiritual welfare but also about that of others, including those who might have sinned against us.
Usually, such sins are minor and give us an opportunity to show that we truly love our brothers and are willing to forgive, as God has mercifully forgiven us.
Sadly, as imperfect humans, we may sometimes harbor a grudge against another.
If we talk about the matter, others may side with us, causing a division in the congregation.
If we allow such a situation to continue, it would show a lack of appreciation for God’s mercy and the ransom.
Our Father will cease to apply to us the value of his Son’s sacrifice if we display an unforgiving spirit.
Jesus elaborated on this immediately after giving the model prayer.
Finally, to benefit from God’s forgiveness, we must strive to avoid making a practice of serious sin.
It is an honor to be allowed by Jehovah to contribute to the beauty of our spiritual paradise.
We do that by zealously preaching the Kingdom good news and making more disciples.
Each time we help a person progress to Christian dedication, we have worked to extend the borders of the spiritual paradise.
We can also enhance the beauty of our spiritual paradise by steadily improving our own Christian personality.
In that way, we make this paradise more appealing to onlookers.
More than even Bible knowledge, it is often our chaste, peaceful conduct that initially draws people to the organization and in turn to God and to Christ.
How pleased Jehovah and Jesus must be when they observe our beautiful spiritual paradise today! The enjoyment we have now in working to enhance its beauty is but a foretaste of the joy we will have later in working to make the earth a physical paradise.
Spirit creatures called angels are mighty in power.
They are superior to humans and thus have greater intellect and strength.
Of course, faithful angels use their power for good.
For example, on one occasion an angel of Jehovah struck down 185,000 enemy Assyrian soldiers—a feat that would have been impossible for one human and difficult even for an entire army.
On another occasion an angel used his superhuman power and ingenuity to release Jesus apostles from jail.
That spirit creature eluded security measures, unlocked the doors, let out the apostles, and then locked the doors behind them—all of that while guards were stationed nearby! Whereas faithful spirit creatures use their power for good, Satan uses his power for evil.
And what power and influence he has! The Scriptures refer to him as the ruler of this world.
Whether married or single, we must strenuously resist all forms of sexual immorality.
Is the fight easy?
By no means! If you are a young person, for instance, you might hear your schoolmates boast about having casual sex or about sexting, a practice that in some places is viewed as being tantamount to distributing child pornography.
The Bible says: Whoever practices sexual immorality is sinning against his own body.
Both suffering and death have resulted from the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
And the majority of unmarried youths who lose their virginity say that they regret what they did.
The reality of immoral sex is far different from what is portrayed by the entertainment media, which would have us believe that breaking God’s laws has no consequences.
Such thinking makes people fall victim to the deceptive power of sin.
Jephthah had no other child; his daughter was his only hope for a descendant, someone to carry on his name and his inheritance in Israel.
Nevertheless, concludes with Jephthah saying: I have opened my mouth to Jehovah, and I am unable to turn back.
His faithfulness even at great personal cost brought him God’s approval and blessing.
Would you have made the same choice?
When we dedicated our lives to Jehovah, we vowed that we would do his will unreservedly.
We knew that living up to that promise would require self-sacrifice.
However, our willingness is especially put to the test when we are asked to do things that are not initially to our liking.
When we make such sacrifices and serve God in a way that takes us out of our comfort zone, we prove ourselves faithful.
The resulting blessings are always far greater than any sacrifices we may make, painful as they may be.
Can we see Jehovah’s enduring love for us in what he has created?
Yes, we can because the very act of creation was a manifestation of God’s love.
He designed the earth with an ecosystem in which we can safely exist and thrive.
However, he wants us to do more than merely exist.
We need to eat to keep on living.
Jehovah made sure that the earth could produce a seemingly endless variety of plants that can be prepared as wholesome food.
Why, he even made eating a delightful and satisfying experience! Jehovah created us with the ability to perform productive and meaningful work that adds to our enjoyment of life.
He purposed that humans fill the earth, subdue it, and have in subjection the fish, the birds, and other living creatures.
And how loving of Jehovah to endow us with qualities that enable us to imitate him!—.
Events on the world scene clearly indicate that Bible prophecy is now being fulfilled and that the end of this wicked system of things is imminent.
Therefore, we should not assume that much time is needed for the state of this world to develop to the point where the ten horns and the wild beast of turn on Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion.
Let us bear in mind that God will put it into their hearts to make that move—and this could happen swiftly and at any time! The end of this entire system of things is not far off.
With good reason, we should heed Jesus warning as given in today’s text.
Let us be resolved to serve Jehovah with a sense of urgency, confident that he acts in behalf of those who keep in expectation of him.
Jesus described the scope of the preaching work by saying that the good news would be preached in all the inhabited earth.
Disciples are to be made of people of all the nations.
That entails a global work.
To understand how Jehovah’s Witnesses have fulfilled Jesus prophecy with regard to the scope of the preaching work, let us consider some facts.
There are approximately 600,000 members of the clergy in the various denominations in the United States, where there are some 1,200,000 Witnesses of Jehovah.
Worldwide, the Roman Catholic Church has a little over 400,000 priests.
Now consider the number of Witnesses involved in the Bible-based Kingdom-preaching work.
Worldwide, some eight million volunteer ministers preach to people in 240 lands.
What an amazing work is being accomplished, all to Jehovah’s praise and glory!—.
Jesus leads the Christian congregation by means of holy spirit.
We need holy spirit to help us resist temptation, to embolden and equip us for the ministry, and to enable us to make sound decisions.
Should we not take advantage of every provision—including congregation meetings—to receive that spirit?
At many of our meetings, we review the fulfillment of Bible prophecy.
As a result, we reinforce our conviction that Jehovah’s promises for the future will likewise be fulfilled.
Of course, it is not just those who speak from the platform who encourage us.
Fellow Christians who offer comments and sing from the heart also build us up.
And when we converse with our brothers and sisters before and after the meetings, we feel a sense of belonging and enjoy true refreshment.
The Bible indicates that wickedness will greatly increase in the last days.
So we can expect that world conditions, bad as they are now, will continue to decline.
But how bad do you expect conditions to become before the great tribulation?
For example, do you expect that there will be a war in every country, no food on anyone’s table, and illness in every household?
Under those conditions, even skeptics would likely feel compelled to admit that Bible prophecy was undergoing fulfillment.
However, Jesus said that most people would take no note of his presence, carrying on with life’s normal activities until it is too late.
Thus, the Scriptures indicate that world conditions during the last days would not become so extreme that people would be forced to believe that the end is near.
Jesus said those words while he was on earth.
But Christ has been empowered in heaven to wage war against Satan’s world.
Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that Jesus now knows when Armageddon will occur.
We, however, do not know.
It is imperative that we stay watchful until the tribulation occurs.
Yet, the timing of that event has never been uncertain to Jehovah.
He has determined exactly when the end will come.
He is counting down the time to the start of the great tribulation, and its start will not be late! How can we be sure of this?
Jehovah’s prophecies have always been fulfilled right on time! We can be certain that Jehovah’s promise of deliverance through the great tribulation will not fail us either.
However, if we want to survive the destruction of this system, we must keep on the watch.
Faith enables us to do things that from a human standpoint may seem impossible.
For instance, many of us have changed our attitudes and practices so drastically that we are almost unrecognizable to those who knew us before.
Jehovah supported our efforts because we took these steps based on our faith in him.
Once our faith moved us to dedicate ourselves to Jehovah, we became his friends, something we could never have done in our own power.
Our faith continues to empower us.
In faith we are able to resist the attacks of our superhuman adversary, the Devil.
In addition, trust in Jehovah helps us to minimize our anxiety during challenging times.
Jehovah says that when our faith moves us to put Kingdom interests first, he will provide for our material needs.
More than that, because of our faith, we will receive a gift no human could ever obtain by his own efforts—everlasting life.
In what way has God first loved us?
The apostle Paul said: God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Love is Jehovah’s dominant attribute, so we can understand why Jesus told one inquirer that the first commandment from God is: You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.
From Jesus words, we learn that love for God involves, first of all, our heart.
Being halfhearted is displeasing to Jehovah.
However, we note that love for God also involves our whole soul, mind, and strength.
This means that genuine love for God is much more than just an emotional feeling of the heart.
In addition to being heartfelt, our love for God must involve all our spiritual and physical faculties.
According to the prophet Micah, that is what Jehovah wants from us.
What are some reasons why we may not clearly see God’s hand in our affairs?
Life’s challenges can overwhelm us.
When this happens, we may forget to keep focused on how Jehovah has already helped us.
When Queen Jezebel threatened the prophet Elijah’s life, even Elijah momentarily forgot how God had acted in his behalf.
Regarding Elijah, the Bible says: He asked that he might die.
What was the solution to Elijah’s problem?
He needed to look to Jehovah for encouragement.
Job also got so distracted by his own concerns that he neglected to see things from God’s viewpoint.
Like Job, we may need to put forth greater effort to see God.
How can we do that?
In the light of the Scriptures, we need to meditate on what is happening around us.
As we become aware of how Jehovah supports us, he will become more real to us.
Many things happened during Jesus ministry that could have distracted him, but he never succumbed to them.
Early in his ministry, after he had taught the crowds and performed miracles in Capernaum, people begged him not to leave their city.
But how did Jesus react to this flattering request?
He said: I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.
True to his word, Jesus walked the length and breadth of Palestine, preaching and teaching.
Though perfect, he had normal human needs and sometimes felt very tired because of expending himself in God’s service.
On a later occasion while Jesus was teaching his followers how to cope with opposition, a man interrupted, saying: Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.
But Jesus refused to be drawn into this dispute.
Love is God’s dominant quality, his most important one.
Jehovah does not just possess love—he is the personification of it.
How wonderful it is to know that the Creator of the universe and of all living things is a God of love! Everything he does is guided by that quality.
The warm, benevolent affection that God has for his creatures assures us that all his purposes for the human family will be fulfilled in the best possible way and will result in the greatest benefit to all who come under his rulership.
For example, out of love Jehovah has set a day on which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, Jesus Christ.
We can be confident that this will come to pass.
For rightly disposed and obedient humans, favorable judgment will result in a truly blessed future that will go on and on throughout all eternity.
At a critical moment, the apostles abandoned Jesus.
Peter had earlier stated that even if the others did that, he would not.
Nevertheless, when Jesus was being taken into custody, all the apostles—including Peter—abandoned him.
Peter repeatedly denied even knowing Jesus.
However, Peter showed remorse, and Jehovah continued to use him.
Had you been a disciple then, would Peter’s actions have affected your loyalty to Jehovah?
Today, will you recognize that Jehovah may allow time for repentance on the part of wrongdoers and that he will ultimately correct the wrongs and act in a just way?
On the other hand, sometimes those who have been guilty of serious sins reject Jehovah’s mercy and are unrepentant.
In such situations, will you have confidence that Jehovah will in time judge such wrongdoers, perhaps removing them from the congregation?
Jesus did not hesitate to tell his disciples that he loved them.
He also showed his love by closely and regularly associating with his disciples.
Similarly, tell your children that you love them, and regularly show them how much they mean to you.
Samuel, who lives in Australia, says: When I was very young, Dad used to read My Book of Bible Stories to me every evening.
He would answer my questions, hug me, and kiss me good-night.
What a surprise when I later discovered that Dad was not raised in a family where hugs and kisses were common! Yet, he made a real effort to express his love for me.
As a result, I developed a strong bond with him, and I felt contented and secure.
Help your children to feel that way by often telling them I love you.
Show your affection for your children.
Talk with them, eat with them, play with them.
We have the responsibility to make known to our fellow humans that they can come into a friendly relationship with their Creator.
Before humans exercise faith in Jesus sacrifice, God considers them to be his enemies.
The apostle John wrote: The one who exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life; the one who disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.
Happily, Christ’s sacrifice makes reconciliation with God possible.
We share in teaching people spiritual truth, helping them to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah.
This is an important part of our preaching work.
David was loved by Jehovah, who found him to be a man agreeable to his heart.
But David later committed adultery with Bath-sheba, and she became pregnant.
That occurred while her husband, Uriah, was away serving in the army.
When he came home temporarily, David tried to get him to have sexual relations with Bath-sheba so that it might appear that Uriah was the child’s father.
Uriah would not do what the king suggested, so David arranged to have him killed in battle.
David paid dearly for his crime—calamities came upon him and his household.
Yet, God showed mercy to this man who overall walked before Jehovah with integrity of heart.
If you had lived among God’s people back then, how would you have reacted? Would David’s wrong conduct have stumbled you?
When Jehovah observes humans, he does not pay attention to outward appearances.
Rather, he examines the heart, the inner person.
This fact was amply demonstrated when God formed the Christian congregation.
He drew to himself and his Son many individuals who from a human standpoint might have seemed to be undesirable.
One such person was a Pharisee named Saul.
The examiner of hearts, however, did not see Saul as useless clay.
Instead, God saw that he could be molded into a desirable vessel—in fact, a chosen vessel to bear witness to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.
Others whom God saw as potential vessels for an honorable use included former drunkards, immoral people, and thieves.
As they gained accurate knowledge of God’s Word and expressed faith, they allowed Jehovah to mold them.
How well this text describes Satan’s vicious disposition! Although the whole world already lies in his power, Satan is hungry for more victims.
Satan is intent on devouring Jehovah’s people.
The waves of persecution he has unleashed against Jesus followers from the first century until now give evidence of his vicious spirit.
A famished lion feels no pity for its prey.
It feels no compassion before the kill and experiences no remorse afterward.
In a similar way, Satan has shown no pity for those whom he tries to devour.
For example, think about how often Satan the Devil must have been lurking somewhere when the Israelites succumbed to such sins as sexual immorality and greed.
When you read about the tragic consequences that befell immoral Zimri and greedy Gehazi, for instance, can you see the roaring lion reveling in his conquest?
What was the solution to such disruptive thinking?
Paul exhorted the Christians: I urge you, brothers, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.
Neither should there be divisions of any kind in the Christian congregation today.
Paul urged anointed Christians to focus on their heavenly citizenship rather than on earthly things.
They were to act as ambassadors substituting for Christ.
Ambassadors do not meddle in the affairs of the nations to which they are assigned.
Their loyalties lie elsewhere.
Christians with an earthly hope are also subjects of God’s Kingdom, so it is inappropriate for them to take sides in this world’s disputes.
The anxious wait is over.
Relieved to see her father returning safely from battle, the young woman races to greet him and rejoices over his astounding victory.
Instead of joining her in song and dance, he rips apart his battle-stained garments and cries out: Oh no, my daughter! You have broken my heart.
Then he utters the words that change her life forever, shattering her dreams and hopes of a normal life.
Yet, without hesitation, she encourages her father to follow through on what he promised Jehovah.
Her words reveal her great faith.
She trusts that whatever Jehovah asks is best for her.
Her father’s heart swells with pride because he knows that his daughter’s willingness to support his decision brings Jehovah’s smile of approval.
Jephthah and his daughter put their trust and confidence in Jehovah’s way of doing things, even when it was hard to do so.
They were convinced that gaining God’s approval was worth any sacrifice.
The door to complete forgiveness opens to us when we exercise faith in the ransom.
God’s Word assures us that our sins can be blotted out.
On the basis of the ransom, Jehovah adopts his spirit-anointed servants as his children.
As to those of us who are of the other sheep, it is as though Jehovah has drawn up an adoption certificate with our name on it.
After we have reached perfection and have passed the final test, Jehovah will be delighted to sign the certificate, as it were, and adopt us as his beloved earthly children.
Jehovah’s love for his precious children is everlasting.
The benefits of the ransom last forever.
This gift will never lose its value.
No person or power can take it away from us.
When Jehovah drew us into a relationship with him, he was aware of what sort of imperfect tendencies would be particularly troublesome for us.
And he knew that we would occasionally transgress.
Yet, this did not prevent Jehovah from wanting us as his friends.
Love moved God to offer us a precious gift—the ransom sacrifice of his beloved Son.
If on the basis of this priceless provision we repentantly seek Jehovah’s forgiveness when we err, we can have the confidence that our friendship with him is still intact even though we are in an imperfect state.
Isaiah foretold that this One would become a leader and commander.
And Daniel was inspired to write about the coming of Messiah the Leader.
Finally, Jesus Christ identified himself as the Leader of God’s people.
Jesus disciples followed him willingly, and they affirmed that he was Jehovah’s choice.
What convinced them?
At Jesus baptism, John the Baptizer saw the heavens being parted and, like a dove, the spirit coming down upon him.
For the rest of Jesus earthly ministry, God’s holy spirit empowered Jesus to perform miracles and to speak with divine authority.
In addition, holy spirit produced in Jesus perfect fruitage, including love, joy, and stalwart faith.
No other leader provided such convincing evidence.
Jesus was Jehovah’s choice.
Jephthah’s daughter sacrificed her natural desires for a husband and children in order to promote true worship.
How might we imitate her self-sacrificing attitude?
Thousands of young Christian men and women are willingly sacrificing marriage or are not having children—at least for now—in order to serve Jehovah to the full.
Older ones too may be sacrificing the time they could otherwise spend with their children and grandchildren in order to work on theocratic construction projects or to attend the School for Kingdom Evangelizers and to serve in areas where the need for Kingdom publishers is greater.
Others set aside personal matters to share in service campaigns.
Such wholehearted service brings deep joy to Jehovah, who will never forget their work and the love shown for him.
Would it be possible for you to make additional sacrifices to serve Jehovah more fully?
Recall what happened in King David’s case.
From the rooftop David saw a woman bathing.
He failed to look away and to direct his thoughts elsewhere.
That led him to desire a woman who was someone else’s wife and to take steps to commit adultery with her.
In order to combat immoral fantasies, we need to make a covenant with our eyes, as did faithful Job.
We must solemnly decide to control our eyes and not allow them to gaze with immoral lust at another person.
That would include averting our gaze from sexually charged images, be they on a computer screen, a billboard, a magazine cover, or anywhere else.
In your fight against wrong desires, take immediate action.
Willingly submit to the counsel of God’s Word, which can help you avoid wrongdoing and thus remain chaste.
Although we want to be kind even to those who do not follow God’s laws, we should not become their intimate associates or close friends.
It would therefore be wrong for one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who is a single person to date such an individual who is not dedicated and faithful to God and who does not respect His high standards.
Maintaining Christian integrity is far more important than becoming popular with people who do not live by Jehovah’s laws.
Our close associates should be those who do God’s will.
The disastrous results of bad associations were experienced by the Israelites.
Because they became unfaithful to God, Jesus later told them: Look! Your house is abandoned to you.
Jehovah cast off Israel, transferring his blessing to the newly formed Christian congregation.
By maintaining a humble attitude, Jehovah’s people obey an important principle given by Jesus.
In his Sermon on the Mount, he declared: You heard that it was said: You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.
However, I say to you: Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those who persecute you, so that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens, since he makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.
Yes, as God’s servants, we must learn to love our enemies, regardless of their attitude toward us.
In all areas of life, Jehovah’s people must show by their attitude and actions that they love Jehovah and their neighbor.
For instance, even if some do not respond favorably to the Kingdom message, we show neighbor love when they are in need.
How long would the foretold preaching work continue?
Jesus said that this global work would continue right on through the last days, and then the end would come.
What other religious group has continued to preach the good news during these momentous last days?
Some of those whom we meet in the ministry may say: We have the holy spirit, but you people are doing the work.
But is not the fact that we can endure in the work evidence that we have God’s spirit?
From time to time, certain religious groups have tried to do what Jehovah’s Witnesses regularly accomplish, but those efforts usually result in failure.
Others engage in so-called missionary activities for a limited time and then go back to their normal routine.
Still others may even try to go from door to door, but what are they preaching?
The answer to that question makes it clear that they are not carrying out the work that Christ began.
Continued effort is required in order to be readjusted and manifest the new personality.
Paul reminded fellow believers: You were taught to put away the old personality that conforms to your former course of conduct and that is being corrupted according to its deceptive desires.
And you should continue to be made new in your dominant mental attitude, and should put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.
The expression continue to be made new indicates that putting on the new personality is an ongoing process.
This is encouraging, for it assures us that regardless of how long we have been serving Jehovah, we can keep making progress in cultivating and refining the Christian qualities that make up the new personality.
Yes, the Bible can continue to change our life.
The disciples see Jesus walking on the Sea of Galilee.
Peter calls out to Jesus, asking if he could walk across the water to his Master.
When Jesus tells him to come, Peter gets out of the boat and miraculously walks toward Jesus on the choppy surface.
Moments later, though, Peter starts to sink.
Why?
He looked at the windstorm and became afraid.
Peter cries out to Jesus, who quickly catches hold of him and says the words quoted above.
When Peter climbed out of the boat to walk on the water, he did so in faith.
Jesus had called him, and Peter trusted that God’s power would support him just as it was supporting Jesus.
Similarly, when we dedicated ourselves to Jehovah and got baptized, we did so because of our faith.
Jesus called us to be his followers, to walk in his footsteps.
We had to exercise faith in both Jesus and God, trusting that they would support us in various ways.
Certainly, one of a loving father’s priorities is that of protecting and safeguarding his family against any possible harm or serious danger.
Jehovah, our heavenly Father, does no less.
Consider an example.
How precious your eyes are to you! That is how Jehovah feels about his people.
How precious God’s people are to him! Jehovah has on occasion allowed enemies to take the life of a faithful one, such as Stephen.
Yet, God protects his people overall by providing timely warnings against Satan’s crafty acts.
Through his Word and Bible-based publications from his organization, we are helped to see the truth about deceptive riches, immoral and violent entertainment, misuse of the Internet, and so on.
Clearly, as a loving Father, Jehovah looks after the safety and well-being of his people.
A Kingdom Hall is the center of pure worship for the local community.
Among the provisions that Jehovah makes for our spiritual nourishment are the weekly meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
It is here that we receive vital spiritual refreshment and direction through his organization.
Even though we have a standing invitation to eat at the table of Jehovah, we must never take that invitation for granted.
Jehovah considers such occasions for worship and mutual encouragement so important that he inspired the apostle Paul to urge us not to forsake our meeting together.
Would we be showing respect for Jehovah if we missed Christian meetings for unnecessary reasons?
Indeed, we can show how much we appreciate Jehovah and his provisions by preparing for and wholeheartedly participating in these meetings.
Many in Christendom believe, according to this teaching, that Christians will be bodily caught up from the earth.
Then, they expect that Jesus will visibly return to rule the earth.
However, the Bible clearly shows that the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven and that Jesus will come on the clouds of heaven.
Both of these expressions imply invisibility.
Additionally, flesh and blood cannot inherit God’s Kingdom.
So those who will be taken to heaven will first need to be changed, in a moment, in the blink of an eye, during the last trumpet.
Therefore, while we do not use the term rapture here because of its wrong connotation, the remaining faithful anointed will be gathered together in an instant of time.
That admonition in itself is a good reason to remain in expectation—Jesus told us to do so! In this regard, Jehovah’s organization has set an example.
Its publications have consistently exhorted us to await and keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah and to fix our hope on God’s promised new world.
Although keeping in expectation was appropriate for Christians living centuries ago, it is particularly important for us.
Why?
Because we are living during Christ’s presence.
The sign of his presence has been in evidence since 1914.
And the multifeatured sign, which includes worsening world conditions and global Kingdom preaching, means that we are living in the conclusion of the system of things.
Since Jesus did not say how long that period of time would go on before the end arrived, we need to be especially vigilant, watchful.
Manoah and his wife were going to have a son! No doubt, Manoah was happy, but he was also aware of the great responsibility that rested on his shoulders.
In a nation filled with badness, how could he and his wife successfully raise their son to serve God?
Manoah pleaded with Jehovah, saying: Please let the man of the true God the angel whom you just sent come again to instruct us about what we should do with the child who will be born.
If you are a parent, you can likely relate to Manoah’s earnest plea.
You too bear the weighty responsibility of helping your child to come to know and love Jehovah.
To that end, Christian parents arrange for a meaningful and progressive Family Worship program.
Of course, to impress Bible truths on a child’s mind, you need to do more than conduct a weekly family study.
Can you meet the challenge of inculcating the truth in your child?
Why is it vital that we let our brotherly love continue?
The simple answer is that Jehovah requires us to show brotherly love to one another.
We cannot claim to love God and at the same time refuse to love our brothers.
Additionally, we need one another.
This is especially true in times of trouble.
Paul knew that some of the Hebrew Christians to whom he was writing would soon need to leave their homes and material possessions.
Jesus had described how difficult that time would be.
So more than ever before, those Christians needed to strengthen their affection for one another.
Soon the destructive winds of the greatest tribulation of all time will be released.
It is not enough for us just to meet together regularly.
Paul reminded the Hebrew Christians that they should use such occasions to incite one another to love and fine works.
We are living in what the Bible calls the last days, and straight ahead is a tribulation like nothing that has occurred before.
Furthermore, Satan and his demons have been cast out of heaven and are confined to the vicinity of the earth, resulting in intense woe for earth’s inhabitants.
We have been commissioned to carry out a historic and unprecedented preaching campaign that is reaching peoples and language groups as never before! To keep receiving God’s blessing, we need to pay attention to all the directions provided through the Christian congregation.
Having an obedient spirit now will help us to follow directions during the great tribulation, which will eliminate Satan’s entire evil system.
Thereafter, we will need new directions for new world living.
What point is the apostle Paul here making?
An anointed Christian would partake unworthily if he did not maintain a good relationship with Jehovah.
Such a warning helps anointed Christians to remember that they have not yet taken hold of the reward.
They need to continue to press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.
Under inspiration, Paul appealed to anointed Christians to walk worthily of the calling with which they were called.
How should this be done?
Paul goes on to say with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love, earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
Jehovah’s spirit promotes humility, not pride.
To determine to what extent a less experienced brother’s thoughts and actions are influenced by Kingdom truth, an elder might ask him, How has your dedication to Jehovah changed the way you use your life?
That question can lead to a meaningful conversation about what makes our sacred service whole-souled.
Perhaps at the end of such a conversation, he might say a prayer, asking Jehovah to give the brother the holy spirit he needs to complete his training.
How upbuilding it will be for the brother to hear the elder’s heartfelt prayer in his behalf! In the initial phase of training, an elder could consider some Bible accounts that might help the learner to see the need to be willing, reliable, and humble.
Such qualities are as essential to the learner as nutrients are to the soil.
They quicken his spiritual growth and serve to open his eyes to the wonderful things in God’s Word.
Mary was to conceive, give birth to, and raise the only-begotten Son of God! It is easy to think only of Mary’s wonderful privilege and fail to consider some of the practical concerns that might have seemed daunting.
God’s angel Gabriel told her that she would become pregnant miraculously—without having relations with a man.
Gabriel did not offer to go to Mary’s family and neighbors to explain the cause of her pregnancy.
What would they think?
Mary must have been concerned about her fiancé, Joseph.
How could she convince him that, although she was pregnant, she had remained faithful to him?
Moreover, what a responsibility it would be to raise, care for, and train the only-begotten Son of the Most High! We cannot know all the concerns that may have raced through Mary’s mind when Gabriel spoke to her.
However, we do know that she answered with the words of today’s text.
Noah lived in an evil world but had no desire to make its inhabitants his close friends.
He did not seek the companionship of ungodly people.
He and the seven members of his family occupied themselves with the doing of God-given work, which included building an ark.
Meanwhile, Noah was also a preacher of righteousness.
Noah’s preaching, his work on the ark, and his association with his family kept him busy doing good things that pleased God.
As a result, Noah and his immediate family survived the Flood.
We should be grateful to them because all of us today are the descendants of those who served Jehovah—faithful Noah, Noah’s wife, his sons, and their wives.
Similarly, loyal and obedient first-century Christians kept themselves separate from ungodly people and survived the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish system of things in 70 C.
Not every pastime is beneficial, relaxing, or refreshing; nor is it good to engage in recreation too much or too often.
How can our conscience help us to enjoy upbuilding recreation and benefit from it?
The Scriptures warn against certain behavior identified as the works of the flesh.
These works include sexual immorality, uncleanness, brazen conduct, idolatry, spiritism, hostility, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, dissensions, divisions, sects, envy, drunkenness, wild parties, and things like these.
Paul wrote that those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom.
Accordingly, we can ask ourselves: Does my conscience move me to shun sports that are aggressive, competitive, nationalistic, or violent? Does my inner voice warn me when I am tempted to view a film that features pornographic scenes or one that condones immorality, drunkenness, or spiritism?
The expression our Father, not my Father, reminds us that we belong to an association of brothers who truly love one another.
What a precious privilege that is! Anointed Christians, who have been begotten as God’s sons with heavenly life in view, rightly address Jehovah as Father in the fullest sense.
Christians whose hope is to live forever on earth can also address Jehovah as Father.
He is their Life-Giver, and he lovingly provides for the needs of all true worshippers.
Those with this earthly hope will in the fullest sense become God’s children after they have reached perfection and have proved their loyalty in the final test.
Parents give their children a fine gift when they teach them to pray and help them to view Jehovah as a caring heavenly Father.
Parents can give their children no greater gift than that of helping them to develop a warm, close relationship with Jehovah.
Uncontrolled anxious thoughts can cause us physical and spiritual harm.
Let us trust in Jehovah and remember the words of today’s text.
Good words of encouragement from someone who understands us can make our heart rejoice.
Confiding in our parents, our spouse, or a trusted friend who views things from God’s standpoint may help to relieve our anxiety.
No one understands our anxiety better than Jehovah does.
Do not be anxious over anything, wrote Paul, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
Think about those who are helping to protect us from spiritual harm—fellow believers, elders, the faithful slave, angels, Jesus, and Jehovah himself.
Just north of the temple at Jerusalem was a pool known as Bethzatha.
Large crowds of sick and infirm people would gather there, hoping that they would be miraculously cured.
Moved with pity, Jesus approached a man who had been sick longer than Jesus had been alive on earth.
Jesus inquired if he wanted to get well.
The response was immediate.
The man wanted to be healed but he could not see how, for he had no one to help him into the pool.
Jesus then commanded the man to do the impossible—to pick up his mat and walk.
Taking Jesus at his word, the man picked up his mat and began to walk.
What a heartwarming foregleam of what Jesus will do in the new world! In this miracle, we also see Jesus compassion.
He sought out the needy.
Jesus example should motivate us to continue to seek out people in our territory who are depressed about the terrible things happening in this world.
The undeserved gift of Jesus ransom sacrifice was given so that we might gain life.
Referring to this superlative expression of God’s love, the apostle Paul wrote: Christ died for ungodly men at the appointed time.
For hardly would anyone die for a righteous man; though perhaps for a good man someone may dare to die.
But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
This greatest expression of God’s love opened to mankind the prospect of having a favored standing with Jehovah.
By means of the ransom, Jehovah shows his love for the world of mankind.
If we hope to live forever on earth and we continue to serve Jehovah faithfully, we can be assured that he will make life pleasant for us in the new world.
How fitting it is that we view the ransom as the greatest evidence of God’s enduring love for us!
The privilege of living under Kingdom rule is well worth any effort we make to cooperate with Jehovah’s organization and care for theocratic assignments.
Of course, our circumstances may change.
For instance, some members of the Bethel family in the United States have been reassigned to the field and are now enjoying abundant blessings in other forms of the full-time ministry.
Because of advancing age or other factors, others who were in the traveling work have now received special pioneer assignments.
If we cultivate contentment, pray for God’s help, and do all we can in his service, we will experience joy and will receive many blessings even in these critical last days.
What about our future prospects?
We may have ideas about where we would like to live in the new world, but we may be asked to move to a different area.
Regardless of where we will then serve and what we will do, we can be sure that we will be grateful and contented, brimming with joy.
Although we do not fully understand all that will happen during that time of test, we can expect that it will involve some measure of sacrifice.
In the first century, Christians had to leave behind their possessions and endure hardships in order to survive.
To remain faithful, will we be willing to experience material loss?
Will we be ready to do whatever is required of us to prove our loyalty to Jehovah?
Just think! At that time, we will be the only ones following the example of the ancient prophet Daniel by continuing to worship our God no matter what.
This will not be the time to preach the good news of the Kingdom.
That time will have passed.
The time for the end will have come! No doubt God’s people will proclaim a hard-hitting judgment message.
This may well involve a declaration announcing that Satan’s wicked world is about to come to its complete end.
We should not be surprised if the world hates us for our neutral stand; Jesus warned us that it would.
Most opposers do not appreciate the importance of the issues involved in Christian neutrality.
For us, though, these are matters of utmost importance.
Loyalty to Jehovah requires that we be steadfast in the face of threats.
Fear of man can affect people of all ages, but young people may find it especially difficult to go against the flow, so to speak.
If your children are facing such issues as the flag salute or nationalistic celebrations, do not hesitate to assist them.
Use Family Worship sessions to help your children understand the issues involved so that they can meet those challenges courageously.
Help them to express their personal convictions clearly and respectfully.
Take the initiative to speak with their teachers about these matters if necessary.
No longer perfect, Adam could not reflect God’s qualities perfectly.
He not only lost a marvelous future for himself but also handed down to his children imperfection, sin, and death.
He deprived his offspring of the prospect of life without end.
Furthermore, Adam and Eve could no longer have a perfect child; neither could any of their children have a perfect child.
After turning Adam and Eve away from God, Satan the Devil has continued to mislead mankind until today.
God’s love for humans, however, endures.
Despite Adam and Eve’s rebellion, Jehovah wants mankind to enjoy a good relationship with him.
He does not desire any to die.
So right after the rebellion, God made arrangements to enable humans to restore their friendship with him while he at the same time maintained his own righteous standards.
Appreciation for our role in Jehovah’s service will grow as we, in imitation of our God, look for the good in others.
Instead of seeking the spotlight or always stepping in to take over, we will more often find ourselves modestly seeking the advice of others and yielding to their suggestions.
We will rejoice with them when they receive privileges.
And we will praise Jehovah as we see how he blesses the entire association of our brothers in the world.
Also, we will develop good judgment by modestly learning to see things from Jehovah’s viewpoint.
Through regular study, prayer, and application of what we learn, we can gradually strengthen our conscience.
We learn to put others first.
If we do our part, Jehovah promises that he will finish our training, helping us to develop modesty and other godly qualities.
Those related to us in the faith certainly merit honor and respect.
This is especially true of the elders who are taking the lead.
We honor these brothers regardless of their nationality, education, social standing, or financial status.
The Bible refers to them as gifts in men, and they are a key part of God’s arrangement to care for the needs of his people.
Think of congregation elders, circuit overseers, Branch Committee members, and the members of the Governing Body.
Our brothers and sisters in the first century had high regard for those appointed to take the lead, and we feel similarly today.
We do not idolize well-known representatives of the Christian congregation or react in their presence as if angels were standing nearby.
Still, we do respect and honor such brothers for their hard work and humility.
The Bible Students understood that it was not enough for them to inform relatives, close friends, and church members of their stand on false religion.
The whole world needed to see Babylon the Great for what it is—a religious prostitute! Accordingly, between December 1917 and early 1918, the few thousand Bible Students zealously distributed 10,000,000 copies of a tract featuring the subject The Fall of Babylon—a hard-hitting indictment of Christendom.
As you can imagine, the clergy were furious; but undeterred, the Bible Students kept right on with this important work.
They were determined to obey God as ruler rather than men.
What can we conclude?
That far from becoming enslaved to Babylon the Great during the war, these Christian men and women were breaking free from its influence and were helping others to do so.
Some might imagine that this is a contrast between those who are not in the truth and those who are, between those who are not Christians and those who are.
However, Paul was writing to those who are in Rome as God’s beloved ones, called to be holy ones.
Thus, Paul was contrasting Christians who walked according to the flesh with Christians who walked according to the spirit.
He linked living according to the flesh with the sinful passions that were then at work in their bodies.
So when speaking of those who set their minds on the things of the flesh, Paul was referring to people who are ruled by or focused on their desires and leanings as imperfect humans.
In the main, these are ones who follow their cravings, impulses, and passions, whether sexual or otherwise.
Some anxiety may be caused by a person’s past actions or failings.
At times, King David felt that his errors loomed over his head.
He admitted: My anguished heart makes me groan aloud.
In that situation, what was the wise thing for David to do?
What did he do?
He trusted in Jehovah’s mercy and forgiveness.
At other times, you may become anxious about the present.
For instance, when David wrote , he feared for his life.
Nevertheless, he did not allow anxiety to destroy his confidence in Jehovah.
David made his problems a subject of fervent prayer, but he also understood the value of taking practical steps to deal with the cause of the anxiety.
Learn a lesson from David.
Instead of allowing anxiety to overwhelm you, take what steps you can to deal with the situation and then confidently leave matters in Jehovah’s hands.
David accepted correction from Jehovah’s representative, the prophet Nathan.
David also prayed to Jehovah, confessing his sins and expressing a sincere desire to be restored to Jehovah’s favor.
Instead of being paralyzed by guilt, David learned from his mistakes.
Indeed, he never repeated those serious sins.
Years later, he died faithful, his record of integrity firmly sealed in Jehovah’s memory.
What can we learn from David’s example?
If we fall into serious sin, we need to repent sincerely and seek Jehovah’s forgiveness.
We must confess our sins to him.
We also need to approach the elders, who can offer us spiritual help.
By availing ourselves of Jehovah’s arrangements, we show that we trust in his promise to heal and forgive us.
Thereafter, we do well to learn from our mistakes, move forward in our service to Jehovah, and look to the future with confidence.
Jesus compared himself to a shepherd, and his followers to a flock of sheep.
Consider: If two sheep are on a hill, two other sheep are in a valley, and still another sheep is grazing elsewhere, would we describe those five sheep as a flock?
Generally, a flock of sheep stays together under the care of its shepherd.
Similarly, we cannot follow our Shepherd if we deliberately isolate ourselves.
We need to meet together with other Christians to be part of one flock under one shepherd.
When we attend a meeting, we contribute to the unity of our brotherhood.
Some of our fellow worshippers have been rejected by their parents and siblings.
Yet, Jesus promised that he would give them a spiritual family to love them and care for them.
When you attend meetings regularly, you may very well prove to be a father, mother, brother, or sister to one of these dear ones! Does that not motivate us to do our utmost to be at all the meetings?
When you receive a gift, what do you do?
Most likely you show your appreciation in some way.
In addition, you will likely make good use of the gift, not taking it for granted.
Jehovah unfailingly provides what we need to live and to be happy.
Does that not move us to want to love him in return?
The Israelites lived under Jehovah’s loving care for hundreds of years and were bountifully blessed by him, in both material and spiritual ways.
Their continuing to receive such blessings, however, was contingent on their obeying God’s Law, which included regularly offering to Jehovah the best of the first ripe fruits of the land.
The Israelites would thus demonstrate that they did not take for granted Jehovah’s love and blessings.
Jehovah created humans with remarkable abilities.
He gave us thinking ability to solve problems and plan for the future.
He gave us power to carry out our plans, enabling us to work toward proper goals.
He also created us with a conscience—an inborn sense of right and wrong—that can help us avoid wrongdoing and correct our mistakes when we fall short.
Through his Word, Jehovah repeatedly admonishes us to use our abilities for good.
For example, in the Hebrew Scriptures, we read: The plans of the diligent surely lead to success; and whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might.
In the Christian Greek Scriptures, we are told: As long as we have the opportunity, let us work what is good toward all; and to the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another.
Clearly, Jehovah wants us to do what we can to benefit ourselves and others.
Jehovah’s people have turned their back on the fruit that they used to produce before they came to know, love, and serve God.
Their past way of life may have included things of which they are now ashamed and that would have merited death.
Then they changed.
That was true of many in Corinth to whom Paul wrote.
Some had been idolaters, adulterers, homosexuals, thieves, drunkards, and the like.
Yet, they were washed clean and sanctified.
That was likely also true of some in the Roman congregation.
Paul was inspired to write to them: Neither go on presenting your bodies to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also your bodies to God as weapons of righteousness.
Paul was sure that they could remain spiritually clean and thus continue to benefit from God’s undeserved kindness.
Sometime during King Jeroboam’s reign, Jehovah sent a certain prophet from Judah to deliver a scathing judgment message to that apostate king of Israel.
The humble prophet faithfully delivered God’s message, and Jehovah protected his servant from Jeroboam’s violent wrath.
On his way home, the prophet unexpectedly met up with an old man from nearby Bethel.
The man claimed to be a prophet of Jehovah.
He deceived the younger man into disobeying Jehovah’s strict instructions not to eat bread or drink water in Israel and not to return by the way that he came.
Jehovah was not pleased.
Later, on his way home, a lion came across Jehovah’s prophet on the road and killed him.
Why did the once modest prophet presumptuously go along with that deceitful older man?
The Bible does not say.
But it could be that he completely forgot that he was supposed to be walking modestly with God.
The descendants of Adam and Eve inherited imperfection and death from their disobedient parents.
However, they retained the right to exercise the gift of free will.
This is evident in the way God dealt with the nation of Israel.
Through his servant Moses, Jehovah gave the people the choice to accept or reject the privilege of becoming His special property.
What was their response?
They freely chose to carry out the conditions of becoming God’s name people and unanimously declared: All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.
Sadly, in time the nation misused its freedom of choice and broke that promise.
Let us heed this warning example and always treasure our gift of free will by continuing to stick close to Jehovah and obeying his righteous requirements.
Since holy spirit is an invisible force, how could the Israelites discern that it was operating on Moses?
Holy spirit enabled Moses to perform miracles and to declare God’s name to Pharaoh.
Holy spirit also produced in Moses beautiful qualities, such as love, meekness, and patience, that qualified him to lead the Israelites.
The evidence was clear: Jehovah had selected Moses to be the leader of His people.
Later, Jehovah’s holy spirit empowered other men whom he appointed to lead his people.
Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom.
Jehovah’s spirit came upon Gideon.
And the spirit of Jehovah began to empower David.
All those men relied on God’s spirit to help them, and that spirit empowered them to perform feats that they could not have done in their own strength.
The faithful slave has exercised outstanding faith by zealously promoting and spreading the Kingdom good news.
Are you one of the other sheep who supports the anointed in this vital work?
How happy you will feel when your Leader, Jesus, says: To the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.
When Jesus returned to heaven, he did not abandon his followers.
He knew firsthand how much the holy spirit, the angels, and God’s Word helped him to take the lead when he was on earth.
Therefore, he has supplied the faithful slave today with the same assistance.
As anointed Christians, the members of that slave keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes.
As we follow their direction, therefore, we follow our Leader, Jesus.
Soon, he will lead us to everlasting life.
And no human leader can promise that!
Paul set a fine example of respecting his brothers right of free will to make decisions.
Today, when giving counsel on matters involving personal choice, the elders should follow that pattern.
They are happy to share Bible-based information with others in the flock.
Still, the elders are careful to allow individual brothers and sisters to make their own decisions.
That is logical because those individuals will bear the responsibility for the results.
Here is an important lesson: We can show helpful interest in others and call attention to Scriptural principles or counsel.
Still, others have a right and responsibility to make their own decisions.
When they do this wisely, they benefit.
Clearly, we should avoid any tendency to think that we are authorized to make decisions for other brothers and sisters.
Many people think that there is little connection between what they are doing and what God is doing.
In fact, some believe that God has little interest in what is happening to humans.
After Super Typhoon Haiyan wreaked destruction on the central Philippines in November 2013, the mayor of one large city said: God must have been somewhere else.
Other people act as if God cannot see what they are doing.
They are like those whom the apostle Paul described when he said: They did not see fit to acknowledge God.
Such people were filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, and badness.
What about us?
Unlike those mentioned above, we realize that Jehovah observes everything we do.
But do we also perceive his interest and supporting hand in our life?
Although circumstances may deprive you of a Bible, you will never be deprived of the ability to meditate on what you have stored in your memory, such as your favorite scriptures and the words of Kingdom songs.
And God’s spirit can help bring back to your mind the good things you have learned.
So prepare now by setting aside time to read and meditate on the weekly Bible reading.
Time should also be set aside for meditating on what Jesus said and did.
You will surely agree that among the better-known books of the Bible are the Gospel accounts of Jesus life and ministry.
God’s people have even been provided with a publication that puts Jesus experiences and time on earth in chronological order.
It is a wonderful aid, especially if we carefully read and meditate on the parallel Gospel passages cited in each chapter.
Jesus was a loving and loyal friend.
In Bible times, a master did not normally share his private thoughts and feelings with his slaves.
However, Jesus proved to be both master and friend to his faithful apostles.
He spent time with them, shared his feelings with them, and carefully listened when they poured out their hearts to him.
Such loving communication created a warm bond between Jesus and his apostles and prepared them for future responsibilities in God’s service.
Jesus wanted his beloved disciples and friends to experience the joy that comes from a busy life in Jehovah’s service.
Therefore, he desired that they zealously participate in spiritual activities.
Indeed, Jesus wanted them to be ardent disciple-makers! And he lovingly assured his disciples that he would help them to succeed.
Love is Jehovah God’s dominant quality.
His first creation was Jesus, who existed with him in heaven for many aeons and learned God’s loving ways.
By his entire course, including his life on earth, Jesus showed that he fully understands what a loving God Jehovah is, and he imitates that love.
Thus, we can be confident that the rulership exercised by Jehovah and Jesus will forever be guided by the quality of love.
When asked which was the greatest commandment in the Law, Jesus stated: You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.
This is the greatest and first commandment.
The second, like it, is this: You must love your neighbor as yourself.
Notice that Jesus placed love of neighbor second only to love of Jehovah.
This shows how important it is to display love in all our relationships.
God did not restrict his communication with humans to Hebrew.
After the Babylonian exile, Aramaic became the everyday language of some of God’s people.
Perhaps to indicate what was to come, Jehovah inspired the prophets Daniel and Jeremiah and the priest Ezra to record portions of their Bible books in Aramaic.
Alexander the Great later conquered much of the ancient world, and common, or Koine, Greek became an international language.
Many Jews began to speak that language, leading to the translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek.
This translation, thought to have been done by 72 translators, became known as the Septuagint.
It was the first translation of the Bible and one of the most important.
The work of so many translators resulted in varied translation styles, from literal to rather free.
Nevertheless, the Septuagint was viewed as God’s Word by Greek-speaking Jews and later by Christians.
The point of James illustration is made clear in verse 6.
The tongue is also a fire.
The tongue represents our ability to speak.
Like fire, our speech has the potential for causing great harm.
The Bible even says that death and life are in the power of the tongue.
Of course, we do not stop talking just out of concern that we might say something harmful, any more than we refuse to use fire because we fear the damage it might cause.
The key is control.
If we control fire, we can use it to cook our food, warm our bodies, and light up a dark night.
If we tame our tongue, we can use its power to honor God and to benefit others.
Whether we use sounds from our mouth or signs with our hands, the ability to communicate our thoughts and feelings is a marvelous gift from God.
This gift, however, should be used to build up, not tear down.
It is reasonable to believe that Luke gave Paul medical advice and rendered medical services to him and to others in his missionary group.
Why would Luke need to do that?
Because even Paul got sick while traveling.
Luke could provide medical help that was in line with what Jesus had said: Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.
The Bible does not indicate where or when Luke received his medical training.
It has been suggested that Paul mentioned to Christians in Colossae the role of Luke as a physician because they knew him.
Interestingly, there was a medical school in nearby Laodicea.
In any event, Luke was not some untrained layman spouting health recommendations; he was a physician.
That is evident both from the specific medical language that Luke used in his Gospel and in the book of Acts and from the way he focused on Jesus healings of others.
When Jehovah sent his only-begotten Son to this earth, He gave what would become the greatest possible gift of love! The apostle Paul called it God’s indescribable free gift.
Paul knew that all the magnificent promises of God were guaranteed through the perfect sacrifice of Christ.
Thus, that indescribable free gift would include all the goodness and loyal love that Jehovah would extend to us through Jesus.
Indeed, that gift is so awe-inspiring that it cannot be fully described in human terms.
How should receiving such an extraordinary gift affect us?
And in what practical ways should this gift motivate us?
Does it compel you to reconsider your actions and even change the way you have been living your life?
Are you moved to be more generous and loving toward others and to forgive any who have wronged you?
Remember, what Jehovah has given us through Christ is by far the greatest gift ever given.
Adam was the one man through whom sin and death entered into the world.
Thus by the trespass of the one man death ruled as king.
Paul added that the abundance of God’s undeserved kindness came about through the one person, Jesus Christ.
And that undeserved kindness has resulted in good for all mankind.
Through the obedience of the one person Jesus many will be made righteous.
Actually, God’s undeserved kindness can lead to everlasting life through Jesus Christ.
Jehovah was not obliged to have his Son come to earth to provide the ransom.
Moreover, imperfect, sinful humans did not of themselves merit, or deserve, what God and Jesus did in providing a ransom by which forgiveness was possible.
So our being forgiven and offered the prospect of living forever is truly a kindness that is undeserved.
We should highly value the gift of God’s undeserved kindness and let it affect our life daily.
Self-examination is important.
Why?
Paul wrote: Setting the mind on the flesh means death.
That is serious—spiritual death now and physical death in the future.
Still, Paul did not mean that if someone began to set the mind on the flesh his end unavoidably would be death.
Change is possible.
Think of the immoral man in Corinth who went after the flesh and had to be disfellowshipped.
Yet, he could and did change.
He ceased to walk after the flesh and returned to a straight path.
If it was possible for that person to change, it is possible for a Christian today to change, especially one who has not gone after the flesh as far as the man in Corinth had.
Certainly, Paul’s warning about the possible final outcome for someone who sets his or her mind on the flesh should be a stimulus to Christians to make any needed changes!
How comforting it is for us to throw our burden on Jehovah, knowing that he will sustain us’! We can have full confidence that God can do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.
Imagine that—not just abundantly and not superabundantly but more than superabundantly! To receive the reward, we need to exercise full faith in Jehovah and be obedient to his directions.
Moses told the nation of Israel: Jehovah will surely bless you in the land that Jehovah your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance, but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today.
For Jehovah your God will bless you just as he has promised you.
Do you have full confidence that Jehovah will bless you if you continue to serve him faithfully?
You certainly have good reason for such confidence.
This was not an arbitrary choice.
Jehovah was being true to a promise that he had made centuries earlier to his friend Abraham.
Furthermore, Jehovah always exercises his freedom in harmony with his attributes of love and justice.
This is evident in the way he disciplined the Israelites, who repeatedly abandoned true worship.
When they expressed heartfelt repentance, Jehovah willingly extended love and mercy, saying: I will heal their unfaithfulness.
I will love them of my own free will.
What a fine example of using his freedom for the benefit of others! When Jehovah began his creative works, he lovingly chose to bestow free will on his intelligent creatures.
The first one to receive this gift was his firstborn Son, the image of the invisible God.
Even before coming to earth, Jesus chose to remain loyal to his Father and not join Satan in his rebellion.
Our changing circumstances can expand or limit our sphere of operation.
Are you young or up in years?
Is your health good or fragile?
Jehovah always considers how each of us might best be used in his service.
He only expects from us what is reasonable, and he greatly appreciates whatever we do.
Jesus found joy in every one of his assignments, and we can find joy in ours.
A modest person does not feel cramped by his current assignments or responsibilities in the congregation.
He does not worry about gaining future privileges or about what others are achieving.
Instead, he focuses his energies on finding purpose and enjoyment in his present role because he views it as coming from Jehovah.
At the same time, he sincerely respects the role or place that Jehovah has given to others.
Modesty helps us to enjoy giving others due honor and support.
Some younger ones may now be coordinating activities that include older brothers.
Though such younger ones have a changed role, they would do well to benefit from the wisdom and experience of older ones before making decisions.
Timothy, a younger man, worked alongside the apostle Paul for many years.
Paul had written to the Corinthians: I am sending Timothy to you, because he is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord.
He will remind you of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus.
This brief statement points to the close cooperation between Paul and Timothy.
Paul had taken time to teach Timothy his methods.
Timothy learned well and had won Paul’s affection, and Paul was confident that Timothy could care for the spiritual needs of those in Corinth.
What a fine example for elders to imitate today as they train other men to take the lead in the congregation!
Jehovah wants people to live, not die.
As the Source of life, he becomes the Father of everyone who is resurrected.
How appropriate, therefore, that Jesus taught us to pray: Our Father in the heavens.
Jehovah has given Jesus an important share in resurrecting the dead.
In Paradise, Jesus will fulfill his role as the resurrection and the life.
Jehovah’s generosity is not limited to a few privileged people, for Jesus said: Whoever does the will of God, this one is my brother and sister and mother.
It is God’s will that a numberless great crowd from all nations and tribes and tongues become his worshippers.
Those who exercise faith in Christ’s ransom and who do the will of God can be among those who shout: Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.
To disseminate Bible truth in various languages, Zion’s Watch Tower Tract Society was legally incorporated in 1884, with Charles Taze Russell as president.
He was an outstanding student of the Bible, and he fearlessly exposed as false such doctrines as the Trinity and the immortality of the soul.
He discerned that Christ would return invisibly and that the appointed times of the nations would end in 1914.
Brother Russell devoted his time, energy, and money unsparingly to share these truths with others.
Clearly, at that pivotal time, Brother Russell was used by Jehovah and the head of the congregation.
Brother Russell did not seek glory from humans.
In 1896, he wrote: We want no homage, no reverence, for ourselves or our writings; nor do we wish to be called Reverend or Rabbi.
Nor do we wish that any should be called by our name.
He later stated: This is not man’s work.
We all have choices and decisions to make.
Not every one of our decisions is a life-and-death matter.
However, many of our decisions, the choices we make, can have a profound effect on us.
Hence, the ability to make good decisions can help us to live a relatively smooth, peaceful life rather than one that is full of chaos, controversy, and disappointment.
What will help us to make wise decisions?
We certainly need faith in God, not doubting his willingness and ability to help us to be wise.
We also need faith in Jehovah’s Word and in his way of doing things, trusting God’s inspired counsel.
As we draw close to him and grow in love for his Word, we come to trust his judgment.
Accordingly, we develop the habit of consulting God’s Word before making decisions.
Our loving God always does what is in the best interests of his faithful servants.
The Bible tells us: He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.
What a marvelous future awaits all of us who truly appreciate Jehovah’s love and obey him as our Ruler! Jehovah’s Word tells us: Take note of the blameless one, and keep the upright one in sight, for the future of that man will be peaceful.
But all the transgressors will be destroyed.
The blameless one comes to know Jehovah and his Son and obediently does God’s will.
Such a person takes seriously the words of : The world is passing away and so is its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.
As the world’s end draws near, it is urgent that we hope in Jehovah and follow his way.
When the Israelites adopted the sinful ways of the Canaanites, Jehovah no longer granted them his protective care.
What a challenge it must have been for God-fearing families to remain loyal to Jehovah during those hard years! Nevertheless, the Bible reveals that there were faithful ones, such as Jephthah, Elkanah, Hannah, and Samuel, who were determined to gain God’s approval.
We live in a world where people think and act in ways that are similar to those in ancient Canaan—they glorify sex and violence and promote materialism.
Jehovah has given us clear warnings—just as he did the Israelites—to safeguard us from such influences.
Will we learn from the mistakes of the Israelites?
We must strive to remove any trace of Canaanitelike thinking from our lives.
Have we been faithful in making an effort to do so?
When we are faced with serious decisions, it is vital to draw on the Bible as the best source of advice and to seek Jehovah’s guidance in prayer.
Jehovah can give us the qualities we need to make decisions that are in harmony with his will.
Make it a practice to ask: Will this decision give evidence of my love for Jehovah?
Will it bring joy and peace to my family?
And will it show that I am patient and kind?
Jehovah does not coerce us into loving him and serving him.
In line with the free will that he grants us, he respects our responsibility and right to choose for ourselves whether we will serve him.
But he expects us to follow through on other decisions that we make based on his guidance.
With faith in Jehovah’s way of doing things and the principles that he has kindly provided, we can make wise decisions and prove ourselves steady in all our ways.
Martha is busy preparing a special meal for Jesus, and she becomes irritated with Mary.
Jesus notices that Martha is trying to do too much, so he kindly says: Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things.
He then suggests that just one dish of food would be sufficient.
Jesus now turns his attention to Mary and clears her of any negligence, saying: For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.
Mary may soon have forgotten what she ate on that special occasion, but she would never forget the commendation and fine spiritual food she received by giving Jesus her undivided attention.
More than 60 years later, the apostle John wrote: Jesus loved Martha and her sister.
These inspired words surely indicate that Martha took to heart Jesus loving correction and that she strove to serve Jehovah faithfully for the rest of her life.
Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to rejoice in their hope despite intense and ongoing persecution.
For example, many of our brothers and sisters are imprisoned in Eritrea, Singapore, and South Korea, in most cases because of acting in harmony with Jesus words not to take up the sword.
Most of Jehovah’s people have not had to endure severe persecution.
Their tests of faith have been different.
Many have had to endure poverty or have suffered during civil wars or natural disasters.
Others are like Moses and the patriarchs in that they have given up a life of worldly ease or fame.
They fight hard to resist being tempted to live a materialistic, self-centered lifestyle.
What is it that enables them to do this?
Their love for Jehovah and their strong faith in the promise that he will correct all injustices and reward his faithful servants with everlasting life in a new world of righteousness.
Jesus was not afraid to ask his followers what they believed.
Imitate his example.
It is best, in a relaxed setting, to invite your children to express their feelings.
If a child is unsure about some teaching, try not to react too strongly or to respond as if you were on the defensive.
Patiently help him to reason on the matter.
It is helpful to view your child’s sincere questions as an indication that he cares and wants to understand.
Even at 12 years of age, Jesus asked serious questions.
Get to know your children well—their thinking, their feelings, their concerns.
Never assume that they have faith simply because they attend Christian meetings and share in the field service with you.
Include spiritual discussions in your daily activities.
Pray with and for your children.
Try to be aware of any tests to their faith, and help them to deal with these.
Serving shoulder to shoulder with our brothers and sisters promotes unity.
It also builds lasting friendships and increases mutual confidence in the coming blessings under God’s Kingdom.
As we strengthen the hands of others, we help them to battle discouraging circumstances and to maintain a positive and hopeful view of the future.
Moreover, doing that for others helps us to keep our spiritual focus and to feel the reality of what God has in store for us.
Yes, it strengthens our hands too.
Seeing how Jehovah on different occasions supported and protected his faithful servants in the past should build our faith and trust in him today.
So when you face pressures and problems, do not let your hands drop down! Instead, reach out to Jehovah in prayer, and allow his mighty hand to strengthen you and lead you to Kingdom blessings.
Declaring the good news of the Kingdom was Jesus primary assignment.
However, he took time to train others to be shepherds and teachers.
Although Philip was busy as an evangelizer, he no doubt helped his four daughters to become effective in sharing Scriptural truths with others.
How important is such training today?
Worldwide, the number of people accepting the good news is growing.
New ones who are not yet baptized need to grasp the importance of personal Bible study.
They must also be taught to preach the good news to others and to teach them the truth.
In our congregations, brothers need to be encouraged to work hard in order to qualify for appointment as ministerial servants and elders.
By means of good instruction, mature Christians can help new ones to make spiritual progress.
A solid marriage is made up of two people who make allowances for each other’s imperfections.
They continue putting up with each other and forgiving each other freely.
Yes, both mates will make mistakes.
When that happens, however, there are opportunities to learn from these errors, to be forgiving, and to let love have full sway as a perfect bond of union.
Moreover, love is patient and kind.
It does not keep account of the injury.
Misunderstandings should be cleared away as soon as possible.
A Christian couple, therefore, should try to settle any issue between them before the day ends.
Sincerely saying I am sorry for hurting you takes humility and courage, but it goes a long way in solving problems and drawing marriage partners closer together.
To keep awake spiritually means more than just having good intentions.
A few days before the incident in the garden of Gethsemane, Jesus told those same disciples to make supplication to Jehovah.
So to remain spiritually watchful, we too must stay alert in prayer.
Since Jesus said that the end will come at an hour that we do not think to be it, this is no time to doze off spiritually, no time to pursue the illusions and fantasies that Satan and his world offer and that our flesh craves.
Through the pages of the Bible, God and Christ tell us what they have in store for us in the immediate future and how we can keep on the watch.
We have to pay attention to our spirituality, to our relationship with Jehovah, and to Kingdom priorities.
We must be aware of time and events so that we can be ready for what is coming.
Our life is at stake!
It is not easy to control our emotions when we feel that we have been slighted or treated unjustly.
It can be devastating if we are mistreated because of our ethnic background, the color of our skin, or some other physical difference.
How much greater the pain is if it is caused by a fellow Christian! How wise it is to apply the Bible’s counsel to control our temper and avoid being quick to take offense! No doubt all of us need to work at being less sensitive and more forgiving.
Jehovah and Jesus take forgiveness very seriously.
Do you need to be more forgiving or to give attention to controlling your emotions?
People who fail to control their emotions often become bitter.
As a result, others may not want to be around them.
A bitter individual can exert a bad influence in the congregation.
The environment in which Jehovah is now molding us is viewed as a spiritual paradise that is presently taking shape.
We feel safe and secure despite the wicked world around us.
We have come to know Jehovah and now experience his fatherly love.
In the new world, we will experience to the full the blessings of the spiritual paradise.
Then, our spiritual paradise will have its perfect counterpart—a literal paradise under the rulership of God’s Kingdom.
During that time of global restoration, Jehovah will continue to mold earth’s inhabitants, educating them to a degree that we might now find hard to imagine.
Furthermore, God will make our minds and bodies perfect, so that we will be able to absorb his teaching and do his will flawlessly.
So let us be determined to continue submitting to Jehovah, showing him that we view his molding as an expression of his love for us.
For the first few centuries of our Common Era, many people could read the Bible in either Greek or Latin.
They were thus in a position to compare the teachings of God’s Word with the dogmas of the church.
On the basis of what they read in the Bible, some among them rejected the unscriptural creeds of the church, but it was dangerous—even fatal—to express such opinions openly.
In time, Bible languages fell into disuse by the masses, and the church opposed efforts to translate God’s Word into the common tongues.
Any dissent from what the church taught was severely punished.
Faithful anointed servants of God had to meet together in discreet groups—if they could meet at all.
The anointed royal priesthood could not function in an organized way.
Babylon the Great held the people in a viselike grip!
We must certainly avoid choosing to practice the serious sins that some in Corinth had been guilty of.
That is vital if we are to say that we have accepted God’s undeserved kindness and that sin is not master over us.
However, are we also determined to be obedient from the heart by doing our best to avoid sins that some would view as less serious?
Think of the apostle Paul.
We can be sure that he was not sharing in the gross wrongs mentioned at .
Nonetheless, he confessed that he was still guilty of sin.
He wrote: I am fleshly, sold under sin.
For I do not understand what I am doing.
For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate.
This shows that there were other things that Paul viewed as sins, and he was fighting against those wrongs too.
May that also be true of us as we strive to be obedient from the heart.
When you are confronted by situations that cause uneasiness, apprehension, or anxiety, pour out your heart to your loving heavenly Father.
After you have done all you can to solve a problem, heartfelt prayer will certainly accomplish more than worry.
As shown at , Jehovah can respond to our earnest, heartfelt, and persistent supplications.
How?
By giving us inner calm that can free our mind and heart of disturbing emotions.
Many can testify to this, based on their own experience.
In place of anxiety, a distressing sense of foreboding, God helped them to gain a profound sense of peace and tranquillity that actually surpassed human understanding.
That can be your experience too.
Thus the peace of God can triumph over any challenge you may face.
You can fully trust Jehovah’s compassionate promise: Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
I will fortify you, yes, I will help you.
Moses turned his back on the treasures of Egypt, choosing to be mistreated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin.
May we imitate the faith of loyal ancient ones, such as Moses, by treasuring our gift of free will and using it to do God’s will.
While it might seem easier to have someone else make decisions for us, doing so would rob us of one of the great blessings of free will.
That blessing is revealed at .
Verse 19 describes the choice that God gave to the Israelites.
In verse 20 we learn that Jehovah gave them the precious opportunity to show him what was in their hearts.
We too can choose to worship Jehovah.
We could have no greater motive than to use God’s gift of free will to express our love for him and to bring him honor and glory!
Jehovah expects us to put to good use the abilities with which he has endowed us.
Why?
Because he loves us, and he knows that it brings us satisfaction when we employ these gifts.
At the same time, Jehovah knows that humans have limitations.
On our own, we can never eliminate imperfection, sin, and death; neither can we control other people, for all have free will.
And no matter how much knowledge or experience we gain, we will always be like children in comparison with Jehovah.
In all circumstances, we need to lean on Jehovah for guidance, trusting in him to support us and do for us what we cannot do for ourselves.
At the same time, we should do what we can, taking appropriate action to solve problems and help others.
In short, we need both to trust in Jehovah and to do what is good’; we need to act with faithfulness.
Barzillai declined the offer.
Why?
Because of his advanced age, he told David that he did not want to become a burden to the king.
So Barzillai recommended that Chimham, presumably one of his sons, take his place.
Modesty helped Barzillai to make a reasonable decision.
He did not turn down David’s invitation because he felt inadequate to shoulder responsibility or because he wanted to enjoy a quiet life in retirement.
He simply recognized and accepted his changing circumstances and his limitations.
He did not want to take on more than he reasonably could.
If we focus on position, prominence, or recognition, it only provides a breeding ground for egotism, competition, and eventual disappointment.
Modesty, however, helps all to focus their collective abilities and efforts on bringing glory to God and doing what is best to help others.
Jehovah is an awe-inspiring Creator.
Everything he creates meets the highest standards.
As is evident in creation, Jehovah lovingly set boundaries.
He made both natural laws and moral laws to ensure that everything functions harmoniously.
Hence, all things in the universe have an assigned place and function according to their role in God’s purpose.
Jehovah sets the standard for how his creation should work together.
Thus, the law of gravity holds the atmosphere close to the earth, regulates tides and oceans, and contributes to the physical order essential to life on earth.
All creation, including humans, moves and functions within these boundaries.
Clearly, the order in creation testifies that God has a purpose for earth and mankind.
In our ministry, can we draw attention to the Cause of this impressive order?
After Moses time, his successor, Joshua, was strengthened by the prince of Jehovah’s army to lead God’s people into battle against the Canaanites.
Later, King Hezekiah faced an overwhelming force of Assyrian soldiers who threatened to invade Jerusalem.
In one night, the angel of Jehovah went out and struck down 185,000 men.
Of course, while the angels are perfect, the men whom they assisted were not.
Moses once failed to sanctify Jehovah.
Joshua neglected to seek God’s guidance before concluding a covenant with the Gibeonites.
For a brief period, Hezekiah’s heart became haughty.
Nevertheless, despite the imperfections of these men, the Israelites were expected to follow their lead.
Jehovah was supporting those men with his superhuman agents.
Yes, Jehovah was leading his people.
A popular philosophy or common adage is: Follow your heart.
But doing that can be dangerous.
And in a sense, doing so is unscriptural.
The Bible warns us not to let our imperfect heart or mere sentiment rule when we are making decisions.
And Bible accounts show the sad consequences of following one’s heart.
The core problem is that in imperfect humans, the heart is more treacherous than anything else and is desperate.
So, what could it mean for us if we simply follow our heart and let our emotions dictate our thinking and actions?
For example, what might happen if we make decisions when we are angry?
The answer may be obvious if we have done this in times past.
Or is it likely that we will make sound decisions when we are discouraged?
Clearly, we could easily be deceived by our emotions if we allow them to prevail when we are making important decisions.
Among the crowds in Jerusalem were some Greek proselytes who evidently were so impressed with Jesus that they asked the apostle Philip to arrange a meeting with him.
Jesus, however, refused to be distracted from the more important matters that lay ahead.
He certainly did not want to try to gain popularity in order to avoid a sacrificial death at the hands of God’s enemies.
So after explaining that he would soon die, he said to Andrew and Philip: Whoever is fond of his life destroys it, but whoever hates his life in this world will safeguard it for everlasting life.
Rather than satisfy the curiosity of those Greeks, he recommended following his self-sacrificing course and said the words of today’s text.
No doubt, Philip carried this positive message back to the inquirers.
Though Jesus refused to be distracted from his main purpose of preaching the good news, he was not always thinking about work.
Even when we are persecuted, we do our best to live according to God’s righteous principles and laws.
By performing righteous deeds, we let our light shine and thus bring glory to Jehovah’s name.
As holy people, we prove by the way we live our lives that Jehovah’s laws are good and that Satan’s accusations are false.
When we make mistakes, as we all do, we genuinely repent and turn away from practices that dishonor Jehovah.
On the basis of Christ’s sacrifice, Jehovah forgives the sins of those who exercise faith.
He accepts as his worshippers those who dedicate themselves to him.
Jehovah declares anointed Christians righteous as his sons and those of the other sheep righteous as his friends.
So even now, the ransom enables us to have a righteous standing with our Father and to share in the sanctification of his name.
We too can pour out our concerns to Jehovah, knowing that he will hear us and strengthen us to endure with joy.
And when our prayers are answered, our faith gets stronger.
Since faith is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit, we need to keep on asking for God’s spirit, as Jesus urged us to do.
Our prayers, though, should not be limited to asking God for personal help.
Too numerous to recount are the wonderful works we can thank and praise Jehovah for daily! Also, our prayers should reflect that we keep in mind those in prison, as though we were imprisoned with them.
And we should pray for our worldwide brotherhood, especially those who are taking the lead among us.
Our hearts are touched when we see how Jehovah answers our united prayers!—.
Boaz was clearly concerned about Ruth and her precarious situation as a foreigner.
For one thing, he invited her to stay with his group of young women so that she would not be harassed by the men who were working in the field.
He even made sure that she would get enough food and water, just like the hired workers.
In addition, Boaz did not speak down to the poor foreign woman but, instead, reassured her.
Not only was Boaz moved by Ruth’s unselfish love for her mother-in-law, Naomi, but he was also impressed that she had become a worshipper of Jehovah.
Boaz kindness was actually an expression of Jehovah’s loyal love toward a woman who had come to seek refuge under the wings of the God of Israel.
Similarly today, our kindly demeanor can help all sorts of people recognize the truth and sense how much Jehovah loves them.
Consider the courage and honesty of the men who wrote the Bible.
Many ancient writers flattered their leaders and glorified their kingdoms.
Jehovah’s prophets, however, always spoke the truth.
They were willing to point out the shortcomings of their own people, even their kings.
And they made plain their own failings and those of other servants of God.
Because of the guiding principles found in the Bible, many are convinced that it was inspired by God.
Bible principles protect us from sharing in false worship and from superstitions that enslave many people.
Such teachings as evolution tend to make nature into a sort of god, giving it powers that belong only to Jehovah.
Those who say that there is no God claim that our future is entirely in our own hands.
They, however, offer no sure hope for a better future.
God’s Law to the Israelites showed Jehovah’s strong feelings against clothing that does not make clear the distinction between male and female—what has been described in our day as unisex fashion.
From God’s stated direction about clothing, we clearly see that God is not pleased with styles of dress that feminize men, that make women look like men, or that make it hard to see the difference between men and women.
God’s Word contains principles that help Christians make good decisions about how to dress.
That is so no matter where they live, what their culture is, or what the climate is.
We do not need detailed lists saying which styles of dress are acceptable and which are objectionable.
Rather, we are guided by Scriptural principles that allow room for personal preferences.
Jehovah is able and willing to give us strength by means of his holy spirit.
It is vital that we draw on that spirit so that we can face any challenge that Satan and his wicked system thrust upon us.
Also, we can be grateful that we have God’s Word, which is a product of holy spirit.
Think, too, about the spiritual food based on the Bible that we receive each month.
The words of were spoken while the temple in Jerusalem was being rebuilt, and those words are very fitting for us.
We are also made stronger by divine education at our Christian meetings, assemblies, conventions, and in our theocratic schools.
That training can help us to have the proper motivation, to set spiritual goals, and to fulfill our many Christian responsibilities.
Do you eagerly seek to gain strength from that type of education?
Young people have the strength needed to accomplish much in Jehovah’s service.
Some young brothers in Bethel service have a part in printing and binding Bibles and Bible literature.
Many young brothers and sisters share in the work of building and maintaining Kingdom Halls.
When natural disasters strike, young people join more experienced Witnesses in carrying through with relief efforts.
And many young pioneers help to take the good news to indigenous and foreign-language communities.
The psalmist sang: Those seeking Jehovah will lack nothing good.
Indeed, Jehovah never disappoints those who zealously serve him.
We personally taste and see that Jehovah is good as we do all we can in his service.
And when we give God whole-souled worship, we experience happiness that has no equal.
A legal divorce not based on sexual immorality would not free one to remarry.
Of course, a person might choose to forgive an adulterous but repentant mate, even as the prophet Hosea apparently forgave his immoral wife, Gomer.
Similarly, Jehovah extended mercy to repentant Israel after that nation’s spiritual adultery.
It might be added that if a person knows that his or her mate committed adultery and chooses to resume sexual relations with the guilty mate, such an action constitutes forgiveness and removes a Scriptural basis for divorce.
After saying the words of today’s text, Jesus spoke of those who have the gift of living a single life.
He added: Let the one who can make room for it make room for it.
Many have chosen to remain single in order to serve Jehovah with an undivided mind.
For doing so, they are to be commended.
While undeserved kindness from Jehovah provides us with many blessings, we should not presumptuously think that he condones all conduct.
Among the early Christians, there were some who attempted to turn the undeserved kindness of God into an excuse for brazen conduct.
These unfaithful Christians apparently thought that they could sin and then count on Jehovah to forgive them.
Worse still, they endeavored to entice their brothers to join them in their contemptuous ways.
Even today, anyone doing that has outraged the spirit of undeserved kindness.
Today, Satan has misled some Christians into thinking that they can presume on God’s mercy and commit sins with impunity.
But while Jehovah is willing to forgive repentant sinners, he expects us to put up a strong fight against our sinful tendencies.
The Mosaic Law acted as a protective wall against the degraded moral and religious acts of other nations.
When Israel listened to God, the nation received his blessing.
When they ignored him, they suffered dire consequences.
Directions were needed for another reason.
The Law pointed to an important development as to Jehovah’s will.
That was the coming of the Messiah, Jesus Christ.
The Law made it clear as never before that the Israelites were imperfect.
It also impressed on them the need for a ransom, a perfect sacrifice that would fully cover sin.
Furthermore, the Law helped to preserve the genealogical line leading to the Messiah and to identify him when he appeared.
Yes, the Law acted as a temporary tutor, or guardian, leading to Christ.
Deeds of godly devotion include your activities in the congregation, such as your meeting attendance and participation in the ministry.
Also included are spiritual activities that others do not see, such as your private prayers and your personal study.
A person who has dedicated his life to Jehovah will not consider these deeds to be chores.
Rather, he will reflect the attitude of King David, who said: To do your will, O my God, is my delight, and your law is deep within me.
Remember, as a dedicated and baptized Christian, you will stand before Jehovah on your own.
Your service to him should not depend on others—not even your parents.
Your holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion give evidence that you have made the truth your own and that you are progressing toward baptism.
We need to follow the Bible-based direction we receive from the elders.
Recall Paul’s counsel regarding disorderly ones in the congregation.
Some individuals were meddling with what did not concern them.
They were evidently admonished by the elders but persisted in disregarding the counsel.
How was the congregation to deal with such a person?
Paul directed: Keep this one marked and stop associating with him.
That counsel was balanced with the caution not to treat such a person as an enemy.
Today, elders may give a warning talk about someone’s persisting in a course that reflects badly on the congregation, such as dating an unbeliever.
How do you react to their counsel?
If you are aware of the situation described in the talk, will you take care to avoid socializing with such an individual?
Your loving concern and firm stand may move the person to abandon a disorderly course.
Immigrants face the challenge of adjusting to the culture of the new country.
Ruth set a fine example in this regard.
First, she showed respect for the customs of her new country by asking permission to glean.
She did not take this right for granted as if others owed her something.
Second, she readily expressed gratitude for the kindnesses shown to her.
When immigrants display such a fine attitude, they are more likely to gain the respect of local residents and fellow believers.
We rejoice that Jehovah in his undeserved kindness has allowed people from all backgrounds to hear the good news.
In their home country, they may not have been able to take advantage of a Bible study or to associate freely with Jehovah’s people.
But now that they have the opportunity to associate with us, should we not help them so that they no longer feel like strangers in our midst?
Millions of modern-day worshippers of God are following the example of Jesus by keeping their hope in clear focus and not allowing trials to weaken their faith.
Consider the example of Rudolf Graichen, who was born in Germany in 1925.
He recalled pictures of Bible scenes that hung on the walls of his home.
One picture, he wrote, showed the wolf and the lamb, the kid and the leopard, the calf and the lion—all in peace, being led by a little boy.
Such pictures made a lasting impression on me.
Despite many years of cruel persecution, first by the Nazi Gestapo and later by the Communist Stasi of East Germany, Rudolf maintained his strong faith in an earthly paradise.
Other severe trials faced by Rudolf were the loss of his beloved mother, who died of typhus in the Ravensbrück concentration camp, and seeing his father weaken in faith and renounce being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
God’s people work hard to apply the Bible’s admonition: Deaden, therefore, your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion.
We would not want to make it difficult for fellow believers to heed that counsel.
Brothers and sisters who have given up a sexually loose lifestyle may still be fighting sinful leanings.
We would not want to make their fight harder, would we?
When we are around our spiritual brothers and sisters, our manner of dress should help to make the congregation a haven of moral chastity.
We have the freedom to choose what to wear.
Still, all of us have a responsibility to wear clothes that make it easier for others to remain chaste and to maintain God’s standards of holiness in thought, word, and conduct.
This arrangement does not make a wife inferior to her husband.
It actually helps her to fulfill the role God had in mind for a wife when he said: It is not good for the man Adam to continue to be alone.
I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.
Just as Christ, the head of the congregation, displays love, a Christian husband is to exercise loving headship.
When he does so, his wife feels secure and finds satisfaction in being respectful, supportive, and submissive.
Imitating Jesus example requires that his followers love one another just as he loved them.
Marital love shown by Christians should therefore be so strong that either mate would be willing, if necessary, to die for the other.
Many people pray because it makes them feel good, but they do not really believe that God hears their prayers.
They need to know that Jehovah is the Hearer of prayer.
Jesus told his disciples: If you ask anything in my name, I will do it.
Obviously, anything means anything that is in harmony with Jehovah’s will.
John assures us: This is the confidence that we have toward him, that no matter what we ask according to his will, he hears us.
How good it is to teach others that far from being a mere psychological crutch, prayer is a wonderful means of approaching Jehovah’s throne of undeserved kindness! By teaching them to pray in the right way, to the right Person, and for the right things, we can help them draw close to Jehovah and find comfort during times of distress.
Those words surely express the sentiments of all loyal Witnesses of Jehovah.
But what if illness or advanced age somewhat limits your ministry?
Always remember that as you share the good news with caregivers and others, your sacred service glorifies our wonderful God.
If you are imprisoned because of your faith, you likely speak about the truth as circumstances permit, and that makes Jehovah’s heart rejoice.
The same is true if you are in a religiously divided household but stick to your spiritual routine.
Even under adverse circumstances, you can praise Jehovah and make spiritual progress.
Jehovah will certainly bless you as you share God’s precious truth with those who are in need of hope.
Jehovah’s servants highly esteem God’s own holy book, the Bible.
Being imperfect, we all receive Scriptural counsel at times.
How will we respond to it?
Consider the first-century Christians Euodia and Syntyche.
Serious problems arose between these anointed women.
The problems that existed between Euodia and Syntyche could have disrupted the peace of the whole congregation.
The Bible does not tell us the outcome, but these sisters may have responded well to the apostle Paul’s loving counsel.
Similar situations sometimes cause difficulties in congregations of Jehovah’s people today.
However, such problems can be solved or even avoided if we apply the counsel found in God’s Word, the Bible.
And if we highly esteem Jehovah’s own Book, we will live by its instructions.
All of us need encouragement.
That is especially true when we are growing up.
Children need encouragement like plants need water, explains educator Timothy Evans.
With encouragement, a child feels worthwhile and appreciated.
But we live in critical times.
People are selfish, there is little natural affection, and encouragement is scarce.
Satan the Devil wants to discourage us because he knows that discouragement can make us weak spiritually and in other ways.
Satan used a combination of calamities and accusations in an effort to discourage righteous Job, but that cruel scheme failed.
We can fight the works of the Devil by encouraging members of our family and of the congregation.
This will help to make our home and the Kingdom Hall places where we feel happy and secure.
Jehovah’s great love has been displayed in many ways.
For example, note the magnificence of the universe.
There are billions of galaxies, each containing many billions of stars and planets.
In our own Milky Way galaxy, one of those stars is our sun, without which the multitude of life forms on earth would not exist.
All these creations give evidence of Jehovah’s Godship and of his qualities, such as his power, wisdom, and love.
On earth, Jehovah created everything for the benefit of his creatures designed for earthly life.
For humans, he made a beautiful paradise garden and gave them perfect minds and bodies capable of living forever.
Moreover, he gives food to every living thing, for his loyal love endures forever.
Over the years our King has given us tools to use to help prepare the hearts of millions to receive the Kingdom message.
Some tools were useful for perhaps a decade or so, while others have proved to be of timeless value.
But all these tools have allowed us to develop our skills as evangelizers in some way.
One tool that helped many get started in the ministry was the testimony card, which Kingdom publishers began using in 1933.
The card contained a brief Bible message.
The testimony card was helpful in more ways than one.
Although having a strong desire to share in the preaching work, some publishers were shy and did not know what to say.
Others would tell the householder everything they knew in just a few minutes, but their presentation was not always tactful! In contrast, in a few concise, well-chosen words, the testimony card did the talking for the publisher.
Today, we are blessed with much knowledge of Jehovah’s works of creation and the outworking of his purpose.
The world promotes higher education and advanced learning.
Yet, the experience of many shows that pursuing such things often leads to loss of faith and loss of love for God.
The Bible, however, urges us not only to love knowledge but also to acquire wisdom and understanding.
That means to learn how to use the knowledge that God has given us so that we can benefit ourselves and others.
God’s will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
We demonstrate our love for Jehovah when we put our heart into telling everyone the Kingdom good news and helping people to understand God’s grand purpose for mankind.
Man’s linguistic abilities are a miraculous gift designed by God.
Our God-given brain is unique in another important respect.
Unlike animals, humans were created in God’s image.
They have free will and can choose to use their linguistic skills to glorify God.
To all who desire to honor the Creator of language, God has given a wonderful gift, the Bible.
It is available in whole or in part in over 2,800 languages.
When you absorb these holy writings, you are filling your mind with the thoughts of God.
Thus you can enjoy meditating on things that are able to make you wise for salvation.
To meditate means to focus your thoughts and to reflect on or ponder over something, be it good or bad.
The two best subjects for meditation are Jehovah God and his Son, Jesus Christ.
By word and example, Jesus trained his disciples to serve others humbly.
He taught his apostles to be self-sacrificing in Jehovah’s service and in dealing with fellow believers.
Through your example of humble self-sacrifice, you can teach your children the same lesson.
I never felt jealous because of the time my husband spent with others as an elder, says Debbie, a mother of two.
I knew that whenever our family needed my husband’s attention, he would give it to us.
Her husband, Pranas, adds: Later, our children were keen to be involved at assemblies and on theocratic projects.
They flourished, made friends, and felt that they belonged! The entire family now serves Jehovah in the full-time ministry.
By the way you demonstrate humility and self-sacrifice, your children are likely to learn how to serve others.
In recent years, we have seen an increase in the number of those partaking at the Memorial of Christ’s death.
That trend contrasts with the decrease in the number of partakers that we saw for many decades.
Should this increase trouble us?
No.
Let us consider some key factors to keep in mind.
Those taking the count at the Memorial cannot judge who truly have the heavenly hope.
The number of partakers includes those who mistakenly think that they are anointed.
Some who at one point started to partake of the emblems later stopped.
Others may have mental or emotional problems that lead them to believe that they will rule with Christ in heaven.
Therefore, the number of partakers does not accurately indicate the number of anointed ones left on earth.
And the Bible does not state how many will be left at the time that the great tribulation begins.
In choosing close friends, Jesus was selective.
Jesus chose such friends from among those who loyally followed him and served Jehovah wholeheartedly.
Do you similarly select your close friends from among those who serve Jehovah unreservedly?
Why is this important?
The warmth of our brotherhood can help you to progress to maturity.
Perhaps you are a young person who is trying to decide what course you will pursue in life.
How wise you are if you associate with fellow believers who have considerable experience in serving Jehovah and in contributing to the unity of the congregation! Over the years, they may have had some ups and downs in life and may even have faced challenges in serving God.
Such ones can help you to choose the best way of life.
Warm, upbuilding association with such brothers and sisters can help you to make your own wise decisions and to press on to maturity.
By both word and deed, Jesus built up the faith of his disciples.
We should follow his example because helping others build up their faith also strengthens our own.
In your preaching and teaching, highlight the proof that God exists, that he cares about us, and that the Bible is his inspired Word.
Help your brothers and sisters bolster their faith as well.
If any show signs of doubt, perhaps by starting to grumble against appointed brothers, do not quickly shun them.
Instead, tactfully come to their aid, helping them take steps to restore their faith.
If you are in school and the theory of evolution is discussed, boldly defend your faith in creation—you might be surprised at the effect your words have on others.
Jehovah helps all of us to stand firm in the faith.
The effort we put into building our faith is well worth it, for the rewards of faith are incomparable.
Samuel was so reluctant to do what the people demanded that Jehovah three times saw the need to tell him to listen to them.
Even so, Samuel did not allow bitterness or resentment against the man who would replace him to take root in his heart.
When Jehovah told him to anoint Saul, the prophet obeyed, not reluctantly out of mere duty, but willingly out of love.
Like Samuel, experienced elders today show a kind disposition toward those whom they train.
Such elders do not hold back from training others for fear of having to relinquish certain congregation privileges to the learners.
Bighearted teachers view willing learners, not as competitors, but as fellow workers—as precious gifts to the congregation.
And what satisfaction such unselfish teachers experience as they observe how the learners use their abilities to benefit the congregation!—.
As King of God’s Kingdom, Jesus will crush the serpent’s head and erase from the universe all traces of Satan’s rebellion.
While on earth, Jesus helped his disciples to see the importance of God’s Kingdom.
Immediately after his baptism, Jesus proclaimed the good news of the Kingdom of God far and wide.
In his last words to his disciples before he returned to heaven, Jesus instructed them to be witnesses of him to the most distant part of the earth.
By means of the Kingdom-preaching work, people throughout the earth would have an opportunity to learn about the ransom and become subjects of God’s Kingdom.
Today, we show our support for the Kingdom by assisting Christ’s brothers on earth in carrying out the commission to preach the good news of the Kingdom worldwide.
Meditating on spiritual things will help a person grow to Christian maturity.
A person who spends little time thinking about Jehovah and Jesus will not maintain strong faith.
Such a person is in danger of drifting away or drawing away from the truth.
Jesus warned that if we do not hear, or accept, God’s Word with a fine and good heart, we will not retain it.
Instead, we could easily be carried away by anxieties, riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring nothing to maturity.
Therefore, let us continue to ponder over God’s Word.
This will motivate us to reflect Jehovah’s glory, qualities, and personality as revealed in the Bible.
What more could we ask for?
Growing in the knowledge of God and being allowed to reflect his glory are wonderful privileges, a never-ending process as we continue to learn how to imitate our loving heavenly Father.
We must never doubt that if we follow God’s direction, it will turn out for our good.
It is vital that we put faith in the One who can really help.
Paul reminds us that God is the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.
Jehovah’s servants do all they can to carry out the will of God, but knowing their limitations, they trust in Jehovah to bless the outcome.
Are we not glad that our God is with us?
Can we expect our requests for more faith to be answered?
The Bible assures us that we can when we ask according to God’s will.
Clearly, Jehovah is pleased with those who put their complete trust in him.
Jehovah will answer our request for more faith, and our faith will grow exceedingly, leading to our being counted worthy of the Kingdom of God.
Speech is part of our daily life, but we do not need to talk all the time.
In fact, the Bible says that there is a time to be silent.
Maintaining silence when others are speaking can be a mark of respect.
Controlling our tongue to keep quiet about a confidential matter gives evidence of discretion and discernment.
Restraining our tongue when we are provoked is the course of wisdom.
On the other hand, the Bible also says that there is a time to speak.
If a friend gave you a beautiful present, you would probably not store it out of sight.
Rather, you would show your appreciation by putting it to good use.
We show our gratitude for Jehovah’s gift of speech by using it wisely.
That might include expressing our feelings, communicating our needs, sharing words of encouragement, and giving God praise.
As Christianity spread, much communication among Christians was in Greek.
In fact, the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which contain inspired records of what Jesus taught and did, were widely distributed in Greek.
Thus, the language of many disciples was Greek rather than Hebrew.
The letters of the apostle Paul and the other inspired books were also distributed in Greek.
It is noteworthy that when writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures quoted from the Hebrew Scriptures, they usually did so from the Septuagint.
These quotations, which at times vary somewhat from the exact Hebrew wording, are now part of the inspired Scriptures.
Thus, the work of imperfect human translators became part of the inspired Word of God, a God who does not favor one culture or language over another.
Because of the headship principle that exists throughout God’s arrangement of things, love is especially important.
But headship is not to be exercised in a domineering way.
Although a husband is the head of his wife, the Bible instructs him to assign her honor.
One way husbands can honor their wives is by taking into consideration their needs and giving them first choice in some matters.
Indeed, God’s Word states: Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it.
Yes, Jesus even gave his life for his followers.
When a husband imitates the loving way in which Jesus exercises headship, it is much easier for a wife to love and respect him and be in subjection to him.
As parents, you want your teenage children to remain spiritually healthy.
And God wants you to bring your children up in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.
So use your God-given responsibility to establish and maintain a spiritual routine.
To illustrate: You insist that your children be educated because their education is important and you hope to instill in them a love for learning.
Loving parents likewise insist that their children benefit from the admonition of Jehovah at congregation meetings and through other spiritual programs.
Because divine education is vital, you try to instill in your children love for spiritual things and appreciation for wisdom.
As Jesus helped his disciples, you seek to help your teenage children to succeed in the ministry by developing in them a love of teaching God’s Word and by helping them stick to a good field service routine.
Those who study ancient Hebrew Bible manuscripts, such as the Dead Sea Scrolls, are struck by the many occurrences of the Tetragrammaton—the four Hebrew letters that represent God’s name.
The divine name appears not only in those ancient Hebrew manuscripts but also in some copies of the Greek Septuagint from the second century B.
through the first century  Despite the clear evidence that the personal name of God belongs in the Bible, many translations completely omit the sacred name of God.
In 1952, the Revised Standard Version was published.
That version omitted the name, reversing the policy of the editors of the American Standard Version of 1901.
Why?
The preface says: The use of any proper name for the one and only God is entirely inappropriate for the universal faith of the Christian Church.
That set a pattern for many subsequent translations, English and non-English.
Because of inherited sin, we are all facing the death penalty.
Lovingly, Jehovah arranged for Jesus to come to the earth and taste death for everyone.
Not only did Jehovah save our present life but he laid the basis for wiping out the cause of death forever.
All who exercise faith in Jesus will receive everlasting life in peace and happiness as earthly subjects of God’s Kingdom by Christ or, for the anointed, as corulers in that Kingdom.
What other blessings are included in this gift from Jehovah?
Jehovah’s gift includes the curing of all our sicknesses, the transformation of our earth into a paradise, and the resurrection of the dead.
We surely love Jehovah and his dear Son for giving us what is an indescribable free gift.
We do not live at a time when a fellow Christian can use gifts of healing to cure us.
But some well-intentioned brothers give unsolicited health recommendations.
Granted, someone might simply offer general, practical suggestions.
Paul did so when Timothy was experiencing stomach problems, perhaps because the local water was polluted.
That, however, is quite different from trying to persuade a fellow Witness to use some herb, remedy, or diet that may not be effective or in some cases may even be harmful.
At times, some have tried to persuade others with an explanation: My relative had a similar disease, and he took Then he got well.
No matter how sincere the suggestion, we do well to keep in mind that there may be risks even with widely used medications and treatments.
As Christians, we can benefit from the guidelines that were given in the Law to the nation of Israel.
How so?
We can stop and look at the underlying principles of the Law.
Even though we are not under those laws, we can view many of them as trustworthy guides in our daily lives and our worship of our holy God, Jehovah.
He had those laws recorded in the Bible so that we could learn from them, be guided by the principles, and appreciate the higher moral standards for Christians.
Listen to what Jesus said: You heard that it was said: You must not commit adultery.
But I say to you that everyone who keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Thus, we need to avoid not only the act of adultery but also the sexual craving to share in immorality.
Jesus promised that our Father in heaven will not fail to give holy spirit to those asking Him.
The fruitage of the spirit, positive qualities that are produced by God’s active force, reflects the very personality of the almighty God.
As you cultivate the fruitage of that spirit, your relationship with others will improve.
Thus, you will find that many situations that could otherwise cause anxiety do not arise.
Admittedly, you will need humility to yield to the mighty hand of God and to throw all your anxiety on him.
But as you cultivate humility, you will be on a path that results in God’s favor and support.
By maintaining a realistic estimate of your physical, mental, and emotional abilities, you will be less likely to become overwhelmed by anxiety, for you will be relying on God.
Accounts of Joseph, Moses, and David are among the most detailed and vivid of all Bible characters.
Reading about how Jehovah was with them throughout their trials and how they came to be used mightily by Jehovah makes us feel all the more Jehovah’s care and love for his servants.
Discipline from Jehovah helps us see another aspect of his love.
When those who have done wrong are disciplined by Jehovah and they respond and repent, he will forgive in a large way.
What does that mean?
David gave a touching description of Jehovah’s forgiveness in these words: He forgives all your errors and heals all your ailments; he reclaims your life from the pit and crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.
May we always be sensitive to Jehovah’s counsel, even his discipline, and be quick to respond, recognizing that it is an expression of his boundless love for us.
We are all born imperfect.
So at times some in the congregation may hurt us by what they say or do.
This can test our love for Jehovah and for his people.
What will we do on such occasions?
For example, High Priest Eli had two sons who did not uphold Jehovah’s laws.
We read: The sons of Eli were wicked men; they had no regard for Jehovah.
Though their father played a key role in promoting true worship, his two sons committed very serious sins.
Eli knew about this and should have disciplined them, but he was lax in that regard.
As a result, God adversely judged the household of Eli.
In time, his descendants would not be allowed to serve as high priests.
Had you lived in Eli’s day, how would you have reacted to Eli’s toleration of the sins committed by his sons? Would you have let it stumble you to the point that you would no longer serve God?
At Jehovah’s direction, the Israelites built the tabernacle.
Later, they constructed a temple for the worship of Jehovah.
After returning from exile in Babylon, the Jews regularly gathered in synagogues.
Early Christians met in the homes of members of the congregation.
Today, Jehovah’s people meet for education and worship in tens of thousands of Kingdom Halls worldwide.
So great was Jesus love and appreciation for Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem that a Gospel writer attributed to him the prophetic sentiment found in today’s text.
No Kingdom Hall can rightly be called the house of Jehovah in the same sense that these words applied to the temple in Jerusalem.
Even so, the Bible contains principles that show us how our modern-day places of worship should be used and respected.
Will we be able to deal lovingly with one another during Christ’s Thousand Year Reign?
If we learn to forgive freely and if we avoid strained relations now, it will be easier for us to do so then.
Life in the new world may not mean that we will always get what we want when we want it.
Instead, that life will involve being appreciative and content in any situation as we benefit from submitting to Jehovah’s loving sovereignty.
It will mean putting into practice the very qualities that Jehovah is teaching us to cultivate now.
By learning to live now as we expect to live then, we are developing qualities that we will need to manifest for all eternity.
We are strengthening our faith in the reality of the inhabited earth to come.
Moreover, we are showing how deeply we yearn for the righteous conditions that will then exist on earth.
Indeed, we are preparing for everlasting life in God’s new world.
When you examine ripe fruit at the market, you see that not all the pieces are identical.
Yet, they do share some characteristics that identify them as being ripe.
Similarly, mature Christians may be of different nationality, background, health, age, and experience.
There are even differences in personality or culture.
Still, all who grow spiritually develop qualities that identify them as being mature.
How so?
A mature servant of Jehovah builds his life around the example of Jesus, who left a model for us to follow his steps closely.
What did Jesus highlight as being very important?
Loving Jehovah with all one’s heart, soul, and mind, and loving one’s neighbor as oneself.
A mature Christian strives to live in harmony with that counsel.
He has established a life pattern that shows that he gives priority to his relationship with Jehovah and he displays self-sacrificing love for others.
Before Jesus ascended to heaven, his apostles asked the above.
Jesus answer showed that it was not the time for them to know when God’s Kingdom would start ruling.
He told his disciples to focus on the important witnessing work that they needed to do.
Nevertheless, Jesus taught his followers to look forward to the coming of God’s Kingdom.
So Christians since the days of the apostles have been praying for it to come.
When the time approached for God’s Kingdom in the hands of Jesus to start ruling from heaven, Jehovah helped his people to understand the timing of events.
In 1876, an article written by Charles Taze Russell was published in the magazine Bible Examiner.
That article, Gentile Times: When Do They End?
, pointed to 1914 as a significant year.
The article linked the seven times of Daniel’s prophecy with the appointed times of the nations spoken of by Jesus.
Jehovah’s worshippers have long lived in expectation of the fulfillment of inspired prophecies.
Isaiah, who foretold that Jehovah would bring about a restoration after Judah’s desolation, declared: Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.
Micah, whose prophecies also involved God’s ancient people, personally resolved: I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah.
For centuries, God’s servants also lived in expectation of the fulfillment of prophecies concerning the Messiah, or Christ.
God’s present-day servants also keep in expectation, for prophecies about the Messiah are still undergoing fulfillment.
Through the Messianic Kingdom, Jehovah will soon put an end to human suffering by destroying the wicked and delivering his people from this unstable world lying in Satan’s power.
Let us therefore remain alert and fully aware that this system is rapidly nearing its end.
Sharing the good news with others can help us to cultivate humility and various aspects of the fruitage of God’s spirit.
What is more, as we display the Christlike personality, we adorn our message, which may affect the attitude of some householders.
For example, two Witnesses in Australia listened respectfully to a householder who spoke very unkindly to them.
Later, however, she regretted her manner and wrote to the branch office.
In part, she said: To those two very patient and humble individuals, I would like to convey my apology for my most self-righteous and condescending behaviour.
I am a fool to stand before two people spreading God’s Word and attempt to steer them away like that.
Would the householder have written that if the publishers had shown even a hint of anger?
Probably not.
Yes, how beneficial our ministry is—both for ourselves and for our neighbors!
That was timely counsel coupled with positive direction.
Jehovah thus warned Cain when it was apparent that Cain was on a very dangerous course.
Sadly, Cain did not heed that warning, and he suffered for it.
When Jeremiah’s secretary, Baruch, felt weary and despondent, Jehovah gave him counsel to help him see the reality of his problem.
Unlike Cain, Baruch accepted Jehovah’s counsel, and this preserved his life.
Those whom Jehovah loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges everyone whom he receives as a son, wrote Paul.
Discipline, however, is not limited to punishment.
It takes various forms.
There are many examples in the Bible of faithful servants undergoing extreme trials that may have involved discipline and that trained them.
Many have concluded that a measure of regular exercise promotes good health and refreshes the body and mind.
If we want to enjoy exercise in a group, should we share in it with just anyone?
tells us: The one walking with the wise will become wise, but the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.
Does this not suggest that we should be selective in our choice of recreation, guided by our Bible-trained conscience?
There is also the question of when to engage in recreation.
Do you plan recreation around theocratic activities, such as meetings, field ministry, and personal study?
Or do you find yourself trying to fit theocratic activities between periods of leisure?
What are your priorities?
Jesus said: Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.
Does your conscience prompt you to set priorities that line up with Jesus advice?
What a privilege it is for us not only to know God’s personal name but also to bear it as a people for his name.
We implore our heavenly Father: Let your name be sanctified.
Your making such a request may move you to ask Jehovah to help you to avoid doing or saying anything that would dishonor his holy name.
We do not want to be like some in the first century who did not practice what they preached, as mentioned in today’s text.
What is needed for God’s name to be completely sanctified and cleared of all reproach?
For that to happen, Jehovah must act to remove all who willfully reject his sovereignty.
Mankind will gradually be brought to perfection.
How we long for the time when all intelligent creation will treat Jehovah’s name as holy! Then, at last, our loving heavenly Father will be all things to everyone.
Realizing that it was his Father, Jehovah, who had healed the woman, Jesus treated her kindly, saying: Daughter, your faith has made you well.
Go in peace, and be healed from your grievous sickness.
How kind Jesus is! We see that he has a warm place in his heart for those who suffer from illnesses.
Satan wants to convince us that we are unloved and worthless.
By his miracles, Jesus clearly proved that he truly cares about us and our problems.
What a sympathetic King and High Priest! It may not be easy for us to understand the feelings of those who suffer from a chronic illness, especially if we have never experienced such.
We can bear in mind that Jesus empathized with the sick even though he himself was never sick.
May Jesus example move us to do the same, to the best of our ability.
This will be a time for rewarding those who are faithful and for punishing those who are not.
According to Matthew, Jesus finished giving the composite sign with the parable of the sheep and the goats, saying: When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.
All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.
What judgment will the sheep and the goats hear pronounced on them?
The parable finishes with the words: These the goats will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.
There are many ways to express our love for Jehovah.
For example, we show love for God and neighbor by having a zealous share in the Kingdom-preaching work.
We show that we truly love Jehovah by enduring tests of faith as integrity keepers.
If our trials become severe, we can be sure that God is aware of our suffering and will help us, for we are precious to him.
Our love for Jehovah moves us to meditate on his creative works and other marvelous deeds.
We show that we love God and highly value his Word by diligently studying the Bible.
Love for Jehovah draws us ever closer to him in prayer.
And our love for God grows deeper as we reflect on the ransom sacrifice he provided for our sins.
These are just some of the many reasons we have for loving Jehovah in response to his enduring love for us.
It is understandable that we might feel some affection for the land, the culture, the language, and the food of the country we were raised in.
However, we must avoid the mine is best attitude.
For our pleasure, Jehovah has created great variety in all things.
So why insist that one way of doing things is superior to another?
God wants people of all sorts to come to an accurate knowledge of truth and to enjoy everlasting life.
Open-mindedness toward a diversity of acceptable ideas enriches us and protects our Christian unity.
As we maintain our loyalty to Jehovah, we must avoid involvement in the world’s controversies.
Partisan allegiances have no place among us.
How thankful we are to Jehovah for freeing us from the divisive, prideful, competitive practices that dominate Satan’s world!
The apostle Paul wrote of the need for Christians in Ephesus to grow spiritually.
He encouraged them to reach out to attain to the oneness of the faith and of the accurate knowledge of the Son of God, to being a full-grown man, attaining the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ.
When Paul wrote his letter, the congregation in Ephesus had already existed for some years.
Many disciples there had reached a high level of spiritual development.
Some, however, still needed to press on to maturity.
The situation among Jehovah’s Witnesses today is much the same.
Many brothers and sisters have long served God and have advanced to spiritual maturity.
But obviously not all are at that point.
For example, thousands of new ones are baptized each year, so some still need to strive for maturity.
What about you?
Paul, called [to be] an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes [our] brother,
Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called [to be] saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours
Grace [be] unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ;
That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and [in] all knowledge;
Who shall also confirm you unto the end, [that ye may be] blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God [is] faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and [that] there be no divisions among you; but [that] ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them [which are of the house] of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.
Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?
I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius;
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect.
For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.
Where [is] the wise? where [is] the scribe? where [is] the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.
For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom
But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness;
But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, [are called]
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty;
And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, [yea], and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are
That no flesh should glory in his presence.
Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;
And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;
And did all eat the same spiritual meat;
And did all drink the same spiritual drink for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them and that Rock was Christ.
But with many of them God was not well pleased for they were overthrown in the wilderness.
Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
Neither be ye idolaters, as [were] some of them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.
Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.
Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.
There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man but God [is] faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear [it.]
Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?
For we [being] many are one bread, [and] one body for we are all partakers of that one bread.
Behold Israel after the flesh are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?
What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?
But I [say], that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and of the table of devils.
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.
Let no man seek his own, but every man another’s [wealth].
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, [that] eat, asking no question for conscience sake
For the earth [is] the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.
If any of them that believe not bid you [to a feast], and ye be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake for the earth [is] the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof
Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other for why is my liberty judged of another [man’s] conscience?
For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.
Be ye followers of me, even as I also [am] of Christ.
Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered [them] to you.
But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman [is] the man; and the head of Christ [is] God.
Every man praying or prophesying, having [his] head covered, dishonoureth his head.
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with [her] head uncovered dishonoureth her head for that is even all one as if she were shaven.
For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.
For a man indeed ought not to cover [his] head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God but the woman is the glory of the man.
For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man.
Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man.
For this cause ought the woman to have power on [her] head because of the angels.
Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.
For as the woman [is] of the man, even so [is] the man also by the woman; but all things of God.
Judge in yourselves is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered?
Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?
Now in this that I declare [unto you] I praise [you] not, that ye come together not for the better, but for the worse.
For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it.
For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.
When ye come together therefore into one place, [this] is not to eat the Lord’s supper.
For in eating every one taketh before [other] his own supper and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise [you] not.
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus the [same] night in which he was betrayed took bread
And when he had given thanks, he brake [it], and said, Take, eat this is my body, which is broken for you this do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also [he took] the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood this do ye, as oft as ye drink [it], in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come.
Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink [this] cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of [that] bread, and drink of [that] cup.
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord’s body.
For this cause many [are] weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.
For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.
And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not together unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I come.
Now concerning spiritual [gifts], brethren, I would not have you ignorant.
Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were led.
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed and [that] no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.
And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.
And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;
To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;
To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another [divers] kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues
But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.
For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body so also [is] Christ.
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether [we be] Jews or Gentiles, whether [we be] bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
For the body is not one member, but many.
If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?
And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?
If the whole body [were] an eye, where [were] the hearing? If the whole [were] hearing, where [were] the smelling?
But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.
And if they were all one member, where [were] the body?
But now [are they] many members, yet but one body.
And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary
And those [members] of the body, which we think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely [parts] have more abundant comeliness.
For our comely [parts] have no need but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to that [part] which lacked
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.
[Are] all apostles? [are] all prophets? [are] all teachers? [are] all workers of miracles?
Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
But covet earnestly the best gifts and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become [as] sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
And though I have [the gift of] prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed [the poor], and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.
Charity suffereth long, [and] is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,
Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;
Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.
Charity never faileth but whether [there be] prophecies, they shall fail; whether [there be] tongues, they shall cease; whether [there be] knowledge, it shall vanish away.
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child but when I became a man, I put away childish things.
For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.
And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these [is] charity.
Follow after charity, and desire spiritual [gifts], but rather that ye may prophesy.
For he that speaketh in an [unknown] tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God for no man understandeth [him]; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.
But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men [to] edification, and exhortation, and comfort.
He that speaketh in an [unknown] tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.
I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied for greater [is] he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.
Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?
And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?
So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them [is] without signification.
Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh [shall be] a barbarian unto me.
Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual [gifts], seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.
Wherefore let him that speaketh in an [unknown] tongue pray that he may interpret.
For if I pray in an [unknown] tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.
What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.
Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?
For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.
I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than ye all
Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that [by my voice] I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an [unknown] tongue.
Brethren, be not children in understanding howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.
In the law it is written, With [men of] other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not but prophesying [serveth] not for them that believe not, but for them which believe.
If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in [those that are] unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or [one] unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all
And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on [his] face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.
How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying.
If any man speak in an [unknown] tongue, [let it be] by two, or at the most [by] three, and [that] by course; and let one interpret.
But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.
Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.
If [any thing] be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.
For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.
And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.
For God is not [the author] of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.
Let your women keep silence in the churches for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but [they are commanded] to be under obedience, as also saith the law.
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.
What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?
If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord.
But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.
Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues.
Let all things be done decently and in order.
Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand;
By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.
For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;
And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures
And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve
After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.
After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.
And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.
For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am and his grace which [was bestowed] upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they all yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
Therefore whether [it were] I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.
Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen
And if Christ be not risen, then [is] our preaching vain, and your faith [is] also vain.
Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.
For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised
And if Christ be not raised, your faith [is] vain; ye are yet in your sins.
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
But now is Christ risen from the dead, [and] become the firstfruits of them that slept.
For since by man [came] death, by man [came] also the resurrection of the dead.
For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
But every man in his own order Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.
Then [cometh] the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.
For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy [that] shall be destroyed [is] death.
For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith all things are put under [him, it is] manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour?
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to morrow we die.
Be not deceived evil communications corrupt good manners.
Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God I speak [this] to your shame.
But some [man] will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?
[Thou] fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other [grain]
But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.
All flesh [is] not the same flesh but [there is] one [kind of] flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, [and] another of birds.
[There are] also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial but the glory of the celestial [is] one, and the [glory] of the terrestrial [is] another.
[There is] one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars for [one] star differeth from [another] star in glory.
So also [is] the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption
It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power
It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam [was made] a quickening spirit.
Howbeit that [was] not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.
The first man [is] of the earth, earthy the second man [is] the Lord from heaven.
As [is] the earthy, such [are] they also that are earthy and as [is] the heavenly, such [are] they also that are heavenly.
And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.
Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.
O death, where [is] thy sting? O grave, where [is] thy victory?
The sting of death [is] sin; and the strength of sin [is] the law.
But thanks [be] to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.
Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye.
Upon the first [day] of the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as [God] hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve by [your] letters, them will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem.
And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.
Now I will come unto you, when I shall pass through Macedonia for I do pass through Macedonia.
And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go.
For I will not see you now by the way; but I trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit.
But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost.
For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and [there are] many adversaries.
Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also [do].
Let no man therefore despise him but conduct him forth in peace, that he may come unto me for I look for him with the brethren.
As touching [our] brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto you with the brethren but his will was not at all to come at this time; but he will come when he shall have convenient time.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.
Let all your things be done with charity.
I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and [that] they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,)
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied.
For they have refreshed my spirit and yours therefore acknowledge ye them that are such.
The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house.
All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an holy kiss.
The salutation of [me] Paul with mine own hand.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you.
My love [be] with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.
For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.
And my speech and my preaching [was] not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, [even] the hidden [wisdom], which God ordained before the world unto our glory
Which none of the princes of this world knew for had they known [it], they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.
But God hath revealed [them] unto us by his Spirit for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.
For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.
Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.
Which things also we speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.
But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God for they are foolishness unto him neither can he know [them], because they are spiritually discerned.
But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ.
And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, [even] as unto babes in Christ.
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat for hitherto ye were not able [to bear it], neither yet now are ye able.
For ye are yet carnal for whereas [there is] among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?
For while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I [am] of Apollos; are ye not carnal?
Who then is Paul, and who [is] Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?
I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.
So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase.
Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.
For we are labourers together with God ye are God’s husbandry, [ye are] God’s building.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.
For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;
Every man’s work shall be made manifest for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man’s work of what sort it is.
If any man’s work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.
If any man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and [that] the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?
If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which [temple] ye are.
Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.
Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;
And ye are Christ’s; and Christ [is] God’s.
Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man’s judgment yea, I judge not mine own self.
For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified but he that judgeth me is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts and then shall every man have praise of God.
And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and [to] Apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think [of men] above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.
For who maketh thee to differ [from another]? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive [it], why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received [it]?
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without us and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.
For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.
We [are] fools for Christ’s sake, but ye [are] wise in Christ; we [are] weak, but ye [are] strong; ye [are] honourable, but we [are] despised.
Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace;
And labour, working with our own hands being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it
Being defamed, we intreat we are made as the filth of the world, [and are] the offscouring of all things unto this day.
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn [you].
For though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet [have ye] not many fathers for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.
Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.
For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every church.
Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come to you.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.
For the kingdom of God [is] not in word, but in power.
What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and [in] the spirit of meekness?
It is reported commonly [that there is] fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father’s wife.
And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be taken away from among you.
For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, [concerning] him that hath so done this deed,
Your glorying [is] not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us
Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened [bread] of sincerity and truth.
I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators
Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the world.
But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to eat.
For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within?
But them that are without God judgeth. Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person.
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints?
Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the church.
I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?
But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the unbelievers.
Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather [suffer yourselves to] be defrauded?
Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that [your] brethren.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And such were some of you but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any.
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats but God shall destroy both it and them. Now the body [is] not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.
And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power.
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make [them] the members of an harlot? God forbid.
What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.
But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit.
Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me [It is] good for a man not to touch a woman.
Nevertheless, [to avoid] fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband.
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence and likewise also the wife unto the husband.
The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.
Defraud ye not one the other, except [it be] with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.
But I speak this by permission, [and] not of commandment.
For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if they abide even as I.
But if they cannot contain, let them marry for it is better to marry than to burn.
And unto the married I command, [yet] not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from [her] husband
And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband else were your children unclean; but now are they holy.
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such [cases] but God hath called us to peace.
For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save [thy] husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save [thy] wife?
But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all churches.
Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.
Art thou called [being] a servant? care not for it but if thou mayest be made free, use [it] rather.
For he that is called in the Lord, [being] a servant, is the Lord’s freeman likewise also he that is called, [being] free, is Christ’s servant.
Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men.
Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with God.
Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, [I say], that [it is] good for a man so to be.
Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh but I spare you.
But this I say, brethren, the time [is] short it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none;
And they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not;
And they that use this world, as not abusing [it] for the fashion of this world passeth away.
But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord
But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please [his] wife.
There is difference [also] between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit but she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please [her] husband.
And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of [her] age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not let them marry.
Nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well.
So then he that giveth [her] in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth [her] not in marriage doeth better.
The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the Lord.
But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.
Now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.
But if any man love God, the same is known of him.
As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol [is] nothing in the world, and that [there is] none other God but one.
For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,)
But to us [there is but] one God, the Father, of whom [are] all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [are] all things, and we by him.
Howbeit [there is] not in every man that knowledge for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat [it] as a thing offered unto an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled.
But meat commendeth us not to God for neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.
But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak.
For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols;
And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died?
But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.
Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord?
If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.
Mine answer to them that do examine me is this,
Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working?
Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also?
For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen?
Or saith he [it] altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, [this] is written that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, [is it] a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
If others be partakers of [this] power over you, [are] not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live [of the things] of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?
Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.
But I have used none of these things neither have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me for [it were] better for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void.
For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!
For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward but if against my will, a dispensation [of the gospel] is committed unto me.
What is my reward then? [Verily] that, when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.
For though I be free from all [men], yet have I made myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more.
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the law;
To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are without law.
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak I am made all things to all [men], that I might by all means save some.
And this I do for the gospel’s sake, that I might be partaker thereof with [you].
Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they [do it] to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible.
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air
But I keep under my body, and bring [it] into subjection lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life;
(For the life was manifested, and we have seen [it], and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;)
That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us and truly our fellowship [is] with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.
This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us [our] sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous
And he is the propitiation for our sins and not for ours only, but also for [the sins of] the whole world.
And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected hereby know we that we are in him.
He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.
Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning.
Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you because the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth.
He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.
He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him.
But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes.
I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.
I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him [that is] from the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father.
I have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him [that is] from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.
Love not the world, neither the things [that are] in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Little children, it is the last time and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would [no doubt] have continued with us but [they went out], that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.
I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.
Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.
Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father [(but) he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also].
Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.
And this is the promise that he hath promised us, [even] eternal life.
These [things] have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you.
But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.
And now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him.
Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.
Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.
And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.
Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law for sin is the transgression of the law.
And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin.
Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him.
Little children, let no man deceive you he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.
He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.
Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother.
For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.
Not as Cain, [who] was of that wicked one, and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.
Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.
We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not [his] brother abideth in death.
Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.
Hereby perceive we the love [ of God], because he laid down his life for us and we ought to lay down [our] lives for the brethren.
But whoso hath this world’s good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels [of compassion] from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?
My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.
And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.
And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.
And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God because many false prophets are gone out into the world.
Hereby know ye the Spirit of God Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God
And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God and this is that [spirit] of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world.
Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.
They are of the world therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them.
We are of God he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
Beloved, let us love one another for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.
He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son [to be] the propitiation for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.
No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.
And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son [to be] the Saviour of the world.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.
And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment because as he is, so are we in this world.
There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love.
We love him, because he first loved us.
If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?
And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also.
Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments and his commandments are not grievous.
For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world and this is the victory that overcometh the world, [even] our faith.
Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he that came by water and blood, [even] Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.
For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost and these three are one.
And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood and these three agree in one.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son.
He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son.
And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
He that hath the Son hath life; [and] he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.
These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us
And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him.
If any man see his brother sin a sin [which is] not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death I do not say that he shall pray for it.
All unrighteousness is sin and there is a sin not unto death.
We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.
[And] we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness.
And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, [even] in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.
Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;
As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance
But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, [as] silver and gold, from your vain conversation [received] by tradition from your fathers;
Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.
For all flesh [is] as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away
But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you.
Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings,
As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby
Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded.
Unto you therefore which believe [he is] precious but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner,
And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, [even to them] which stumble at the word, being disobedient whereunto also they were appointed.
But ye [are] a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light
Which in time past [were] not a people, but [are] now the people of God which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
Dearly beloved, I beseech [you] as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by [your] good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake whether it be to the king, as supreme;
Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.
For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men
As free, and not using [your] liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
Honour all [men]. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king.
Servants, [be] subject to [your] masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.
For this [is] thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
For what glory [is it], if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer [for it], ye take it patiently, this [is] acceptable with God.
For even hereunto were ye called because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth
Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed [himself] to him that judgeth righteously
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness by whose stripes ye were healed.
For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.
Likewise, ye wives, [be] in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives;
But [let it be] the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, [even the ornament] of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.
For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands
Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.
Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with [them] according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered.
Finally, [be ye] all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, [be] pitiful, [be] courteous
Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.
For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile
Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.
For the eyes of the Lord [are] over the righteous, and his ears [are open] unto their prayers but the face of the Lord [is] against them that do evil.
And who [is] he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?
But and if ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, happy [are ye] and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts and [be] ready always to [give] an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear
Having a good conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.
For [it is] better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing.
For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit
By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;
Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.
The like figure whereunto [even] baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.
Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;
Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with [them] to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of [you]
Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.
For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.
But the end of all things is at hand be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.
And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves for charity shall cover the multitude of sins.
Use hospitality one to another without grudging.
As every man hath received the gift, [even so] minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If any man speak, [let him speak] as the oracles of God; if any man minister, [let him do it] as of the ability which God giveth that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you
But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy [are ye]; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.
But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or [as] a thief, or [as] an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men’s matters.
Yet if [any man suffer] as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf.
For the time [is come] that judgment must begin at the house of God and if [it] first [begin] at us, what shall the end [be] of them that obey not the gospel of God?
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls [to him] in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.
The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight [thereof], not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;
Neither as being lords over [God’s] heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.
And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.
Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all [of you] be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time
Casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you.
Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour
Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.
But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle [you].
To him [be] glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand.
The [church that is] at Babylon, elected together with [you], saluteth you; and [so doth] Marcus my son.
Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. Peace [be] with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians [which is] in God the Father and [in] the Lord Jesus Christ Grace [be] unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers;
For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.
And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost
So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.
For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain
But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention.
For our exhortation [was] not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile
But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts.
For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God [is] witness
Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor [yet] of others, when we might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ.
But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children
So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.
For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail for labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God.
Ye [are] witnesses, and God [also], how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe
As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father [doth] his children,
For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they [have] of the Jews
Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire.
Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.
For what [is] our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? [Are] not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
For ye are our glory and joy.
Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens alone;
And sent Timotheus, our brother, and minister of God, and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith
That no man should be moved by these afflictions for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto.
For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.
For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour be in vain.
But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also [to see] you
Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your faith
For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.
For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God;
Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort [you] by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, [ so] ye would abound more and more.
For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, [even] your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication
That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour;
For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.
He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit.
But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.
And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and more;
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive [and] remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.
For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God and the dead in Christ shall rise first
Then we which are alive [and] remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort one another with these words.
But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.
For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.
For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.
But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.
Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day we are not of the night, nor of darkness.
Therefore let us not sleep, as [do] others; but let us watch and be sober.
For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.
But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.
For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.
Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do.
And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you;
See that none render evil for evil unto any [man]; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all [men].
Rejoice evermore.
Pray without ceasing.
Despise not prophesyings.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and [I pray God] your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful [is] he that calleth you, who also will do [it.]
Brethren, pray for us.
Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.
I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, [which is] our hope;
Unto Timothy, [my] own son in the faith Grace, mercy, [and] peace, from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord.
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other doctrine,
From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling;
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious but I obtained mercy, because I did [it] ignorantly in unbelief.
And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
This [is] a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.
Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, [be] honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a good warfare;
Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck
Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.
I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, [and] giving of thanks, be made for all men;
Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.
Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, [and] lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.
I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.
In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;
But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.
For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.
Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.
This [is] a true saying, If a man desire the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.
A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach;
Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous;
One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity;
(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?)
Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Likewise [must] the deacons [be] grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;
Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a deacon, being [found] blameless.
Even so [must their] wives [be] grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.
Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.
For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly
But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.
And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.
Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;
For every creature of God [is] good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.
But refuse profane and old wives’ fables, and exercise thyself [rather] unto godliness.
For bodily exercise profiteth little but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
This [is] a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.
For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe.
These things command and teach.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.
Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee.
Rebuke not an elder, but intreat [him] as a father; [and] the younger men as brethren;
But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite their parents for that is good and acceptable before God.
Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.
But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.
And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.
But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.
Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old, having been the wife of one man,
Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints’ feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.
But the younger widows refuse for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry;
Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith.
And withal they learn [to be] idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.
I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.
For some are already turned aside after Satan.
If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that are widows indeed.
Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.
For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The labourer [is] worthy of his reward.
Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses.
Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.
I charge [thee] before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men’s sins keep thyself pure.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake and thine often infirmities.
Some men’s sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some [men] they follow after.
Likewise also the good works [of some] are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and [his] doctrine be not blasphemed.
And they that have believing masters, let them not despise [them], because they are brethren; but rather do [them] service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort.
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, [even] the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness;
For we brought nothing into [this] world, [and it is] certain we can carry nothing out.
And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.
But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and [into] many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
For the love of money is the root of all evil which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.
I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and [before] Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession;
That thou keep [this] commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ
Which in his times he shall shew, [who is] the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;
Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see to whom [be] honour and power everlasting. Amen.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy;
That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
Which some professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace [be] with thee. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy [our] brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints which are in all Achaia
Grace [be] to you and peace from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed [be] God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort;
Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.
For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ.
And whether we be afflicted, [it is] for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer or whether we be comforted, [it is] for your consolation and salvation.
And our hope of you [is] stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so [shall ye be] also of the consolation.
For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life
But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead
Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver in whom we trust that he will yet deliver [us];
For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or acknowledge; and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end;
And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judaea.
When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay nay?
But [as] God [is] true, our word toward you was not yea and nay.
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, [even] by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea.
For all the promises of God in him [are] yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.
Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, [is] God;
Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth.
Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy for by faith ye stand.
Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who in presence [am] base among you, but being absent am bold toward you
But I beseech [you], that I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh.
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh
(For the weapons of our warfare [are] not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;)
Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ;
And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.
Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? If any man trust to himself that he is Christ’s, let him of himself think this again, that, as he [is] Christ’s, even so [are] we Christ’s.
For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction, I should not be ashamed
That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters.
For [his] letters, say they, [are] weighty and powerful; but [his] bodily presence [is] weak, and [his] speech contemptible.
Let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by letters when we are absent, such [will we be] also in deed when we are present.
For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise.
But we will not boast of things without [our] measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us, a measure to reach even unto you.
For we stretch not ourselves beyond [our measure], as though we reached not unto you for we are come as far as to you also in [preaching] the gospel of Christ
Would to God ye could bear with me a little in [my] folly and indeed bear with me.
For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present [you as] a chaste virgin to Christ.
But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or [if] ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with [him].
For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles.
But though [I be] rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things.
Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely?
I robbed other churches, taking wages [of them], to do you service.
And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied and in all [things] I have kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and [so] will I keep [myself].
As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia.
Wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth.
But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.
For such [are] false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.
And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.
Therefore [it is] no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works.
I say again, Let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little.
That which I speak, I speak [it] not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting.
Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also.
For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye [yourselves] are wise.
For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour [you], if a man take [of you], if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face.
I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also.
Are they Hebrews? so [am] I. Are they Israelites? so [am] I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so [am] I.
Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I [am] more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.
Of the Jews five times received I forty [stripes] save one.
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;
[In] journeyings often, [in] perils of waters, [in] perils of robbers, [in] perils by [mine own] countrymen, [in] perils by the heathen, [in] perils in the city, [in] perils in the wilderness, [in] perils in the sea, [in] perils among false brethren;
In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.
Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?
If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me
And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven.
And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell God knoweth;)
How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.
Of such an one will I glory yet of myself I will not glory, but in mine infirmities.
For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth but [now] I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he seeth me [to be], or [that] he heareth of me.
And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.
And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ’s sake for when I am weak, then am I strong.
I am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me for I ought to have been commended of you for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing.
Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.
For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except [it be] that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.
Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you for I seek not yours, but you for the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.
But be it so, I did not burden you nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile.
Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you?
I desired Titus, and with [him] I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? [walked we] not in the same steps?
Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak before God in Christ but [we do] all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying.
For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and [that] I shall be found unto you such as ye would not lest [there be] debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults
[And] lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and [that] I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed.
This [is] the third [time] I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.
I told you before, and foretell you, as if I were present, the second time; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare
Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates.
Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates.
For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong and this also we wish, [even] your perfection.
Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to destruction.
Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
Greet one another with an holy kiss.
All the saints salute you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, [be] with you all. Amen.
But I determined this with myself, that I would not come again to you in heaviness.
For if I make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me?
And I wrote this same unto you, lest, when I came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy is [the joy] of you all.
For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you.
But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part that I may not overcharge you all.
Sufficient to such a man [is] this punishment, which [was inflicted] of many.
So that contrariwise ye [ought] rather to forgive [him], and comfort [him], lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.
Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm [your] love toward him.
For to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in all things.
To whom ye forgive any thing, I [forgive] also for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave [it], for your sakes [forgave I it] in the person of Christ;
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us for we are not ignorant of his devices.
Furthermore, when I came to Troas to [preach] Christ’s gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother but taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia.
Now thanks [be] unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place.
For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish
To the one [we are] the savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who [is] sufficient for these things?
For we are not as many, which corrupt the word of God but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ.
Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some [others], epistles of commendation to you, or [letters] of commendation from you?
Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men
[Forasmuch as ye are] manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.
And such trust have we through Christ to God-ward
Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but our sufficiency [is] of God;
Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.
But if the ministration of death, written [and] engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which [glory] was to be done away
How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?
For if the ministration of condemnation [be] glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.
For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.
For if that which is done away [was] glorious, much more that which remaineth [is] glorious.
Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech
And not as Moses, [which] put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is abolished
But their minds were blinded for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which [vail] is done away in Christ.
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart.
Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.
Now the Lord is that Spirit and where the Spirit of the Lord [is], there [is] liberty.
But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, [even] as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not;
But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.
But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost
In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.
For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to [give] the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.
[We are] troubled on every side, yet not distressed; [we are] perplexed, but not in despair;
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body.
For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
So then death worketh in us, but life in you.
We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak;
Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present [us] with you.
For all things [are] for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.
For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward [man] is renewed day by day.
For we know that if our earthly house of [this] tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven
If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.
For we that are in [this] tabernacle do groan, being burdened not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.
Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing [is] God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.
Therefore [we are] always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord
Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things [done] in [his] body, according to that he hath done, whether [it be] good or bad.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences.
For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to [answer] them which glory in appearance, and not in heart.
For whether we be beside ourselves, [it is] to God or whether we be sober, [it is] for your cause.
For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead
And [that] he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we [him] no more.
Therefore if any man [be] in Christ, [he is] a new creature old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.
And all things [are] of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation;
To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation.
Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech [you] by us we pray [you] in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God.
For he hath made him [to be] sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
We then, [as] workers together [with him], beseech [you] also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.
(For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee behold, now [is] the accepted time; behold, now [is] the day of salvation.)
Giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed
But in all [things] approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,
In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings;
By pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,
By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report as deceivers, and [yet] true;
As unknown, and [yet] well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;
As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and [yet] possessing all things.
O [ye] Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged.
Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels.
Now for a recompence in the same, (I speak as unto [my] children,) be ye also enlarged.
Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?
And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?
And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in [them]; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Receive us; we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.
I speak not [this] to condemn [you] for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live with [you].
Great [is] my boldness of speech toward you, great [is] my glorying of you I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.
For, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without [were] fightings, within [were] fears.
Nevertheless God, that comforteth those that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus;
And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so that I rejoiced the more.
For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry, though [it were] but for a season.
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.
For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of but the sorrow of the world worketh death.
For behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, [what] clearing of yourselves, yea, [what] indignation, yea, [what] fear, yea, [what] vehement desire, yea, [what] zeal, yea, [what] revenge! In all [things] ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter.
Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, [I did it] not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of God might appear unto you.
Therefore we were comforted in your comfort yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all.
For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we spake all things to you in truth, even so our boasting, which [I made] before Titus, is found a truth.
And his inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him.
I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all [things.]
Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on the churches of Macedonia;
How that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality.
For to [their] power, I bear record, yea, and beyond [their] power [they were] willing of themselves;
Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and [take upon us] the fellowship of the ministering to the saints.
And [this they did], not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God.
Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace also.
Therefore, as ye abound in every [thing, in] faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and [in] all diligence, and [in] your love to us, [see] that ye abound in this grace also.
I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love.
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.
And herein I give [my] advice for this is expedient for you, who have begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago.
Now therefore perform the doing [of it]; that as [there was] a readiness to will, so [there may be] a performance also out of that which ye have.
For if there be first a willing mind, [it is] accepted according to that a man hath, [and] not according to that he hath not.
For [I mean] not that other men be eased, and ye burdened
But by an equality, [that] now at this time your abundance [may be a supply] for their want, that their abundance also may be [a supply] for your want that there may be equality
As it is written, He that [had gathered] much had nothing over; and he that [had gathered] little had no lack.
But thanks [be] to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you.
For indeed he accepted the exhortation; but being more forward, of his own accord he went unto you.
And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise [is] in the gospel throughout all the churches;
And not [that] only, but who was also chosen of the churches to travel with us with this grace, which is administered by us to the glory of the same Lord, and [declaration of] your ready mind
Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us
Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great confidence which [I have] in you.
Whether [any do enquire] of Titus, [he is] my partner and fellowhelper concerning you or our brethren [be enquired of, they are] the messengers of the churches, [and] the glory of Christ.
Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the churches, the proof of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf.
For as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you
For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal hath provoked very many.
Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready
Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting.
Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice before, that the same might be ready, as [a matter of] bounty, and not as [of] covetousness.
But this [I say], He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.
Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, [so let him give]; not grudgingly, or of necessity for God loveth a cheerful giver.
And God [is] able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye, always having all sufficiency in all [things], may abound to every good work
Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God.
For the administration of this service not only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God;
Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ, and for [your] liberal distribution unto them, and unto all [men];
And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding grace of God in you.
Thanks [be] unto God for his unspeakable gift.
The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth;
I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.
And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.
And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.
For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist.
Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.
Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into [your] house, neither bid him God speed
For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.
Having many things to write unto you, I would not [write] with paper and ink but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be full.
The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen.
Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord,
And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;
And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;
And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.
For if these things be in you, and abound, they make [you that ye shall] neither [be] barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.
Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall
For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know [them], and be established in the present truth.
Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting [you] in remembrance;
Knowing that shortly I must put off [this] my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me.
Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.
For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.
We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.
For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man but holy men of God spake [as they were] moved by the Holy Ghost.
But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.
And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.
For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast [them] down to hell, and delivered [them] into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment;
And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth [person], a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly;
And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned [them] with an overthrow, making [them] an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly;
And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked
But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption;
And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, [as] they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots [they are] and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you;
Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children
Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam [the son] of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness;
But was rebuked for his iniquity the dumb ass speaking with man’s voice forbad the madness of the prophet.
These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.
For when they speak great swelling [words] of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, [through much] wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in error.
While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.
For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known [it], to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.
But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog [is] turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.
This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in [both] which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance
And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as [they were] from the beginning of the creation.
For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water
Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished
But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.
But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day [is] with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up.
[Seeing] then [that] all these things shall be dissolved, what manner [of persons] ought ye to be in [all] holy conversation and godliness,
Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.
And account [that] the longsuffering of our Lord [is] salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you;
As also in all [his] epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as [they do] also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction.
Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know [these things] before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.
But grow in grace, and [in] the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him [be] glory both now and for ever. Amen.
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ
Grace unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward each other aboundeth;
So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure
[Which is] a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer
Seeing [it is] a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;
Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and [by] our gathering together unto him,
Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.
Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things?
And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time.
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work only he who now letteth [will let], until he be taken out of the way.
And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming
[Even him], whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.
Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have [free] course, and be glorified, even as [it is] with you
And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command you.
And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.
Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.
For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you;
Neither did we eat any man’s bread for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you
Not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us.
For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat.
For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies.
Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.
But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.
Yet count [him] not as an enemy, but admonish [him] as a brother.
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. The Lord [be] with you all.
The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every epistle so I write.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you all. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus,
To Timothy, [my] dearly beloved son Grace, mercy, [and] peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I thank God, whom I serve from [my] forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day;
Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;
When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God;
Who hath saved us, and called [us] with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,
But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us.
This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain
But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found [me].
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.
Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.
Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of [this] life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.
And if a man also strive for masteries, [yet] is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.
The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits.
Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.
Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel
Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, [even] unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.
Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
[It is] a faithful saying For if we be dead with [him], we shall also live with [him]
If we suffer, we shall also reign with [him] if we deny [him], he also will deny us
If we believe not, [yet] he abideth faithful he cannot deny himself.
Of these things put [them] in remembrance, charging [them] before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, [but] to the subverting of the hearers.
Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
But shun profane [and] vain babblings for they will increase unto more ungodliness.
And their word will eat as doth a canker of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.
Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.
If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master’s use, [and] prepared unto every good work.
Flee also youthful lusts but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes.
And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all [men], apt to teach, patient,
This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.
For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof from such turn away.
For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts,
But they shall proceed no further for their folly shall be manifest unto all [men], as theirs also was.
But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience,
Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured but out of [them] all the Lord delivered me.
Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.
But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.
But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned [them];
And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
I charge [thee] therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;
Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.
For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;
And they shall turn away [their] ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.
But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished [my] course, I have kept the faith
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.
Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me
For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee for he is profitable to me for the ministry.
And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.
The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring [with thee], and the books, [but] especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil the Lord reward him according to his works
Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words.
At my first answer no man stood with me, but all [men] forsook me [I pray God] that it may not be laid to their charge.
Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and [that] all the Gentiles might hear and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve [me] unto his heavenly kingdom to whom [be] glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
Erastus abode at Corinth but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.
Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
The Lord Jesus Christ [be] with thy spirit. Grace [be] with you. Amen.
The elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth.
For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.
Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the brethren, and to strangers;
Which have borne witness of thy charity before the church whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well
Because that for his name’s sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles.
We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers to the truth.
I wrote unto the church but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not.
Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth [them] out of the church.
Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God but he that doeth evil hath not seen God.
Demetrius hath good report of all [men], and of the truth itself yea, and we [also] bear record; and ye know that our record is true.
I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write unto thee
The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach,
And, being assembled together with [them], commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, [saith he], ye have heard of me.
For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.
When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?
And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.
But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judæa, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.
And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;
Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey.
And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James [the son] of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas [the brother] of James.
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.
And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,)
Men [and] brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus.
For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.
And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.
For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein and his bishoprick let another take.
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all [men], shew whether of these two thou hast chosen,
There was a certain man in Cæsarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian [band],
[A] devout [man], and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway.
He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius.
And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.
And now send men to Joppa, and call for [one] Simon, whose surname is Peter
He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea side he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.
And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was departed, he called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on him continually;
And when he had declared all [these] things unto them, he sent them to Joppa.
On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour
And he became very hungry, and would have eaten but while they made ready, he fell into a trance,
And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth
Wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.
And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat.
But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean.
And the voice [spake] unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, [that] call not thou common.
This was done thrice and the vessel was received up again into heaven.
Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon’s house, and stood before the gate,
And called, and asked whether Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were lodged there.
While Peter thought on the vision, the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee.
Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing for I have sent them.
Then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek what [is] the cause wherefore ye are come?
And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that feareth God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by an holy angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.
Then called he them in, and lodged [them]. And on the morrow Peter went away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him.
And the morrow after they entered into Cæsarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends.
And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped [him].
But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man.
And as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come together.
And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath shewed me that I should not call any man common or unclean.
Therefore came I [unto you] without gainsaying, as soon as I was sent for I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?
And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,
And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.
Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither Simon, whose surname is Peter; he is lodged in the house of [one] Simon a tanner by the sea side who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.
Immediately therefore I sent to thee; and thou hast well done that thou art come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
Then Peter opened [his] mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons
That word, [I say], ye know, which was published throughout all Judæa, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;
How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree
Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly;
Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, [even] to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.
And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God [to be] the Judge of quick and dead.
To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.
While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word.
And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost.
For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter,
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry certain days.
And the apostles and brethren that were in Judæa heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him,
Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.
But Peter rehearsed [the matter] from the beginning, and expounded [it] by order unto them, saying,
I was in the city of Joppa praying and in a trance I saw a vision, A certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even to me
Upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes, I considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.
And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat.
But I said, Not so, Lord for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth.
But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, [that] call not thou common.
And this was done three times and all were drawn up again into heaven.
And, behold, immediately there were three men already come unto the house where I was, sent from Cæsarea unto me.
And the Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. Moreover these six brethren accompanied me, and we entered into the man’s house
And he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is Peter;
And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning.
Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.
Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as [he did] unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?
When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.
Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only.
And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus.
And the hand of the Lord was with them and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.
Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.
Who, when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.
For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith and much people was added unto the Lord.
Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul
And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and taught much people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.
And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.
And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world which came to pass in the days of Claudius Cæsar.
Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judæa
Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth [his] hands to vex certain of the church.
And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread.)
And when he had apprehended him, he put [him] in prison, and delivered [him] to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.
Peter therefore was kept in prison but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him.
And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains and the keepers before the door kept the prison.
And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon [him], and a light shined in the prison and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from [his] hands.
And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.
And he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.
When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of his own accord and they went out, and passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him.
And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and [from] all the expectation of the people of the Jews.
And when he had considered [the thing], he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying.
And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.
And when she knew Peter’s voice, she opened not the gate for gladness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.
And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel.
But Peter continued knocking and when they had opened [the door], and saw him, they were astonished.
But he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.
Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.
And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that [they] should be put to death. And he went down from Judæa to Cæsarea, and [there] abode.
And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon but they came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus the king’s chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king’s [country].
And upon a set day Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them.
And the people gave a shout, [saying, It is] the voice of a god, and not of a man.
And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.
But the word of God grew and multiplied.
And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled [their] ministry, and took with them John, whose surname was Mark.
Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.
And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid [their] hands on them, they sent [them] away.
So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.
And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews and they had also John to [their] minister.
And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name [was] Bar-jesus
Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.
But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.
Then Saul, (who also [is called] Paul,) filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him,
And said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, [thou] child of the devil, [thou] enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
And now, behold, the hand of the Lord [is] upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.
Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.
Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem.
But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down.
And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, [Ye] men [and] brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.
Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with [his] hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience.
The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it.
And about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness.
And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their land to them by lot.
And after that he gave [unto them] judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet.
And afterward they desired a king and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years.
And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their king; to whom also he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the [son] of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my will.
Of this man’s seed hath God according to [his] promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus
When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not [he]. But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of [his] feet I am not worthy to loose.
Men [and] brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.
For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled [them] in condemning [him].
And though they found no cause of death [in him], yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain.
And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took [him] down from the tree, and laid [him] in a sepulchre.
But God raised him from the dead
And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.
And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers,
God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, [now] no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.
Wherefore he saith also in another [psalm], Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption
But he, whom God raised again, saw no corruption.
Be it known unto you therefore, men [and] brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins
Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas who, speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God.
But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.
Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.
For so hath the Lord commanded us, [saying], I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth.
And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region.
But the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.
But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto Iconium.
And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost.
And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks believed.
But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the brethren.
Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
But the multitude of the city was divided and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles.
And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to use [them] despitefully, and to stone them,
They were ware of [it], and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about
And there they preached the gospel.
And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had walked
The same heard Paul speak who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed,
Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.
And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.
And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker.
Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.
[Which] when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard [of], they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,
And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein
Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.
And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto them.
And there came thither [certain] Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who persuaded the people, and, having stoned Paul, drew [him] out of the city, supposing he had been dead.
Howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came into the city and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
And when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and [to] Iconium, and Antioch,
And after they had passed throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Attalia
And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled.
And when they were come, and had gathered the church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles.
And there they abode long time with the disciples.
And certain men which came down from Judæa taught the brethren, [and said], Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question.
And being brought on their way by the church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.
And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and [of] the apostles and elders, and they declared all things that God had done with them.
But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command [them] to keep the law of Moses.
And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter.
And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men [and] brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe.
And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as [he did] unto us;
And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they.
Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.
And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men [and] brethren, hearken unto me
Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.
And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,
Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God
But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and [from] fornication, and [from] things strangled, and [from] blood.
For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.
Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; [namely], Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren
And they wrote [letters] by them after this manner; The apostles and elders and brethren [send] greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia
Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, [Ye must] be circumcised, and keep the law to whom we gave no [such] commandment
It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;
[Which] when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.
And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed [them].
And after they had tarried [there] a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the apostles.
Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still.
Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.
And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, [and see] how they do.
And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark.
But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.
And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed asunder one from the other and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus;
And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.
Then came he to Derbe and Lystra and, behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewess, and believed; but his father [was] a Greek
Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.
Him would Paul have to go forth with him; and took and circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those quarters for they knew all that his father was a Greek.
And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem.
And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily.
Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia,
After they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia but the Spirit suffered them not.
And they passing by Mysia came down to Troas.
And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.
And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them.
Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next [day] to Neapolis;
And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, [and] a colony and we were in that city abiding certain days.
And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted [thither.]
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard [us] whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.
And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought [us], saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide [there]. And she constrained us.
And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying
The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation.
And this did she many days. But Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour.
And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew [them] into the marketplace unto the rulers,
And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city,
And teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.
And the multitude rose up together against them and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat [them].
And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast [them] into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely
Who, having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.
And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God and the prisoners heard them.
And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken and immediately all the doors were opened, and every one’s bands were loosed.
And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled.
But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm for we are all here.
Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,
And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.
And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house.
And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed [their] stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway.
And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.
And when it was day, the magistrates sent the serjeants, saying, Let those men go.
And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go now therefore depart, and go in peace.
But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast [us] into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out.
And the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates and they feared, when they heard that they were Romans.
And they came and besought them, and brought [them] out, and desired [them] to depart out of the city.
And they went out of the prison, and entered into [the house of] Lydia and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.
Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews
And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures,
Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.
And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.
But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.
And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also;
Whom Jason hath received and these all do contrary to the decrees of Cæsar, saying that there is another king, [one] Jesus.
And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things.
And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go.
And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea who coming [thither] went into the synagogue of the Jews.
These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so.
Therefore many of them believed; also of honourable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a few.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people.
And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.
And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with all speed, they departed.
Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.
Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him.
Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.
And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, [is]?
Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars’ hill, and said, [Ye] men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.
For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;
Neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things;
And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;
Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s device.
And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent
Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by [that] man whom he hath ordained; [whereof] he hath given assurance unto all [men], in that he hath raised him from the dead.
And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked and others said, We will hear thee again of this [matter].
So Paul departed from among them.
Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed among the which [was] Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth;
And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla; (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome) and came unto them.
And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought for by their occupation they were tentmakers.
And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks.
And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in the spirit, and testified to the Jews [that] Jesus [was] Christ.
And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook [his] raiment, and said unto them, Your blood [be] upon your own heads; I [am] clean from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.
And he departed thence, and entered into a certain [man’s] house, named Justus, [one] that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue.
And Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized.
Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace
And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat,
Saying, This [fellow] persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law.
And when Paul was now about to open [his] mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O [ye] Jews, reason would that I should bear with you
But if it be a question of words and names, and [of] your law, look ye [to it]; for I will be no judge of such [matters].
And he drave them from the judgment seat.
Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes, the chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat [him] before the judgment seat. And Gallio cared for none of those things.
And Paul [after this] tarried [there] yet a good while, and then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila; having shorn [his] head in Cenchrea for he had a vow.
And he came to Ephesus, and left them there but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.
When they desired [him] to tarry longer time with them, he consented not;
But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem but I will return again unto you, if God will. And he sailed from Ephesus.
And when he had landed at Cæsarea, and gone up, and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch.
And after he had spent some time [there], he departed, and went over [all] the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.
And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, [and] mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus.
This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.
And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto [them], and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.
And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him who, when he was come, helped them much which had believed through grace
For he mightily convinced the Jews, [and that] publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ.
And it came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus and finding certain disciples,
He said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.
And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John’s baptism.
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.
When they heard [this], they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul had laid [his] hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.
And all the men were about twelve.
And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.
But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.
And this continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul
So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.
And there were seven sons of [one] Sceva, a Jew, [and] chief of the priests, which did so.
And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?
And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
And many that believed came, and confessed, and shewed their deeds.
Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and burned them before all [men] and they counted the price of them, and found [it] fifty thousand [pieces] of silver.
So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.
After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome.
So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season.
And the same time there arose no small stir about that way.
For a certain [man] named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;
Whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.
Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands
So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.
And when they heard [these sayings], they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great [is] Diana of the Ephesians.
And the whole city was filled with confusion and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the theatre.
And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not.
And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring [him] that he would not adventure himself into the theatre.
Some therefore cried one thing, and some another for the assembly was confused; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.
And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his defence unto the people.
But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great [is] Diana of the Ephesians.
And when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, [Ye] men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the [image] which fell down from Jupiter?
Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.
For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.
Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies let them implead one another.
But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.
For we are in danger to be called in question for this day’s uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse.
And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place.
And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.
And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven.
Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.
And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galilæans?
And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judæa, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia,
Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes,
And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this?
Others mocking said, These men are full of new wine.
But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judæa, and all [ye] that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words
For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is [but] the third hour of the day.
But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel;
And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams
And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy
And I will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come
And it shall come to pass, [that] whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.
Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know
Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain
Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope
Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
Thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance.
Men [and] brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day.
Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne;
He seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.
This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.
Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear.
For David is not ascended into the heavens but he saith himself, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
Now when they heard [this], they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men [and] brethren, what shall we do?
Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, [even] as many as the Lord our God shall call.
And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation.
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized and the same day there were added [unto them] about three thousand souls.
And they continued stedfastly in the apostles’ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.
And fear came upon every soul and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles.
And all that believed were together, and had all things common;
And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all [men], as every man had need.
And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,
Praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.
And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto [him] the disciples, and embraced [them], and departed for to go into Macedonia.
And when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece,
And [there] abode three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.
And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.
These going before tarried for us at Troas.
And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days.
And upon the first [day] of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.
And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered together.
And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.
And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing [him] said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.
When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed.
And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.
And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to take in Paul for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot.
And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.
And we sailed thence, and came the next [day] over against Chios; and the next [day] we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next [day] we came to Miletus.
For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church.
And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons,
Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.
But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.
And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.
Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I [am] pure from the blood of all [men].
For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.
Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.
For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
I have coveted no man’s silver, or gold, or apparel.
Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.
I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.
And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all.
And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul’s neck, and kissed him,
Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.
And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the [day] following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara
And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.
Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre for there the ship was to unlade her burden.
And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.
And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way; and they all brought us on our way, with wives and children, till [we were] out of the city and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.
And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship; and they returned home again.
And when we had finished [our] course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.
And the next [day] we that were of Paul’s company departed, and came unto Cæsarea and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was [one] of the seven; and abode with him.
And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.
And as we tarried [there] many days, there came down from Judæa a certain prophet, named Agabus.
And when he was come unto us, he took Paul’s girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver [him] into the hands of the Gentiles.
And when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.
And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem.
There went with us also [certain] of the disciples of Cæsarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.
And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.
And the [day] following Paul went in with us unto James; and all the elders were present.
And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry.
And when they heard [it], they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are all zealous of the law
And they are informed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise [their] children, neither to walk after the customs.
What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together for they will hear that thou art come.
Do therefore this that we say to thee We have four men which have a vow on them;
Them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave [their] heads and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing; but [that] thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the law.
As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written [and] concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from [things] offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from fornication.
Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.
And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him,
And all the city was moved, and the people ran together and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple and forthwith the doors were shut.
And as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
Who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto them and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left beating of Paul.
Then the chief captain came near, and took him, and commanded [him] to be bound with two chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done.
And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle.
And when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the people.
For the multitude of the people followed after, crying, Away with him.
And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief captain, May I speak unto thee? Who said, Canst thou speak Greek?
Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?
But Paul said, I am a man [which am] a Jew of Tarsus, [a city] in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.
And when he had given him licence, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckoned with the hand unto the people. And when there was made a great silence, he spake unto [them] in the Hebrew tongue, saying,
Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence [which I make] now unto you.
(And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the more silence and he saith,)
I am verily a man [which am] a Jew, born in Tarsus, [a city] in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, [and] taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye all are this day.
And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
As also the high priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate of the elders from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem, for to be punished.
And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me.
And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.
And they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.
And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do.
And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus.
And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a good report of all the Jews which dwelt [there],
Came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.
And he said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldest know his will, and see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth.
For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard.
And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
And it came to pass, that, when I was come again to Jerusalem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance;
And saw him saying unto me, Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.
And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee
And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.
And he said unto me, Depart for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles.
And they gave him audience unto this word, and [then] lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a [fellow] from the earth for it is not fit that he should live.
And as they cried out, and cast off [their] clothes, and threw dust into the air,
And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?
When the centurion heard [that], he went and told the chief captain, saying, Take heed what thou doest for this man is a Roman.
Then the chief captain came, and said unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yea.
And the chief captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul said, But I was [free] born.
Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him and the chief captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.
On the morrow, because he would have known the certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from [his] bands, and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear, and brought Paul down, and set him before them.
And Paul, earnestly beholding the council, said, Men [and] brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day.
And the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the mouth.
Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, [thou] whited wall for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?
And they that stood by said, Revilest thou God’s high priest?
Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.
But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men [and] brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.
And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees and the multitude was divided.
For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit but the Pharisees confess both.
And there arose a great cry and the scribes [that were] of the Pharisees’ part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this man but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God.
And when there arose a great dissension, the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring [him] into the castle.
And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.
And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.
And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy.
And they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we have slain Paul.
Now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire something more perfectly concerning him and we, or ever he come near, are ready to kill him.
And when Paul’s sister’s son heard of their lying in wait, he went and entered into the castle, and told Paul.
Then Paul called one of the centurions unto [him], and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain for he hath a certain thing to tell him.
So he took him, and brought [him] to the chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto [him], and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something to say unto thee.
Then the chief captain took him by the hand, and went [with him] aside privately, and asked [him], What is that thou hast to tell me?
And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire thee that thou wouldest bring down Paul to morrow into the council, as though they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly.
But do not thou yield unto them for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee.
So the chief captain [then] let the young man depart, and charged [him, See thou] tell no man that thou hast shewed these things to me.
And he called unto [him] two centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Cæsarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night;
And provide [them] beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring [him] safe unto Felix the governor.
And he wrote a letter after this manner
Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix [sendeth] greeting.
This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them then came I with an army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman.
And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their council
Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds.
And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent straightway to thee, and gave commandment to his accusers also to say before thee what [they had] against him. Farewell.
Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought [him] by night to Antipatris.
On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the castle
Who, when they came to Cæsarea, and delivered the epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him.
And when the governor had read [the letter], he asked of what province he was. And when he understood that [he was] of Cilicia;
I will hear thee, said he, when thine accusers are also come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herod’s judgment hall.
And after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the elders, and [with] a certain orator [named] Tertullus, who informed the governor against Paul.
And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse [him], saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence,
For we have found this man [a] pestilent [fellow], and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes
Who also hath gone about to profane the temple whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.
But the chief captain Lysias came [upon us], and with great violence took [him] away out of our hands,
Commanding his accusers to come unto thee by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of all these things, whereof we accuse him.
And the Jews also assented, saying that these things were so.
Then Paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for myself
Because that thou mayest understand, that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship.
And they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the city
Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me.
But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets
And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.
And herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence toward God, and [toward] men.
Now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation, and offerings.
Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.
Who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought against me.
Or else let these same [here] say, if they have found any evil doing in me, while I stood before the council,
And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let [him] have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him.
And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ.
And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.
He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.
But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix’ room and Felix, willing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.
Now when Festus was come into the province, after three days he ascended from Cæsarea to Jerusalem.
Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,
And desired favour against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him.
But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cæsarea, and that he himself would depart shortly [thither].
Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with [me], and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him.
And when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went down unto Cæsarea; and the next day sitting on the judgment seat commanded Paul to be brought.
And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stood round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not prove.
While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Cæsar, have I offended any thing at all.
But Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?
Then said Paul, I stand at Cæsar’s judgment seat, where I ought to be judged to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest.
For if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Cæsar.
Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, Hast thou appealed unto Cæsar? unto Cæsar shalt thou go.
And after certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cæsarea to salute Festus.
And when they had been there many days, Festus declared Paul’s cause unto the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix
About whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed [me], desiring [to have] judgment against him.
To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.
Therefore, when they were come hither, without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought forth.
Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such things as I supposed
But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked [him] whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters.
But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Cæsar.
Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man myself. To morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.
And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and principal men of the city, at Festus’ commandment Paul was brought forth.
And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here present with us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and [also] here, crying that he ought not to live any longer.
But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him.
Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O king Agrippa, that, after examination had, I might have somewhat to write.
For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes [laid] against him.
Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself
I think myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews
Which knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers
Unto which [promise] our twelve tribes, instantly serving [God] day and night, hope to come. For which hope’s sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?
I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against [them].
And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled [them] to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted [them] even unto strange cities.
Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests,
At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them which journeyed with me.
And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? [it is] hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.
But rise, and stand upon thy feet for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee;
Delivering thee from the people, and [from] the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee,
But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judæa, and [then] to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.
For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple, and went about to kill [me].
Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come
But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.
For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner.
King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.
Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.
And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them
And when they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Cæsar.
And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto [one] named Julius, a centurion of Augustus’ band.
And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; [one] Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And the next [day] we touched at Sidon. And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave [him] liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself.
And when we had launched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, [a city] of Lycia.
And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us therein.
And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;
And, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called The fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city [of] Lasea.
Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished [them],
And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives.
Nevertheless the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul.
And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain to Phenice, [and there] to winter; [which is] an haven of Crete, and lieth toward the south west and north west.
And when the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained [their] purpose, loosing [thence], they sailed close by Crete.
But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.
And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we let [her] drive.
And running under a certain island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat
Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.
And we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next [day] they lightened the ship;
And the third [day] we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship.
And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on [us], all hope that we should be saved was then taken away.
But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and loss.
And now I exhort you to be of good cheer for there shall be no loss of [any man’s] life among you, but of the ship.
For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Cæsar and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee.
Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer for I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me.
Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.
But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country;
And sounded, and found [it] twenty fathoms and when they had gone a little further, they sounded again, and found [it] fifteen fathoms.
Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.
And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.
Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.
And while the day was coming on, Paul besought [them] all to take meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting, having taken nothing.
Wherefore I pray you to take [some] meat for this is for your health for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you.
And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all and when he had broken [it], he began to eat.
Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took [some] meat.
And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.
And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea.
And when it was day, they knew not the land but they discovered a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship.
And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed [themselves] unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.
And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.
And the soldiers’ counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape.
But the centurion, willing to save Paul, kept them from [their] purpose; and commanded that they which could swim should cast [themselves] first [into the sea], and get to land
And the rest, some on boards, and some on [broken pieces] of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land.
And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita.
And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid [them] on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.
And when the barbarians saw the [venomous] beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live.
And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.
Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.
In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius; who received us, and lodged us three days courteously.
And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a bloody flux to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.
So when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the island, came, and were healed
Who also honoured us with many honours; and when we departed, they laded [us] with such things as were necessary.
And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
And landing at Syracuse, we tarried [there] three days.
And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli
Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days and so we went toward Rome.
And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and The three taverns whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.
And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him.
And it came to pass, that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews together and when they were come together, he said unto them, Men [and] brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
Who, when they had examined me, would have let [me] go, because there was no cause of death in me.
But when the Jews spake against [it], I was constrained to appeal unto Cæsar; not that I had ought to accuse my nation of.
For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see [you], and to speak with [you] because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.
And they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judæa concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came shewed or spake any harm of thee.
But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest for as concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.
And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into [his] lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and [out of] the prophets, from morning till evening.
And some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not.
And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers,
Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive
For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with [their] eyes, and hear with [their] ears, and understand with [their] heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and [that] they will hear it.
And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves.
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him,
Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him.
Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, [being] the ninth [hour].
And a certain man lame from his mother’s womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple;
Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms.
And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us.
And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.
And he took him by the right hand, and lifted [him] up and immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength.
And he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God
And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him.
And as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together unto them in the porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly wondering.
And when Peter saw [it], he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?
The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let [him] go.
But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you;
And killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses.
And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
And now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did [it], as [did] also your rulers.
But those things, which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;
For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass, [that] every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.
Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.
Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
Unto you first God, having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.
And as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them,
Being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
And they laid hands on them, and put [them] in hold unto the next day for it was now eventide.
Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes,
Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,
If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole;
Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, [even] by him doth this man stand here before you whole.
This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.
Neither is there salvation in any other for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.
And beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.
But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,
Saying, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them [is] manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny [it].
But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.
And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.
For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.
So when they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people for all [men] glorified God for that which was done.
For the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was shewed.
And being let go, they went to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them.
And when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou [art] God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is
Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things?
The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together,
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul neither said any [of them] that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.
And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus and great grace was upon them all.
Neither was there any among them that lacked for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold,
And laid [them] down at the apostles’ feet and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.
And Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation,) a Levite, [and] of the country of Cyprus,
Having land, sold [it], and brought the money, and laid [it] at the apostles’ feet.
But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,
And kept back [part] of the price, his wife also being privy [to it], and brought a certain part, and laid [it] at the apostles’ feet.
But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back [part] of the price of the land?
Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God.
And Ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up the ghost and great fear came on all them that heard these things.
And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried [him] out, and buried [him].
And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in.
And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so much.
Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband [are] at the door, and shall carry thee out.
Then fell she down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the ghost and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying [her] forth, buried [her] by her husband.
And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things.
And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon’s porch.
And of the rest durst no man join himself to them but the people magnified them.
And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women.)
Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid [them] on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.
There came also a multitude [out] of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits and they were healed every one.
Then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him, (which is the sect of the Sadducees,) and were filled with indignation,
And laid their hands on the apostles, and put them in the common prison.
But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said,
Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.
And when they heard [that], they entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high priest came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
But when the officers came, and found them not in the prison, they returned, and told,
Then came one and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people.
Then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without violence for they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned.
And when they had brought them, they set [them] before the council and the high priest asked them,
Saying, Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? and, behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.
Then Peter and the [other] apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.
Him hath God exalted with his right hand [to be] a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
And we are his witnesses of these things; and [so is] also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him.
When they heard [that], they were cut [to the heart], and took counsel to slay them.
Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space;
And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men.
For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nought.
After this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him he also perished; and all, [even] as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.
And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought
But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.
And to him they agreed and when they had called the apostles, and beaten [them], they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.
And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.
And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.
And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.
Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples [unto them], and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables.
Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.
But we will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word.
And the saying pleased the whole multitude and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch
Whom they set before the apostles and when they had prayed, they laid [their] hands on them.
And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people.
Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called [the synagogue] of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen.
And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake.
Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and [against] God.
And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon [him], and caught him, and brought [him] to the council,
And set up false witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law
For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.
And all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.
Then said the high priest, Are these things so?
And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,
And said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee.
Then came he out of the land of the Chaldæans, and dwelt in Charran and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell.
And he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not [so much as] to set his foot on yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when [as yet] he had no child.
And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat [them] evil four hundred years.
And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I judge, said God and after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision and so [Abraham] begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isaac [begat] Jacob; and Jacob [begat] the twelve patriarchs.
And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt but God was with him,
And delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house.
Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Chanaan, and great affliction and our fathers found no sustenance.
But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first.
And at the second [time] Joseph was made known to his brethren; and Joseph’s kindred was made known unto Pharaoh.
Then sent Joseph, and called his father Jacob to [him], and all his kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.
So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,
And were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor [the father] of Sychem.
But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair, and nourished up in his father’s house three months
And when he was cast out, Pharaoh’s daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.
And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds.
And when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel.
And seeing one [of them] suffer wrong, he defended [him], and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian
For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them but they understood not.
And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?
But he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?
Wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday?
Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons.
And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sina an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.
When Moses saw [it], he wondered at the sight and as he drew near to behold [it], the voice of the Lord came unto him,
I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.
This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge? the same did God send [to be] a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in the bush.
He brought them out, after that he had shewed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty years.
This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear.
This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and [with] our fathers who received the lively oracles to give unto us
To whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust [him] from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt,
Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us for [as for] this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.
Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices [by the space of] forty years in the wilderness?
Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.
Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen.
Which also our fathers that came after brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David;
Who found favour before God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon built him an house.
Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the prophet,
Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers
But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord,
And cast [him] out of the city, and stoned [him] and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man’s feet, whose name was Saul.
And they stoned Stephen, calling upon [God], and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.
And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judæa and Samaria, except the apostles.
And devout men carried Stephen [to his burial], and made great lamentation over him.
As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed [them] to prison.
Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word.
Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them.
And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.
For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed [with them] and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed.
And there was great joy in that city.
But there was a certain man, called Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one
To whom they all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God.
And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries.
But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Then Simon himself believed also and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done.
Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John
Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost
(For as yet he was fallen upon none of them only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.)
Then laid they [their] hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.
And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles’ hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money,
Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost.
But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.
Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.
For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and [in] the bond of iniquity.
Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me.
And they, when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many villages of the Samaritans.
And the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert.
And he arose and went and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship,
Was returning, and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the prophet.
Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thyself to this chariot.
And Philip ran thither to [him], and heard him read the prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou readest?
And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him.
The place of the scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth
In his humiliation his judgment was taken away and who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth.
And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?
Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.
And as they went on [their] way, they came unto a certain water and the eunuch said, See, [here is] water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?
And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
And he commanded the chariot to stand still and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.
And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more and he went on his way rejoicing.
But Philip was found at Azotus and passing through he preached in all the cities, till he came to Cæsarea.
And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest,
And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.
And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven
And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest [it is] hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord [said] unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man.
And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man but they led him by the hand, and brought [him] into Damascus.
And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.
And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I [am here], Lord.
And the Lord [said] unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for [one] called Saul, of Tarsus for, behold, he prayeth,
And hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting [his] hand on him, that he might receive his sight.
Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem
And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name.
But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel
For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name’s sake.
And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, [even] Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.
And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus.
And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God.
But all that heard [him] were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?
But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.
And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him
But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night to kill him.
Then the disciples took him by night, and let [him] down by the wall in a basket.
And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the disciples but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple.
But Barnabas took him, and brought [him] to the apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.
And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem.
And he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians but they went about to slay him.
[Which] when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.
Then had the churches rest throughout all Judæa and Galilee and Samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.
And it came to pass, as Peter passed throughout all [quarters], he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda.
And there he found a certain man named Æneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy.
And Peter said unto him, Æneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.
And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord.
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did.
And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died whom when they had washed, they laid [ her] in an upper chamber.
And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring [him] that he would not delay to come to them.
Then Peter arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber and all the widows stood by him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them.
But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning [him] to the body said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes and when she saw Peter, she sat up.
And he gave her [his] hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive.
And it was known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord.
And it came to pass, that he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus [our] brother,
To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse Grace [be] unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ;
Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit.
For this cause we also, since the day we heard [it], do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated [us] into the kingdom of his dear Son
And he is the head of the body, the church who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all [things] he might have the preeminence.
For it pleased [the Father] that in him should all fulness dwell;
Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church
Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God;
[Even] the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints
To whom God would make known what [is] the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory
Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus
Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.
For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and [for] them at Laodicea, and [for] as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ;
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words.
For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, [so] walk ye in him
Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.
And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ
Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with [him] through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead.
And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses;
Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;
[And] having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it.
Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath [days]
Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body [is] of Christ.
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
And not holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,
Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh.
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
When Christ, [who is] our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry
For which things’ sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience
In the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them.
But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth.
Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds;
And have put on the new [man], which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond [nor] free but Christ [is] all, and in all.
Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any even as Christ forgave you, so also [do] ye.
And above all these things [put on] charity, which is the bond of perfectness.
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, [do] all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.
Husbands, love [your] wives, and be not bitter against them.
Children, obey [your] parents in all things for this is well pleasing unto the Lord.
Fathers, provoke not your children [to anger], lest they be discouraged.
Servants, obey in all things [your] masters according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God
And whatsoever ye do, do [it] heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance for ye serve the Lord Christ.
But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done and there is no respect of persons.
Masters, give unto [your] servants that which is just and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;
Withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds
That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time.
Let your speech [be] alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man.
All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, [who is] a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts;
For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them [that are] in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, greet you.
Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house.
And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the [epistle] from Laodicea.
And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.
The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace [be] with you. Amen.
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus
Grace [be] to you, and peace, from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed [be] the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly [places] in Christ
According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love
Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace;
Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence;
Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself
That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; [even] in him
In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will
That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.
In whom ye also [trusted], after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise,
Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.
Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints,
Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers;
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
Which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.
And you [hath he quickened], who were dead in trespasses and sins;
But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,
Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;)
And hath raised [us] up together, and made [us] sit together in heavenly [places] in Christ Jesus
Not of works, lest any man should boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them.
Wherefore remember, that ye [being] in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands;
That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition [between us];
And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.
For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;
And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner [stone];
In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord
In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.
For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,
If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you-ward
How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few words,
Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ)
Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit;
Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ;
According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,
With all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love;
Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
[There is] one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;
One Lord, one faith, one baptism,
One God and Father of all, who [is] above all, and through all, and in you all.
But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.
(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?
He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.)
And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, [even] Christ
From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart
Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
But ye have not so learned Christ;
If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus
That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts;
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind;
And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour for we are members one of another.
Be ye angry, and sin not let not the sun go down upon your wrath
Neither give place to the devil.
Let him that stole steal no more but rather let him labour, working with [his] hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice
And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.
Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children;
And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour.
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints;
Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient but rather giving of thanks.
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Let no man deceive you with vain words for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.
Be not ye therefore partakers with them.
For ye were sometimes darkness, but now [are ye] light in the Lord walk as children of light
(For the fruit of the Spirit [is] in all goodness and righteousness and truth;)
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret.
But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.
Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord [is].
And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit;
Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;
Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.
For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church and he is the saviour of the body.
Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so [let] the wives [be] to their own husbands in every thing.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it;
So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself.
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church
This is a great mystery but I speak concerning Christ and the church.
Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife [see] that she reverence [her] husband.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord for this is right.
Honour thy father and mother; (which is the first commandment with promise;)
Servants, be obedient to them that are [your] masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;
Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;
With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men
Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether [he be] bond or free.
And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.
Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high [places].
Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.
Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints;
And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel,
For which I am an ambassador in bonds that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that ye also may know my affairs, [and] how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our affairs, and [that] he might comfort your hearts.
Peace [be] to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Grace [be] with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.
Paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead;)
Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father
To whom [be] glory for ever and ever. Amen.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel
Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.
But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.
As we said before, so say I now again, If any [man] preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.
For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.
But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught [it], but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.
For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews’ religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it
And profited in the Jews’ religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.
But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother’s womb, and called [me] by his grace,
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.
But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.
Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.
Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia;
And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were in Christ
But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.
And they glorified God in me.
Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with [me] also.
And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run, in vain.
But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised
And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage
To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you.
But of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me God accepteth no man’s person) for they who seemed [to be somewhat] in conference added nothing to me
But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as [the gospel] of the circumcision [was] unto Peter;
(For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles)
And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship; that we [should go] unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.
Only [they would] that we should remember the poor; the same which I also was forward to do.
But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed.
For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision.
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.
But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before [them] all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?
We [who are] Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, [is] therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.
For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor.
For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God.
I am crucified with Christ nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
I do not frustrate the grace of God for if righteousness [come] by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.
O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?
This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if [it be] yet in vain.
He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, [doeth he it] by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.
Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.
And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, [saying], In thee shall all nations be blessed.
So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.
For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse for it is written, Cursed [is] every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.
But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, [it is] evident for, The just shall live by faith.
And the law is not of faith but, The man that doeth them shall live in them.
Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us for it is written, Cursed [is] every one that hangeth on a tree
That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though [it be] but a man’s covenant, yet [if it be] confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto.
Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.
And this I say, [that] the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect.
For if the inheritance [be] of the law, [it is] no more of promise but God gave [it] to Abraham by promise.
Wherefore then [serveth] the law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; [and it was] ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator.
Now a mediator is not [a mediator] of one, but God is one.
[Is] the law then against the promises of God? God forbid for if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.
But the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster [to bring us] unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.
For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
And if ye [be] Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.
Now I say, [That] the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all;
But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father.
Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world
But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,
To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.
And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.
Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods.
But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.
I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.
Brethren, I beseech you, be as I [am]; for I [am] as ye [are] ye have not injured me at all.
Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first.
And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel of God, [even] as Christ Jesus.
Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record, that, if [it had been] possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?
They zealously affect you, [but] not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them.
But [it is] good to be zealously affected always in [a] good [thing], and not only when I am present with you.
My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you,
I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you.
Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.
But he [who was] of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman [was] by promise.
Which things are an allegory for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.
But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.
For it is written, Rejoice, [thou] barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.
Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.
But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him [that was born] after the Spirit, even so [it is] now.
Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.
So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.
For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.
Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.
For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.
Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?
This persuasion [cometh] not of him that calleth you.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
I would they were even cut off which trouble you.
For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only [use] not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.
For all the law is fulfilled in one word, [even] in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.
[This] I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.
For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh and these are contrary the one to the other so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are [these]; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like of the which I tell you before, as I have also told [you] in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
Meekness, temperance against such there is no law.
And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another.
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.
For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.
But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
For every man shall bear his own burden.
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things.
Be not deceived; God is not mocked for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
And let us not be weary in well doing for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.
As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all [men], especially unto them who are of the household of faith.
Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.
As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.
For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.
But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace [be] on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
From henceforth let no man trouble me for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with your spirit. Amen.
God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,
Hath in these last days spoken unto us by [his] Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;
Who being the brightness of [his] glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
Being made so much better than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they.
For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?
And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.
And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.
But unto the Son [he saith], Thy throne, O God, [is] for ever and ever a sceptre of righteousness [is] the sceptre of thy kingdom.
Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, [even] thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands
They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment;
And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?
For the law having a shadow of good things to come, [and] not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.
For then would they not have ceased to be offered? because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins.
But in those [sacrifices there is] a remembrance again [made] of sins every year.
For [it is] not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins.
Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me
In burnt offerings and [sacrifices] for sin thou hast had no pleasure.
Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God.
Above when he said, Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and [offering] for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure [therein]; which are offered by the law;
Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second.
By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once [for all].
And every priest standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins
But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God;
From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.
For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
[Whereof] the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us for after that he had said before,
Now where remission of these [is, there is] no more offering for sin.
Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus,
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.
Let us hold fast the profession of [our] faith without wavering; (for he [is] faithful that promised;)
And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works
Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some [is]; but exhorting [one another] and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,
But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.
He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses
Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?
For we know him that hath said, Vengeance [belongeth] unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his people.
[It is] a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompence of reward.
For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.
For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.
Now the just shall live by faith but if [any man] draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
For by it the elders obtained a good report.
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.
By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts and by it he being dead yet speaketh.
By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.
But without faith [it is] impossible to please [him] for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and [that] he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith.
By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went.
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as [in] a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise
For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker [is] God.
Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised.
Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, [so many] as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.
These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of [them], and embraced [them], and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country.
And truly, if they had been mindful of that [country] from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.
But now they desire a better [country], that is, an heavenly wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God for he hath prepared for them a city.
By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten [son],
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.
By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, [leaning] upon the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.
By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw [he was] a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king’s commandment.
By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter;
Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them.
By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry [land] which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days.
By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace.
And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and [of] Barak, and [of] Samson, and [of] Jephthae; [of] David also, and Samuel, and [of] the prophets
Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.
Women received their dead raised to life again and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection
And others had trial of [cruel] mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment
They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented;
(Of whom the world was not worthy) they wandered in deserts, and [in] mountains, and [in] dens and caves of the earth.
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset [us], and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,
Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin.
And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him
But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.
Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected [us], and we gave [them] reverence shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?
For they verily for a few days chastened [us] after their own pleasure; but he for [our] profit, that [we] might be partakers of his holiness.
Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.
Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees;
And make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed.
Follow peace with all [men], and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord
Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble [you], and thereby many be defiled;
Lest there [be] any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.
For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.
For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which [voice] they that heard intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more
(For they could not endure that which was commanded, And if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart
And so terrible was the sight, [that] Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake)
But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels,
To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,
And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than [that of] Abel.
See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more [shall not] we [escape], if we turn away from him that [speaketh] from heaven
Whose voice then shook the earth but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.
And this [word], Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear
For our God [is] a consuming fire.
Let brotherly love continue.
Marriage [is] honourable in all, and the bed undefiled but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.
[Let your] conversation [be] without covetousness; [and be] content with such things as ye have for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
So that we may boldly say, The Lord [is] my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God whose faith follow, considering the end of [their] conversation.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. For [it is] a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.
We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle.
For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp.
Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach.
For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of [our] lips giving thanks to his name.
But to do good and to communicate forget not for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief for that [is] unprofitable for you.
Pray for us for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.
But I beseech [you] the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner.
Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom [be] glory for ever and ever. Amen.
And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation for I have written a letter unto you in few words.
Know ye that [our] brother Timothy is set at liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.
Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints. They of Italy salute you.
Grace [be] with you all. Amen.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let [them] slip.
For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward;
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard [him];
God also bearing [them] witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will?
For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak.
But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him?
Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands
Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing [that is] not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.
For it became him, for whom [are] all things, and by whom [are] all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified [are] all of one for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil;
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto [his] brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things [pertaining] to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted.
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus;
Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses [was faithful] in all his house.
For this [man] was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house.
For every house is builded by some [man]; but he that built all things [is] God.
And Moses verily [was] faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after;
But Christ as a son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.
Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his voice,
Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness
So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.)
Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.
But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end;
While it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.
For some, when they had heard, did provoke howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.
But with whom was he grieved forty years? [was it] not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?
And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?
So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.
Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left [us] of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard [it].
For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest although the works were finished from the foundation of the world.
For he spake in a certain place of the seventh [day] on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from all his works.
And in this [place] again, If they shall enter into my rest.
Seeing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief
Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day.
There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God.
For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his own works, as God [did] from his.
Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief.
For the word of God [is] quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and [is] a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight but all things [are] naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast [our] profession.
For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as [we are, yet] without sin.
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things [pertaining] to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins
Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity.
And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.
And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as [was] Aaron.
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.
As he saith also in another [place], Thou [art] a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared;
Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;
And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him;
For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which [be] the first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.
For every one that useth milk [is] unskilful in the word of righteousness for he is a babe.
But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, [even] those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
For [it is] impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put [him] to an open shame.
For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God
But that which beareth thorns and briers [is] rejected, and [is] nigh unto cursing; whose end [is] to be burned.
But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.
For God [is] not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister.
And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end
For men verily swear by the greater and an oath for confirmation [is] to them an end of all strife.
Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed [it] by an oath
Whither the forerunner is for us entered, [even] Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him;
To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;
Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually.
Now consider how great this man [was], unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.
And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham
But he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises.
And without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better.
And here men that die receive tithes; but there he [receiveth them], of whom it is witnessed that he liveth.
And as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, payed tithes in Abraham.
For he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedec met him.
If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need [was there] that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?
For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law.
For he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar.
For [it is] evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda; of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.
And it is yet far more evident for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest,
For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.
And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death
But this [man], because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.
For such an high priest became us, [who is] holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s for this he did once, when he offered up himself.
For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, [maketh] the Son, who is consecrated for evermore.
Now of the things which we have spoken [this is] the sum We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens;
A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.
For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices wherefore [it is] of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer.
For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law
Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle for, See, saith he, [that] thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount.
But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.
For if that first [covenant] had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second.
For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah
Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord.
For this [is] the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people
And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.
In that he saith, A new [covenant], he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old [is] ready to vanish away.
Then verily the first [covenant] had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.
For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein [was] the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary.
And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all;
Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein [was] the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant;
And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.
Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service [of God].
But into the second [went] the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and [for] the errors of the people
The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing
Which [was] a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience;
Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption [for us].
For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?
And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions [that were] under the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.
For where a testament [is], there must also of necessity be the death of the testator.
For a testament [is] of force after men are dead otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth.
Whereupon neither the first [testament] was dedicated without blood.
For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people,
And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.
[It was] therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, [which are] the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us
Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others;
For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment
So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.
My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations;
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all [men] liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.
For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
Blessed [is] the man that endureth temptation for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.
Do not err, my beloved brethren.
Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath
For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.
Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass
For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.
But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth [therein], he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.
If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion [is] vain.
Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, [and] to keep himself unspotted from the world.
My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, [the Lord] of glory, with respect of persons.
For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment;
And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool
Are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?
Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him?
But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?
Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?
If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well
But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors.
For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one [point], he is guilty of all.
For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law.
So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.
For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.
What [doth it] profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?
If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,
And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be [ye] warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what [doth it] profit?
Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.
Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.
Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well the devils also believe, and tremble.
But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?
Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?
Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?
And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness and he was called the Friend of God.
Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.
Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent [them] out another way?
For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.
My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.
For in many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word, the same [is] a perfect man, [and] able also to bridle the whole body.
Behold, we put bits in the horses’ mouths, that they may obey us; and we turn about their whole body.
Behold also the ships, which though [they be] so great, and [are] driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever the governor listeth.
Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things. Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth!
And the tongue [is] a fire, a world of iniquity so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of hell.
For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind
But the tongue can no man tame; [it is] an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God.
Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be.
Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet [water] and bitter?
Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries? either a vine, figs? so [can] no fountain both yield salt water and fresh.
Who [is] a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.
But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.
This wisdom descendeth not from above, but [is] earthly, sensual, devilish.
For where envying and strife [is], there [is] confusion and every evil work.
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, [and] easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.
From whence [come] wars and fightings among you? [come they] not hence, [even] of your lusts that war in your members?
Ye lust, and have not ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.
Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume [it] upon your lusts.
Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.
Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?
But he giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.
Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse [your] hands, [ye] sinners; and purify [your] hearts, [ye] double minded.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep let your laughter be turned to mourning, and [your] joy to heaviness.
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.
Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of [his] brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge.
There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy who art thou that judgest another?
Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain
Whereas ye know not what [shall be] on the morrow. For what [is] your life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.
For that ye [ought] to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that.
But now ye rejoice in your boastings all such rejoicing is evil.
Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth [it] not, to him it is sin.
Go to now, [ye] rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon [you].
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.
Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.
Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.
Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.
Ye have condemned [and] killed the just; [and] he doth not resist you.
Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain.
Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.
Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned behold, the judge standeth before the door.
Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.
Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.
But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath but let your yea be yea; and [your] nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms.
Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord
And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.
Confess [your] faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.
Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.
And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.
Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him;
Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.
In him was life; and the life was the light of men.
And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.
There was a man sent from God, whose name [was] John.
The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all [men] through him might believe.
He was not that Light, but [was sent] to bear witness of that Light.
[That] was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, [even] to them that believe on his name
Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.
John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred before me for he was before me.
And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.
For the law was given by Moses, [but] grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared [him.]
And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?
And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ.
And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No.
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?
He said, I [am] the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias.
And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.
He it is, who coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy to unloose.
These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.
This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me for he was before me.
And I knew him not but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water.
And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.
And I knew him not but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.
And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God.
Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples;
And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!
And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.
Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou?
He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.
And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone.
The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me.
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!
Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.
Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.
Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.
And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.
And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him for they know his voice.
And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him for they know not the voice of strangers.
This parable spake Jesus unto them but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them.
Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.
All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers but the sheep did not hear them.
I am the door by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.
The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy I am come that they might have life, and that they might have [it] more abundantly.
I am the good shepherd the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.
But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.
The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and know my [sheep], and am known of mine.
Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.
No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings.
And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?
Others said, These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?
And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon’s porch.
Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not the works that I do in my Father’s name, they bear witness of me.
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me
And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any [man] pluck them out of my hand.
My Father, which gave [them] me, is greater than all; and no [man] is able to pluck [them] out of my Father’s hand.
I and [my] Father are one.
Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?
The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?
If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken;
Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?
If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.
But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works that ye may know, and believe, that the Father [is] in me, and I in him.
Therefore they sought again to take him but he escaped out of their hand,
And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized; and there he abode.
And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle but all things that John spake of this man were true.
And many believed on him there.
Now a certain [man] was sick, [named] Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
(It was [that] Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.)
Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.
When Jesus heard [that], he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he was.
Then after that saith he to [his] disciples, Let us go into Judæa again.
[His] disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee; and goest thou thither again?
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.
But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.
These things said he and after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.
Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.
Howbeit Jesus spake of his death but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in sleep.
Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.
Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
Then when Jesus came, he found that he had [lain] in the grave four days already.
Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off
And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.
Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him but Mary sat [still] in the house.
Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.
But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give [it] thee.
Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.
Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.
Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live
And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?
She saith unto him, Yea, Lord I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world.
And when she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come, and calleth for thee.
As soon as she heard [that], she arose quickly, and came unto him.
Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where Martha met him.
The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there.
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled,
And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see.
Jesus wept.
Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him!
And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.
Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh for he hath been [dead] four days.
Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?
Then they took away the stone [from the place] where the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up [his] eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
And I knew that thou hearest me always but because of the people which stand by I said [it], that they may believe that thou hast sent me.
And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.
And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go.
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus did, believed on him.
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done.
Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles.
If we let him thus alone, all [men] will believe on him and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.
And one of them, [named] Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all,
Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.
And this spake he not of himself but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation;
And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad.
Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.
And the Jews’ passover was nigh at hand and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves.
Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast?
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that, if any man knew where he were, he should shew [it], that they might take him.
Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
There they made him a supper; and Martha served but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him.
Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.
Then saith one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon’s [son], which should betray him,
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.
Then said Jesus, Let her alone against the day of my burying hath she kept this.
For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.
Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there and they came not for Jesus’ sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.
But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death;
Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.
On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
Took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna Blessed [is] the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.
And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written,
The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record.
For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.
And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the feast
The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus.
Philip cometh and telleth Andrew and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.
And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.
He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be if any man serve me, him will [my] Father honour.
Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour but for this cause came I unto this hour.
Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, [saying], I have both glorified [it], and will glorify [it] again.
The people therefore, that stood by, and heard [it], said that it thundered others said, An angel spake to him.
Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.
Now is the judgment of this world now shall the prince of this world be cast out.
And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all [men] unto me.
This he said, signifying what death he should die.
The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?
Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.
But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him
Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess [him], lest they should be put out of the synagogue
For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me.
And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.
And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.
For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
And I know that his commandment is life everlasting whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.
Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.
And supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s [son], to betray him;
Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God;
He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.
After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples’ feet, and to wipe [them] with the towel wherewith he was girded.
Then cometh he to Simon Peter and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.
Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.
Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also [my] hands and [my] head.
Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash [his] feet, but is clean every whit and ye are clean, but not all.
For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean.
So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?
Ye call me Master and Lord and ye say well; for [so] I am.
If I then, [your] Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another’s feet.
For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.
I speak not of you all I know whom I have chosen but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me.
Now I tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am [he].
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake.
Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved.
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom he spake.
He then lying on Jesus’ breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it?
Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped [it]. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave [it] to Judas Iscariot, [the son] of Simon.
And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly.
Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him.
For some [of them] thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy [those things] that we have need of against the feast; or, that he should give something to the poor.
He then having received the sop went immediately out and it was night.
Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.
Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you.
A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
By this shall all [men] know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt follow me afterwards.
Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake.
Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.
Let not your heart be troubled ye believe in God, believe also in me.
In my Father’s house are many mansions if [it were] not [so], I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, [there] ye may be also.
And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.
Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?
Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.
If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.
Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou [then], Shew us the Father?
Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.
Believe me that I [am] in the Father, and the Father in me or else believe me for the very works’ sake.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater [works] than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do [it.]
If ye love me, keep my commandments.
I will not leave you comfortless I will come to you.
Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me because I live, ye shall live also.
At that day ye shall know that I [am] in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.
He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.
Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?
Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.
He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s which sent me.
These things have I spoken unto you, being [yet] present with you.
But the Comforter, [which is] the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.
Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come [again] unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father for my Father is greater than I.
And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.
Hereafter I will not talk much with you for the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.
But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence.
I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away and every [branch] that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.
Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.
I am the vine, ye [are] the branches He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit for without me ye can do nothing.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast [them] into the fire, and they are burned.
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.
As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you continue ye in my love.
If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father’s commandments, and abide in his love.
These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and [that] your joy might be full.
This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and [that] your fruit should remain that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.
These things I command you, that ye love one another.
If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before [it hated] you.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.
But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, because they know not him that sent me.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin but now they have no cloke for their sin.
He that hateth me hateth my Father also.
But [this cometh to pass], that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.
But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, [even] the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me
And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.
These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended.
They shall put you out of the synagogues yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.
And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me.
But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?
But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.
And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment
Of sin, because they believe not on me;
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, [that] shall he speak and he will shew you things to come.
He shall glorify me for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew [it] unto you.
All things that the Father hath are mine therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew [it] unto you.
A little while, and ye shall not see me and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.
Then said [some] of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me and again, a little while, and ye shall see me and, Because I go to the Father?
They said therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith.
Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see me and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?
Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.
And ye now therefore have sorrow but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.
And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give [it] you.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.
These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.
At that day ye shall ask in my name and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you
For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.
I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.
His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb.
Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.
Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?
Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.
These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee
I have glorified thee on the earth I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.
Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee.
For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received [them], and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.
I pray for them I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine.
And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.
And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we [are].
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.
And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.
I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them through thy truth thy word is truth.
As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.
And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;
O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.
And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare [it] that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples.
And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.
Judas then, having received a band [of men] and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.
Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?
They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am [he]. And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.
As soon then as he had said unto them, I am [he], they went backward, and fell to the ground.
Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am [he] if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way
That the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none.
Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest’s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus.
Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?
Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him,
And led him away to Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.
Now Caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.
And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and [so did] another disciple that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.
But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.
Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also [one] of this man’s disciples? He saith, I am not.
And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold and they warmed themselves and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.
The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.
Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them behold, they know what I said.
And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?
Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil but if well, why smitest thou me?
Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.
And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also [one] of his disciples? He denied [it], and said, I am not.
One of the servants of the high priest, being [his] kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?
Peter then denied again and immediately the cock crew.
Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.
Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this man?
They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.
Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death
That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.
Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?
Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me what hast thou done?
Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews but now is my kingdom not from hence.
Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.
Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault [at all].
But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?
Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged [him].
And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put [it] on his head, and they put on him a purple robe,
And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands.
Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.
Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And [Pilate] saith unto them, Behold the man!
When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify [him], crucify [him]. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify [him] for I find no fault in him.
The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid;
And went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?
Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power [at all] against me, except it were given thee from above therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cæsar’s friend whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Cæsar.
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.
And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King!
But they cried out, Away with [him], away with [him], crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Cæsar.
Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led [him] away.
And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called [the place] of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha
Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst.
And Pilate wrote a title, and put [it] on the cross. And the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.
This title then read many of the Jews for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city and it was written in Hebrew, [and] Greek, [and] Latin.
Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.
Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.
Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also [his] coat now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.
Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the [wife] of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!
Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own [home.]
After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.
Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar and they filled a spunge with vinegar, and put [it] upon hyssop, and put [it] to his mouth.
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and [that] they might be taken away.
Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him.
But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.
And he that saw [it] bare record, and his record is true and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.
For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.
And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced.
And after this Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus and Pilate gave [him] leave. He came therefore, and took the body of Jesus.
And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound [weight].
Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.
There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews’ preparation [day]; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.
And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there
And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage.
And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine.
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come.
His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do [it].
And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.
And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare [it].
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew not whence it was (but the servants which drew the water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom,
And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse [but] thou hast kept the good wine until now.
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples and they continued there not many days.
And the Jews’ passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,
And found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting
And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers’ money, and overthrew the tables;
And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise.
And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.
Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?
Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?
But he spake of the temple of his body.
When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast [day], many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did.
The first [day] of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.
Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.
Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre.
So they ran both together and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.
And he stooping down, [and looking in], saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in.
Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie,
And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself.
Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.
But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping and as she wept, she stooped down, [and looked] into the sepulchre,
And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.
Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and [to] my God, and your God.
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and [that] he had spoken these things unto her.
Then the same day at evening, being the first [day] of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace [be] unto you.
And when he had so said, he shewed unto them [his] hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord.
Then said Jesus to them again, Peace [be] unto you as [my] Father hath sent me, even so send I you.
And when he had said this, he breathed on [them], and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; [and] whose soever [sins] ye retain, they are retained.
But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.
And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them [then] came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace [be] unto you.
Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust [it] into my side and be not faithless, but believing.
And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.
Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed blessed [are] they that have not seen, and [yet] have believed.
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book
But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.
After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he [himself].
There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the [sons] of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.
Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.
But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No.
And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt [his] fisher’s coat [unto him], (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into the sea.
And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes.
As soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.
Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.
Jesus saith unto them, Come [and] dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.
Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise.
This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.
So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, [son] of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.
He saith to him again the second time, Simon, [son] of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.
He saith unto him the third time, Simon, [son] of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry [thee] whither thou wouldest not.
This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me.
Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?
Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what [shall] this man [do]?
Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what [is that] to thee? follow thou me.
Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what [is that] to thee?
This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things and we know that his testimony is true.
And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.
There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him.
Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother’s womb, and be born?
Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and [of] the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth so is every one that is born of the Spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?
Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness.
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you [of] heavenly things?
And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, [even] the Son of man which is in heaven.
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.
He that believeth on him is not condemned but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.
But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judæa; and there he tarried with them, and baptized.
And John also was baptizing in Ænon near to Salim, because there was much water there and they came, and were baptized.
For John was not yet cast into prison.
Then there arose a question between [some] of John’s disciples and the Jews about purifying.
And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all [men] come to him.
John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven.
Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.
He that hath the bride is the bridegroom but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice this my joy therefore is fulfilled.
He must increase, but I [must] decrease.
He that cometh from above is above all he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth he that cometh from heaven is above all.
And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his testimony.
He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true.
For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God for God giveth not the Spirit by measure [unto him].
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.
He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.
When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,
Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
Now Jacob’s well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with [his] journey, sat thus on the well [and] it was about the sixth hour.
There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink.
(For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)
Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep from whence then hast thou that living water?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?
Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again
But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.
The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.
Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither.
The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband
For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband in that saidst thou truly.
The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.
Ye worship ye know not what we know what we worship for salvation is of the Jews.
But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth for the Father seeketh such to worship him.
God [is] a Spirit and they that worship him must worship [him] in spirit and in truth.
The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ when he is come, he will tell us all things.
Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am [he.]
And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the woman yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with her?
The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith to the men,
Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did is not this the Christ?
Then they went out of the city, and came unto him.
In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat.
But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.
Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought him [ought] to eat?
Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.
Say not ye, There are yet four months, and [then] cometh harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest.
And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together.
And herein is that saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth.
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour other men laboured, and ye are entered into their labours.
And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.
So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them and he abode there two days.
And many more believed because of his own word;
And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying for we have heard [him] ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.
Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee.
For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his own country.
Then when he was come into Galilee, the Galilæans received him, having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast for they also went unto the feast.
So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum.
When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judæa into Galilee, he went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his son for he was at the point of death.
Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe.
The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die.
Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way; thy son liveth. And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way.
And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told [him], saying, Thy son liveth.
Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
So the father knew that [it was] at the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth and himself believed, and his whole house.
This [is] again the second miracle [that] Jesus did, when he was come out of Judæa into Galilee.
After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep [market] a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches.
In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water.
For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the water whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.
And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years.
When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time [in that case], he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole?
The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me.
Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.
And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked and on the same day was the sabbath.
The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day it is not lawful for thee to carry [thy] bed.
He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk.
Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk?
And he that was healed wist not who it was for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in [that] place.
Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made him whole.
And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day.
But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God.
Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise.
For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel.
For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth [them]; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.
For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and they that hear shall live.
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;
And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.
Marvel not at this for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,
If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.
There is another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true.
Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth.
But I receive not testimony from man but these things I say, that ye might be saved.
He was a burning and a shining light and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.
But I have greater witness than that of John for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me.
And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.
And ye have not his word abiding in you for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.
Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life and they are they which testify of me.
And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.
I receive not honour from men.
How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that [cometh] from God only?
Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father there is [one] that accuseth you, [even] Moses, in whom ye trust.
For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me for he wrote of me.
But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?
After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is [the sea] of Tiberias.
And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased.
And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples.
And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh.
When Jesus then lifted up [his] eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
And this he said to prove him for he himself knew what he would do.
Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, saith unto him,
There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two small fishes but what are they among so many?
And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
And Jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would.
When they were filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
Therefore they gathered [them] together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had eaten.
Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone.
And when even was [now] come, his disciples went down unto the sea,
And entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them.
And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship and they were afraid.
But he saith unto them, It is I; be not afraid.
Then they willingly received him into the ship and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.
The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat, but [that] his disciples were gone away alone;
(Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks)
When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.
And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither?
Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.
Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you for him hath God the Father sealed.
Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?
Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.
They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work?
Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.
Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread.
And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.
But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not.
All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.
For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.
And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life and I will raise him up at the last day.
The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven.
And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven?
Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves.
No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him and I will raise him up at the last day.
It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.
Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.
I am that bread of life.
Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.
This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us [his] flesh to eat?
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.
As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.
This is that bread which came down from heaven not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever.
These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard [this], said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it?
When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you?
[What] and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?
It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing the words that I speak unto you, [they] are spirit, and [they] are life.
But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him.
And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father.
From that [time] many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away?
Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life.
And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God.
Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?
He spake of Judas Iscariot [the son] of Simon for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him.
Now the Jews’ feast of tabernacles was at hand.
His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judæa, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.
For [there is] no man [that] doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world.
For neither did his brethren believe in him.
Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come but your time is alway ready.
The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.
Go ye up unto this feast I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come.
When he had said these words unto them, he abode [still] in Galilee.
But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.
Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he?
And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him for some said, He is a good man others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people.
Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.
Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught.
And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?
Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or [whether] I speak of myself.
He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
Did not Moses give you the law, and [yet] none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?
The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil who goeth about to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel.
Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man.
If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day?
Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?
But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ?
Howbeit we know this man whence he is but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.
Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not.
But I know him for I am from him, and he hath sent me.
Then they sought to take him but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.
And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this [man] hath done?
The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him.
Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and [then] I go unto him that sent me.
Ye shall seek me, and shall not find [me] and where I am, [thither] ye cannot come.
Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles?
What [manner of] saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find [me] and where I am, [thither] ye cannot come?
In the last day, that great [day] of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.
(But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive for the Holy Ghost was not yet [given]; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.)
Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet.
Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee?
Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?
So there was a division among the people because of him.
And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.
Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?
The officers answered, Never man spake like this man.
Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?
Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?
But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.
Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of them,)
Doth our law judge [any] man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?
They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.
And every man went unto his own house.
Jesus went unto the mount of Olives.
And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them.
And the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and when they had set her in the midst,
They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.
Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned but what sayest thou?
This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and with [his] finger wrote on the ground, [ as though he heard them not].
So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.
And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.
And they which heard [it], being convicted by [their own] conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, [even] unto the last and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.
When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?
She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee go, and sin no more.
Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.
Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, [yet] my record is true for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.
Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.
And yet if I judge, my judgment is true for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.
It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.
I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.
Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.
These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.
Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins whither I go, ye cannot come.
Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come.
And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above ye are of this world; I am not of this world.
I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins for if ye believe not that I am [he], ye shall die in your sins.
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even [the same] that I said unto you from the beginning.
I have many things to say and to judge of you but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.
They understood not that he spake to them of the Father.
Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am [he], and [that] I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.
And he that sent me is with me the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.
As he spake these words, many believed on him.
Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, [then] are ye my disciples indeed;
And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
They answered him, We be Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin.
And the servant abideth not in the house for ever [but] the Son abideth ever.
If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
I know that ye are Abraham’s seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you.
I speak that which I have seen with my Father and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.
They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do the works of Abraham.
But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God this did not Abraham.
Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, [even] God.
Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.
Why do ye not understand my speech? [even] because ye cannot hear my word.
Ye are of [your] father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own for he is a liar, and the father of it.
And because I tell [you] the truth, ye believe me not.
Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
He that is of God heareth God’s words ye therefore hear [them] not, because ye are not of God.
Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?
Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me.
And I seek not mine own glory there is one that seeketh and judgeth.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.
Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death.
Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead whom makest thou thyself?
Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing it is my Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God
Yet ye have not known him; but I know him and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like unto you but I know him, and keep his saying.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day and he saw [it], and was glad.
Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.
Then took they up stones to cast at him but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.
And as [Jesus] passed by, he saw a man which was blind from [his] birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day the night cometh, when no man can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,
And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which is by interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing.
The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged?
Some said, This is he others [said], He is like him [but] he said, I am [he].
Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened?
He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash and I went and washed, and I received sight.
Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.
They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.
And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.
Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.
Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them.
They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet.
But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his sight.
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?
His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind
But by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not he is of age; ask him he shall speak for himself.
These [words] spake his parents, because they feared the Jews for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him.
Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the praise we know that this man is a sinner.
He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner [or no], I know not one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.
Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?
He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear wherefore would ye hear [it] again? will ye also be his disciples?
Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses’ disciples.
We know that God spake unto Moses [as for] this [fellow], we know not from whence he is.
The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and [yet] he hath opened mine eyes.
Now we know that God heareth not sinners but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth.
Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind.
If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.
They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God?
He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?
And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.
And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him.
And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.
And [some] of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also?
Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth.
Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, [and] called
Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.
Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort [you] that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints.
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not.
And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.
Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
Likewise also these [filthy] dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.
Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.
But these speak evil of those things which they know not but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.
Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.
These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear clouds [they are] without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints,
But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;
How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.
But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,
Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
And of some have compassion, making a difference
And others save with fear, pulling [them] out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.
Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present [you] faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy,
Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,
And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.
And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were [now] well stricken in years.
And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest’s office before God in the order of his course,
And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.
And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
And when Zacharias saw [him], he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.
But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.
And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.
For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb.
And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.
And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.
And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings.
And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.
And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple.
And when he came out, he could not speak unto them and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.
And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.
And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s name [was] Mary.
And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, [thou that art] highly favoured, the Lord [is] with thee blessed [art] thou among women.
And when she saw [him], she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary for thou hast found favour with God.
And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David
And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.
Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.
And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.
For with God nothing shall be impossible.
And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda;
And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.
And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost
And whence [is] this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.
And blessed [is] she that believed for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.
And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord,
And his mercy [is] on them that fear him from generation to generation.
He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
He hath put down the mighty from [their] seats, and exalted them of low degree.
He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away.
He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of [his] mercy;
Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.
And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father.
And his mother answered and said, Not [so]; but he shall be called John.
And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name.
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.
And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue [loosed], and he spake, and praised God.
And fear came on all that dwelt round about them and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judæa.
And all they that heard [them] laid [them] up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.
And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,
Blessed [be] the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed his people,
And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David;
To perform the mercy [promised] to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins,
Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us,
To give light to them that sit in darkness and [in] the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.
After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come.
Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly [is] great, but the labourers [are] few pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest.
Go your ways behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves.
Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes and salute no man by the way.
And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace [be] to this house.
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it if not, it shall turn to you again.
And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house.
And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you
And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say,
Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.
Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you.
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.
He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name.
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.
Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.
All things are delivered to me of my Father and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and [he] to whom the Son will reveal [him.]
And he turned him unto [his] disciples, and said privately, Blessed [are] the eyes which see the things that ye see
For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen [them]; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard [them.]
And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?
He said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou?
And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself.
And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right this do, and thou shalt live.
But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour?
And Jesus answering said, A certain [ man] went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded [him], and departed, leaving [him] half dead.
And by chance there came down a certain priest that way and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked [on him], and passed by on the other side.
But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was and when he saw him, he had compassion [on him],
And went to [him], and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave [them] to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.
Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?
And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.
Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain village and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word.
But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.
And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things
But one thing is needful and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.
And it came to pass, that, as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth.
Give us day by day our daily bread.
And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.
And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves;
For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him?
And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.
I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.
And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if [he ask] a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?
Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children how much more shall [your] heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass, when the devil was gone out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered.
But some of them said, He casteth out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils.
And others, tempting [him], sought of him a sign from heaven.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house [divided] against a house falleth.
If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub.
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges.
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.
When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace
But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils.
He that is not with me is against me and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out.
And when he cometh, he findeth [it] swept and garnished.
Then goeth he, and taketh [to him] seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there and the last [state] of that man is worse than the first.
And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed [is] the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked.
But he said, Yea rather, blessed [are] they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is an evil generation they seek a sign; and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn them for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon [is] here.
The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas [is] here.
No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth [it] in a secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the light.
The light of the body is the eye therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when [thine eye] is evil, thy body also [is] full of darkness.
Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness.
If thy whole body therefore [be] full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light.
And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him and he went in, and sat down to meat.
And when the Pharisee saw [it], he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner.
And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness.
[Ye] fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also?
But rather give alms of such things as ye have; and, behold, all things are clean unto you.
But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over [them] are not aware [of them.]
Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also.
And he said, Woe unto you also, [ye] lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers for they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.
Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and [some] of them they shall slay and persecute
That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;
Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.
In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known.
Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.
And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.
Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God?
But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore ye are of more value than many sparrows.
Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God
But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God.
And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven.
And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and [unto] magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say
For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.
And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.
And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?
And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness for a man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.
And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully
And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?
And he said, This will I do I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.
And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, [and] be merry.
But God said unto him, [Thou] fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?
So [is] he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.
And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body, what ye shall put on.
The life is more than meat, and the body [is more] than raiment.
Consider the ravens for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them how much more are ye better than the fowls?
And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the rest?
Consider the lilies how they grow they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
If then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more [will he clothe] you, O ye of little faith?
And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.
But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto you.
Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Let your loins be girded about, and [your] lights burning;
Blessed [are] those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.
And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find [them] so, blessed are those servants.
And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through.
Be ye therefore ready also for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not.
Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even to all?
And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom [his] lord shall make ruler over his household, to give [them their] portion of meat in due season?
Blessed [is] that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.
Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he hath.
But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken;
The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for [him], and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.
And that servant, which knew his lord’s will, and prepared not [himself], neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many [stripes].
But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few [stripes]. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.
I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be already kindled?
But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division
For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is.
And when [ye see] the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to pass.
[Ye] hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?
Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?
When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, [as thou art] in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.
I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite.
There were present at that season some that told him of the Galilæans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.
And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galilæans were sinners above all the Galilæans, because they suffered such things?
I tell you, Nay but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?
I tell you, Nay but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
He spake also this parable; A certain [man] had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.
Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?
And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung [it]
And if it bear fruit, [well] and if not, [then] after that thou shalt cut it down.
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.
And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up [herself].
And when Jesus saw her, he called [her to him], and said unto her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.
And he laid [his] hands on her and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.
And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the people, There are six days in which men ought to work in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day.
The Lord then answered him, and said, [Thou] hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or [his] ass from the stall, and lead [him] away to watering?
And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?
And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I resemble it?
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and waxed a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it.
And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God?
It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeying toward Jerusalem.
Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them,
Strive to enter in at the strait gate for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are
Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets.
But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are; depart from me, all [ye] workers of iniquity.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you [yourselves] thrust out.
And they shall come from the east, and [from] the west, and from the north, and [from] the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.
And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last.
The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee out, and depart hence for Herod will kill thee.
And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third [day] I shall be perfected.
Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the [day] following for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen [doth gather] her brood under [her] wings, and ye would not!
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate and verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until [the time] come when ye shall say, Blessed [is] he that cometh in the name of the Lord.
And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him.
And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.
And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
And they held their peace. And he took [him], and healed him, and let him go;
And answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?
And they could not answer him again to these things.
And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them,
When thou art bidden of any [man] to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him;
And he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.
But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room; that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee.
For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor [thy] rich neighbours; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompence be made thee.
But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind
And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed [is] he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.
Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and bade many
And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready.
And they all with one [consent] began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it I pray thee have me excused.
And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them I pray thee have me excused.
And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.
So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.
And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room.
And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel [them] to come in, that my house may be filled.
For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper.
And there went great multitudes with him and he turned, and said unto them,
If any [man] come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.
For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have [sufficient] to finish [it]?
Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish [it], all that behold [it] begin to mock him,
Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?
Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.
So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.
Salt [is] good but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned?
It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; [but] men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.
And he spake this parable unto them, saying,
What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?
And when he hath found [it], he layeth [it] on his shoulders, rejoicing.
And when he cometh home, he calleth together [his] friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost.
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.
Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find [it]?
And when she hath found [it], she calleth [her] friends and [her] neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost.
Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.
And he said, A certain man had two sons
And the younger of them said to [his] father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth [to me]. And he divided unto them [his] living.
And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living.
And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want.
And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat and no man gave unto him.
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father’s have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!
I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,
And am no more worthy to be called thy son make me as one of thy hired servants.
And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.
But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put [it] on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on [his] feet
And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill [it]; and let us eat, and be merry
For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.
Now his elder son was in the field and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick and dancing.
And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.
And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.
And he was angry, and would not go in therefore came his father out, and intreated him.
And he answering said to [his] father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends
But as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.
And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.
It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.
And he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods.
And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward.
Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed.
I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.
So he called every one of his lord’s debtors [unto him], and said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord?
And he said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty.
Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write fourscore.
And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light.
And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.
He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.
If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true [riches]?
And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man’s, who shall give you that which is your own?
No servant can serve two masters for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things and they derided him.
And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.
The law and the prophets [were] until John since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.
And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail.
Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from [her] husband committeth adultery.
There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day
And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores,
And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom the rich man also died, and was buried;
And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that [would come] from thence.
Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father’s house
For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.
And he said, Nay, father Abraham but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.
And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.
Then said he unto the disciples, It is impossible but that offences will come but woe [unto him], through whom they come!
It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.
Take heed to yourselves If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.
And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.
And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you.
But which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat?
And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?
Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not.
So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants we have done that which was our duty to do.
And it came to pass, as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off
And they lifted up [their] voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.
And when he saw [them], he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed.
And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God,
And fell down on [his] face at his feet, giving him thanks and he was a Samaritan.
And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where [are] the nine?
There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.
And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way thy faith hath made thee whole.
And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation
Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you.
And he said unto the disciples, The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see [it].
And they shall say to you, See here; or, see there go not after [them], nor follow [them].
For as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one [part] under heaven, shineth unto the other [part] under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in his day.
But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.
And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.
They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed [them] all.
Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.
In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in the house, let him not come down to take it away and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back.
Remember Lot’s wife.
Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it.
I tell you, in that night there shall be two [men] in one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.
Two [women] shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
Two [men] shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them, Wheresoever the body [is], thither will the eagles be gathered together.
And he spake a parable unto them [to this end], that men ought always to pray, and not to faint;
Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man
And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary.
And he would not for a while but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man;
Yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.
And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith.
And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?
I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?
And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others
Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican.
The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men [are], extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.
I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.
And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as [his] eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.
I tell you, this man went down to his house justified [rather] than the other for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
And they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch them but when [his] disciples saw [it], they rebuked them.
But Jesus called them [unto him], and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not for of such is the kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.
And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?
And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? none [is] good, save one, [that is], God.
Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honour thy father and thy mother.
And he said, All these have I kept from my youth up.
Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thou one thing sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven and come, follow me.
And when he heard this, he was very sorrowful for he was very rich.
And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!
For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
And they that heard [it] said, Who then can be saved?
And he said, The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.
Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all, and followed thee.
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God’s sake,
Then he took [unto him] the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished.
For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on
And they shall scourge [him], and put him to death and the third day he shall rise again.
And they understood none of these things and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.
And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side begging
And hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant.
And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.
And he cried, saying, Jesus, [thou] Son of David, have mercy on me.
And they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace but he cried so much the more, [Thou] Son of David, have mercy on me.
And Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him and when he was come near, he asked him,
And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight thy faith hath saved thee.
And immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God and all the people, when they saw [it], gave praise unto God.
And [Jesus] entered and passed through Jericho.
And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see him for he was to pass that [way].
And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zacchæus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house.
And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.
And when they saw [it], they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner.
And Zacchæus stood, and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore [him] fourfold.
And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.
And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should immediately appear.
He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.
And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come.
But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this [man] to reign over us.
And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.
Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds.
And he said unto him, Well, thou good servant because thou hast been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.
And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.
And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.
And another came, saying, Lord, behold, [here is] thy pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin
For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow.
And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, [thou] wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow
Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury?
And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give [it] to him that hath ten pounds.
(And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.)
For I say unto you, That unto every one which hath shall be given; and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.
But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay [them] before me.
And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called [the mount] of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
Saying, Go ye into the village over against [you]; in the which at your entering ye shall find a colt tied, whereon yet never man sat loose him, and bring [him hither].
And if any man ask you, Why do ye loose [him]? thus shall ye say unto him, Because the Lord hath need of him.
And they that were sent went their way, and found even as he had said unto them.
And as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt?
And they said, The Lord hath need of him.
And they brought him to Jesus and they cast their garments upon the colt, and they set Jesus thereon.
And as he went, they spread their clothes in the way.
And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen;
Saying, Blessed [be] the King that cometh in the name of the Lord peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.
And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy disciples.
And he answered and said unto them, I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.
And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
Saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things [which belong] unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.
For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side,
And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.
And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought;
And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him,
And could not find what they might do for all the people were very attentive to hear him.
And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Cæsar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed.
([And] this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)
And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judæa, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David)
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.
And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them, Fear not for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.
And this [shall be] a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.
And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.
And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us.
And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.
And when they had seen [it], they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child.
And all they that heard [it] wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these things, and pondered [them] in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.
And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present [him] to the Lord;
And he came by the Spirit into the temple and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said,
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word
And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him.
And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this [child] is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against;
And she [was] a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served [God] with fastings and prayers night and day.
And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom and the grace of God was upon him.
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.
And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast.
And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not [of it].
But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day’s journey; and they sought him among [their] kinsfolk and acquaintance.
And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.
And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
And when they saw him, they were amazed and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.
And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?
And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.
And it came to pass, [that] on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came upon [him] with the elders,
And spake unto him, saying, Tell us, by what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee this authority?
And he answered and said unto them, I will also ask you one thing; and answer me
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then believed ye him not?
But and if we say, Of men; all the people will stone us for they be persuaded that John was a prophet.
And they answered, that they could not tell whence [it was].
And Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.
Then began he to speak to the people this parable; A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time.
And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard but the husbandmen beat him, and sent [him] away empty.
And again he sent another servant and they beat him also, and entreated [him] shamefully, and sent [him] away empty.
And again he sent a third and they wounded him also, and cast [him] out.
Then said the lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son it may be they will reverence [him] when they see him.
But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.
So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed [him]. What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?
He shall come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to others. And when they heard [it], they said, God forbid.
And he beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?
Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him; and they feared the people for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them.
And they watched [him], and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor.
And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, neither acceptest thou the person [of any], but teachest the way of God truly
Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Cæsar, or no?
But he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt ye me?
Shew me a penny. Whose image and superscription hath it? They answered and said, Cæsar’s.
And he said unto them, Render therefore unto Cæsar the things which be Cæsar’s, and unto God the things which be God’s.
And they could not take hold of his words before the people and they marvelled at his answer, and held their peace.
Then came to [him] certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there is any resurrection; and they asked him,
Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man’s brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.
There were therefore seven brethren and the first took a wife, and died without children.
And the second took her to wife, and he died childless.
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for seven had her to wife.
And Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage
But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage
Neither can they die any more for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.
Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living for all live unto him.
Then certain of the scribes answering said, Master, thou hast well said.
And after that they durst not ask him any [question at all].
And he said unto them, How say they that Christ is David’s son?
And David himself saith in the book of Psalms, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples,
Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts;
And he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.
And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.
And he said, Of a truth I say unto you, that this poor widow hath cast in more than they all
For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God but she of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had.
And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts, he said,
[As for] these things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.
And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what sign [ will there be] when these things shall come to pass?
And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived for many shall come in my name, saying, I am [Christ]; and the time draweth near go ye not therefore after them.
But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified for these things must first come to pass; but the end [is] not by and by.
Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom
And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven.
But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute [you], delivering [you] up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake.
And it shall turn to you for a testimony.
Settle [it] therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.
And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and [some] of you shall they cause to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all [men] for my name’s sake.
But there shall not an hair of your head perish.
In your patience possess ye your souls.
And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh.
Then let them which are in Judæa flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.
For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.
And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.
And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring;
Men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.
And he spake to them a parable; Behold the fig tree, and all the trees;
When they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand.
So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.
Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled.
Heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass away.
And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and [so] that day come upon you unawares.
For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.
Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.
And in the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night he went out, and abode in the mount that is called [the mount] of Olives.
And all the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.
Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover.
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him; for they feared the people.
Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.
And he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray him unto them.
And they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.
And he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude.
Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed.
And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat.
And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare?
And he said unto them, Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in.
And ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto thee, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
And he shall shew you a large upper room furnished there make ready.
And they went, and found as he had said unto them and they made ready the passover.
And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
And he said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer
For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide [it] among yourselves
For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.
And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake [it], and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you this do in remembrance of me.
Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup [is] the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you.
But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me [is] with me on the table.
And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was determined but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed!
And they began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.
And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest.
And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.
But ye [shall] not [be] so but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.
For whether [is] greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth? [is] not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth.
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations.
And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me;
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.
And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death.
And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.
And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing.
Then said he unto them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him take [it], and likewise [his] scrip and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.
For I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors for the things concerning me have an end.
And they said, Lord, behold, here [are] two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.
And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also followed him.
And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone’s cast, and kneeled down, and prayed,
Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.
And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.
And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.
And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow,
And said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.
And while he yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him.
But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
When they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?
And one of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he touched his ear, and healed him.
Then Jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders, which were come to him, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves?
When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
Then took they him, and led [him], and brought him into the high priest’s house. And Peter followed afar off.
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them.
But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and said, This man was also with him.
And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.
And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.
And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this [fellow] also was with him for he is a Galilæan.
And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.
And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.
And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.
And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote [him].
And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?
And many other things blasphemously spake they against him.
And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council, saying,
Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe
And if I also ask [you], ye will not answer me, nor let [me] go.
Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.
Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am.
And they said, What need we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth.
And the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate.
And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this [fellow] perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Cæsar, saying that he himself is Christ a King.
And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest [it].
Then said Pilate to the chief priests and [to] the people, I find no fault in this man.
And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place.
When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilæan.
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time.
And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad for he was desirous to see him of a long [season], because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him.
Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing.
And the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused him.
And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked [him], and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together for before they were at enmity between themselves.
And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people and, behold, I, having examined [him] before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him
No, nor yet Herod for I sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him.
I will therefore chastise him, and release [him].
(Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.)
Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spake again to them.
But they cried, saying, Crucify [him], crucify him.
And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death in him I will therefore chastise him, and let [him] go.
And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.
And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.
And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their will.
And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear [it] after Jesus.
And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him.
But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.
For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
And there were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put to death.
And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots.
And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also with them derided [him], saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of God.
And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar,
And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.
But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?
And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds but this man hath done nothing amiss.
And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom.
And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise.
And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour.
And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst.
And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit and having said thus, he gave up the ghost.
Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man.
And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.
And all his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.
And, behold, [there was] a man named Joseph, a counsellor; [and he was] a good man, and a just
(The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them;) [he was] of Arimathæa, a city of the Jews who also himself waited for the kingdom of God.
This [man] went unto Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.
And he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.
And that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.
And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.
And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment.
Now upon the first [day] of the week, very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain [others] with them.
And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.
And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus.
And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments
And as they were afraid, and bowed down [their] faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?
He is not here, but is risen remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee,
And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.
Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.
And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem [about] threescore furlongs.
And it came to pass, that, while they communed [together] and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.
But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.
And he said unto them, What manner of communications [are] these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?
And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
And he said unto them, What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people
And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him.
But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done.
Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre;
And when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was alive.
And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found [it] even so as the women had said but him they saw not.
Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.
And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went and he made as though he would have gone further.
But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And he went in to tarry with them.
And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed [it], and brake, and gave to them.
And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.
And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?
And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,
And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace [be] unto you.
But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.
And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.
And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them [his] hands and [his] feet.
And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.
And he took [it], and did eat before them.
And he said unto them, These [are] the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and [in] the prophets, and [in] the psalms, concerning me.
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,
And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day
And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
And ye are witnesses of these things.
And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.
And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.
And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.
And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy
And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judæa, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,
Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to [our] father for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then?
He answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.
Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do?
And he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is appointed you.
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse [any] falsely; and be content with your wages.
And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not;
John answered, saying unto [them] all, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire
Whose fan [is] in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.
But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip’s wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,
Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison.
Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,
And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.
And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was [the son] of Heli,
Which was [the son] of Matthat, which was [the son] of Levi, which was [the son] of Melchi, which was [the son] of Janna, which was [the son] of Joseph,
Which was [the son] of Mattathias, which was [the son] of Amos, which was [the son] of Naum, which was [the son] of Esli, which was [the son] of Nagge,
Which was [the son] of Maath, which was [the son] of Mattathias, which was [the son] of Semei, which was [the son] of Joseph, which was [the son] of Juda,
Which was [the son] of Joanna, which was [the son] of Rhesa, which was [the son] of Zorobabel, which was [the son] of Salathiel, which was [the son] of Neri,
Which was [the son] of Melchi, which was [the son] of Addi, which was [the son] of Cosam, which was [the son] of Elmodam, which was [the son] of Er,
Which was [the son] of Jose, which was [the son] of Eliezer, which was [the son] of Jorim, which was [the son] of Matthat, which was [the son] of Levi,
Which was [the son] of Simeon, which was [the son] of Juda, which was [the son] of Joseph, which was [the son] of Jonan, which was [the son] of Eliakim,
Which was [the son] of Melea, which was [the son] of Menan, which was [the son] of Mattatha, which was [the son] of Nathan, which was [the son] of David,
Which was [the son] of Jesse, which was [the son] of Obed, which was [the son] of Booz, which was [the son] of Salmon, which was [the son] of Naasson,
Which was [the son] of Aminadab, which was [the son] of Aram, which was [the son] of Esrom, which was [the son] of Phares, which was [the son] of Juda,
Which was [the son] of Jacob, which was [the son] of Isaac, which was [the son] of Abraham, which was [the son] of Thara, which was [the son] of Nachor,
Which was [the son] of Saruch, which was [the son] of Ragau, which was [the son] of Phalec, which was [the son] of Heber, which was [the son] of Sala,
Which was [the son] of Cainan, which was [the son] of Arphaxad, which was [the son] of Sem, which was [the son] of Noe, which was [the son] of Lamech,
Which was [the son] of Mathusala, which was [the son] of Enoch, which was [the son] of Jared, which was [the son] of Maleleel, which was [the son] of Cainan,
Which was [the son] of Enos, which was [the son] of Seth, which was [the son] of Adam, which was [the son] of God.
And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing and when they were ended, he afterward hungered.
And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread.
And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.
And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it.
If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence
And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season.
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about.
And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.
And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,
And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.
And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son?
And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country.
And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.
But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;
But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, [a city] of Sidon, unto a woman [that was] a widow.
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.
And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath,
And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.
But he passing through the midst of them went his way,
And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.
And they were astonished at his doctrine for his word was with power.
And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice,
Saying, Let [us] alone; what have we to do with thee, [thou] Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not.
And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What a word [is] this! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.
And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about.
And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon’s house. And Simon’s wife’s mother was taken with a great fever; and they besought him for her.
And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her and immediately she arose and ministered unto them.
Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking [them] suffered them not to speak for they knew that he was Christ.
And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart from them.
And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also for therefore am I sent.
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.
And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret,
And saw two ships standing by the lake but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing [their] nets.
And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon’s, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship.
Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.
And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.
And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes and their net brake.
And they beckoned unto [their] partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink.
When Simon Peter saw [it], he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.
For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken
And so [was] also James, and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.
And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him.
And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy who seeing Jesus fell on [his] face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
And he put forth [his] hand, and touched him, saying, I will be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.
And he charged him to tell no man but go, and shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.
And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come out of every town of Galilee, and Judæa, and Jerusalem and the power of the Lord was [present] to heal them.
And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy and they sought [means] to bring him in, and to lay [him] before him.
And when they could not find by what [way] they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with [his] couch into the midst before Jesus.
And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, What reason ye in your hearts?
Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise up and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins, (he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house.
And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God.
And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day.
And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom and he said unto him, Follow me.
And he left all, rose up, and followed him.
And Levi made him a great feast in his own house and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them.
But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
And Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise [the disciples] of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink?
And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.
And he spake also a parable unto them; No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was [taken] out of the new agreeth not with the old.
And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.
But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are preserved.
No man also having drunk old [wine] straightway desireth new for he saith, The old is better.
And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing [them] in [their] hands.
And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?
And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him;
And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught and there was a man whose right hand was withered.
And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.
Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy [it]?
And looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so and his hand was restored whole as the other.
And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus.
And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.
And when it was day, he called [unto him] his disciples and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles;
Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Matthew and Thomas, James the [son] of Alphæus, and Simon called Zelotes,
And Judas [the brother] of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.
And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judæa and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases;
And the whole multitude sought to touch him for there went virtue out of him, and healed [them] all.
And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed [be ye] poor for yours is the kingdom of God.
Blessed [are ye] that hunger now for ye shall be filled. Blessed [are ye] that weep now for ye shall laugh.
Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you [from their company], and shall reproach [you], and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake.
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy for, behold, your reward [is] great in heaven for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.
But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation.
Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.
Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets.
But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,
Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you.
And unto him that smiteth thee on the [one] cheek offer also the other; and him that taketh away thy cloke forbid not [to take thy] coat also.
Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask [them] not again.
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.
For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love them.
And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same.
And if ye lend [to them] of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.
But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest for he is kind unto the unthankful and [to] the evil.
Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned forgive, and ye shall be forgiven
And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch?
The disciple is not above his master but every one that is perfect shall be as his master.
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
Either how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother’s eye.
For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.
And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will shew you to whom he is like
He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it for it was founded upon a rock.
But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.
Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready to die.
And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.
And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this
For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a synagogue.
Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof
Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.
For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth [it].
When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.
And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that had been sick.
And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.
Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow and much people of the city was with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.
And he came and touched the bier and they that bare [him] stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother.
And there came a fear on all and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people.
And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judæa, and throughout all the region round about.
And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things.
And John calling [unto him] two of his disciples sent [them] to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?
When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?
And in that same hour he cured many of [their] infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many [that were] blind he gave sight.
Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached.
And blessed is [he], whosoever shall not be offended in me.
And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness for to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings’ courts.
But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet.
This is [he], of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
And all the people that heard [him], and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John.
But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.
And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like?
They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept.
For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a devil.
The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
But wisdom is justified of all her children.
And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat.
And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that [Jesus] sat at meat in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster box of ointment,
And stood at his feet behind [him] weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe [them] with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed [them] with the ointment.
Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw [it], he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman [this is] that toucheth him for she is a sinner.
And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.
There was a certain creditor which had two debtors the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said, I suppose that [he], to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged.
And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped [them] with the hairs of her head.
Thou gavest me no kiss but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet.
My head with oil thou didst not anoint but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment.
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much but to whom little is forgiven, [the same] loveth little.
And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven.
And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also?
And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.
And it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and village, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God and the twelve [were] with him,
And certain women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils,
And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.
And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every city, he spake by a parable
A sower went out to sow his seed and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it.
And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture.
And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it.
And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be?
And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God but to others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand.
Now the parable is this The seed is the word of God.
They on the rock [are they], which, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away.
And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of [this] life, and bring no fruit to perfection.
But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep [it], and bring forth fruit with patience.
No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth [it] under a bed; but setteth [it] on a candlestick, that they which enter in may see the light.
For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither [any thing] hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.
Take heed therefore how ye hear for whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have.
Then came to him [his] mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for the press.
And it was told him [by certain] which said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.
And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it.
Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his disciples and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth.
But as they sailed he fell asleep and there came down a storm of wind on the lake; and they were filled [with water], and were in jeopardy.
And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water and they ceased, and there was a calm.
And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.
And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee.
And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in [any] house, but in the tombs.
When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, [thou] Son of God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not.
(For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For oftentimes it had caught him and he was kept bound with chains and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderness.)
And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion because many devils were entered into him.
And they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep.
And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the mountain and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And he suffered them.
Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked.
When they that fed [them] saw what was done, they fled, and went and told [it] in the city and in the country.
Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind and they were afraid.
They also which saw [it] told them by what means he that was possessed of the devils was healed.
Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear and he went up into the ship, and returned back again.
Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with him but Jesus sent him away, saying,
And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people [gladly] received him for they were all waiting for him.
And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue and he fell down at Jesus’ feet, and besought him that he would come into his house
And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,
Came behind [him], and touched the border of his garment and immediately her issue of blood stanched.
And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press [thee], and sayest thou, Who touched me?
And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.
And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace.
While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue’s [house], saying to him, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master.
But when Jesus heard [it], he answered him, saying, Fear not believe only, and she shall be made whole.
And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the maiden.
And all wept, and bewailed her but he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth.
And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.
And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise.
And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway and he commanded to give her meat.
And her parents were astonished but he charged them that they should tell no man what was done.
Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases.
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.
And he said unto them, Take nothing for [your] journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece.
And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart.
And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and healing every where.
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him and he was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead;
And Herod said, John have I beheaded but who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he desired to see him.
And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida.
And the people, when they knew [it], followed him and he received them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing.
And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals for we are here in a desert place.
But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and buy meat for all this people.
For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company.
And they did so, and made them all sit down.
Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
And they did eat, and were all filled and there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.
And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am?
They answering said, John the Baptist; but some [say], Elias; and others [say], that one of the old prophets is risen again.
He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering said, The Christ of God.
And he straitly charged them, and commanded [them] to tell no man that thing;
For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away?
For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and [in his] Father’s, and of the holy angels.
But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.
And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.
And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment [was] white [and] glistering.
And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias
Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem.
But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep and when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him.
And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias not knowing what he said.
While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them and they feared as they entered into the cloud.
And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son hear him.
And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.
And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from the hill, much people met him.
And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I beseech thee, look upon my son for he is mine only child.
And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth from him.
And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not.
And Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither.
And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare [him]. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his father.
And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples,
Let these sayings sink down into your ears for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.
But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not and they feared to ask him of that saying.
Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest.
And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child, and set him by him,
And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receiveth me and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me for he that is least among you all, the same shall be great.
And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us.
And Jesus said unto him, Forbid [him] not for he that is not against us is for us.
And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem,
And sent messengers before his face and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him.
And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem.
And when his disciples James and John saw [this], they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did?
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.
For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save [them]. And they went to another village.
And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain [man] said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air [have] nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay [his] head.
And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.
And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.
And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.
The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God;
As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
And there went out unto him all the land of Judæa, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.
And John was clothed with camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey;
And preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.
I indeed have baptized you with water but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.
And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.
And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him
And there came a voice from heaven, [saying], Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
And immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness.
And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.
Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,
And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.
And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.
And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the [son] of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets.
And straightway he called them and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.
And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue, and taught.
And they were astonished at his doctrine for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.
And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,
Saying, Let [us] alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.
And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.
And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine [is] this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.
And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee.
And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
But Simon’s wife’s mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her.
And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.
And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.
And all the city was gathered together at the door.
And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him.
And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.
And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.
And when they had found him, they said unto him, All [men] seek for thee.
And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also for therefore came I forth.
And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils.
And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth [his] hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean.
And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away;
And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
But he went out, and began to publish [it] much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places and they came to him from every quarter.
And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judæa by the farther side of Jordan and the people resort unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them again.
And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away [his] wife? tempting him.
And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you?
And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away.
And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.
But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife;
And they twain shall be one flesh so then they are no more twain, but one flesh.
What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same [matter].
And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her.
And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery.
And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them and [his] disciples rebuked those that brought [them].
But when Jesus saw [it], he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not for of such is the kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.
And he took them up in his arms, put [his] hands upon them, and blessed them.
And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? [there is] none good but one, [that is], God.
Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother.
And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth.
Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven and come, take up the cross, and follow me.
And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved for he had great possessions.
And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God!
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?
And Jesus looking upon them saith, With men [it is] impossible, but not with God for with God all things are possible.
Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee.
And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel’s,
But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.
But many [that are] first shall be last; and the last first.
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen unto him,
[Saying], Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles
And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him and the third day he shall rise again.
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come unto him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire.
And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you?
They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.
But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?
And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized
But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but [it shall be given to them] for whom it is prepared.
And when the ten heard [it], they began to be much displeased with James and John.
But Jesus called them [to him], and saith unto them, Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them.
But so shall it not be among you but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister
And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all.
For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And they came to Jericho and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimæus, the son of Timæus, sat by the highway side begging.
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, [thou] Son of David, have mercy on me.
And many charged him that he should hold his peace but he cried the more a great deal, [Thou] Son of David, have mercy on me.
And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth thee.
And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight.
And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.
And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples,
And saith unto them, Go your way into the village over against you and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring [him].
And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither.
And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met; and they loose him.
And certain of them that stood there said unto them, What do ye, loosing the colt?
And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded and they let them go.
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him; and he sat upon him.
And many spread their garments in the way and others cut down branches off the trees, and strawed [them] in the way.
And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna; Blessed [is] he that cometh in the name of the Lord
Blessed [be] the kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord Hosanna in the highest.
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple and when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve.
And on the morrow, when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry
And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing thereon and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not [yet].
And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard [it.]
And they come to Jerusalem and Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves;
And would not suffer that any man should carry [any] vessel through the temple.
And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.
And the scribes and chief priests heard [it], and sought how they might destroy him for they feared him, because all the people was astonished at his doctrine.
And when even was come, he went out of the city.
And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots.
And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, Master, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.
And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God.
For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith.
Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive [them], and ye shall have [them].
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.
But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.
And they come again to Jerusalem and as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders,
And say unto him, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things?
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, was [it] from heaven, or of men? answer me.
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?
But if we shall say, Of men; they feared the people for all [men] counted John, that he was a prophet indeed.
And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
And he began to speak unto them by parables. A [certain] man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about [it], and digged [a place for] the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.
And they caught [him], and beat him, and sent [him] away empty.
And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast stones, and wounded [him] in the head, and sent [him] away shamefully handled.
And again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others; beating some, and killing some.
Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son.
But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.
And they took him, and killed [him], and cast [him] out of the vineyard.
What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.
And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner
And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to catch him in [his] words.
And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar, or not?
Shall we give, or shall we not give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may see [it].
And they brought [it]. And he saith unto them, Whose [is] this image and superscription? And they said unto him, Cæsar’s.
And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s, and to God the things that are God’s. And they marvelled at him.
Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying,
Master, Moses wrote unto us, If a man’s brother die, and leave [his] wife [behind him], and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.
Now there were seven brethren and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed.
And the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed and the third likewise.
And the seven had her, and left no seed last of all the woman died also.
In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.
And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God?
For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven.
And as touching the dead, that they rise have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I [am] the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living ye therefore do greatly err.
And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all?
And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments [is], Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength this [is] the first commandment.
And the second [is] like, [namely] this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.
And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the truth for there is one God; and there is none other but he
And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love [his] neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him [any question.]
And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David?
For David himself said by the Holy Ghost, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.
David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he [then] his son? And the common people heard him gladly.
And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and [love] salutations in the marketplaces,
And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury and many that were rich cast in much.
And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.
And he called [unto him] his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury
For all [they] did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, [even] all her living.
And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto him, Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings [are here]!
And Jesus answering said unto him, Seest thou these great buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately,
Tell us, when shall these things be? and what [ shall be] the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?
And Jesus answering them began to say, Take heed lest any [man] deceive you
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am [Christ]; and shall deceive many.
And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not troubled for [such things] must needs be; but the end [shall] not [be] yet.
For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there shall be famines and troubles these [are] the beginnings of sorrows.
But take heed to yourselves for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them.
And the gospel must first be published among all nations.
But when they shall lead [ you], and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.
Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up against [their] parents, and shall cause them to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all [men] for my name’s sake but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.
But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judæa flee to the mountains
And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house, neither enter [therein], to take any thing out of his house
And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment.
But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!
And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter.
For [in] those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither shall be.
And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved but for the elect’s sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days.
And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here [is] Christ; or, lo, [he is] there; believe [him] not
For false Christs and false prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if [it were] possible, even the elect.
But take ye heed behold, I have foretold you all things.
But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light,
And the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken.
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.
Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near
So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, [even] at the doors.
Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till all these things be done.
Heaven and earth shall pass away but my words shall not pass away.
But of that day and [that] hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.
Take ye heed, watch and pray for ye know not when the time is.
[For the Son of man is] as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch.
Watch ye therefore for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning
Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.
And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.
After two days was [the feast of] the passover, and of unleavened bread and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put [him] to death.
But they said, Not on the feast [day], lest there be an uproar of the people.
And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured [it] on his head.
And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made?
And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me.
For ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye may do them good but me ye have not always.
She hath done what she could she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying.
Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, [this] also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.
And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests, to betray him unto them.
And when they heard [it], they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.
And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water follow him.
And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?
And he will shew you a large upper room furnished [and] prepared there make ready for us.
And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them and they made ready the passover.
And in the evening he cometh with the twelve.
And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, One of you which eateth with me shall betray me.
And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one, [Is] it I? and another [said, Is] it I?
And he answered and said unto them, [It is] one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.
The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had never been born.
And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake [it], and gave to them, and said, Take, eat this is my body.
And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave [it] to them and they all drank of it.
And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many.
Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.
And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.
But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee.
But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet [will] not I.
And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, [even] in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.
But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane and he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray.
And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy;
And saith unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death tarry ye here, and watch.
And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
And he said, Abba, Father, all things [are] possible unto thee; take away this cup from me nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt.
And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?
Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly [is] ready, but the flesh [is] weak.
And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.
And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.
And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take [your] rest it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand.
And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.
And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead [him] away safely.
And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed him.
And they laid their hands on him, and took him.
And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and [with] staves to take me?
I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not but the scriptures must be fulfilled.
And they all forsook him, and fled.
And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about [his] naked [body]; and the young men laid hold on him
And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.
And they led Jesus away to the high priest and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.
And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the high priest and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire.
And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death; and found none.
For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not together.
And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying,
And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what [is it which] these witness against thee?
But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?
And Jesus said, I am and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.
Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses?
Ye have heard the blasphemy what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.
And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.
And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest
And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.
But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.
And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is [one] of them.
And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art [one] of them for thou art a Galilaean, and thy speech agreeth [thereto].
But he began to curse and to swear, [saying], I know not this man of whom ye speak.
And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept.
And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried [him] away, and delivered [him] to Pilate.
And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto him, Thou sayest [it].
And the chief priests accused him of many things but he answered nothing.
And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.
But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.
Now at [that] feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired.
And there was [one] named Barabbas, [which lay] bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.
And the multitude crying aloud began to desire [him to do] as he had ever done unto them.
But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?
For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.
But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them.
And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then that I shall do [unto him] whom ye call the King of the Jews?
And they cried out again, Crucify him.
Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.
And [so] Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged [him], to be crucified.
And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Prætorium; and they call together the whole band.
And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his [head],
And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews!
And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing [their] knees worshipped him.
And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.
And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.
And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull.
And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh but he received [it] not.
And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.
And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.
And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.
And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors.
And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest [it] in three days,
Save thyself, and come down from the cross.
Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.
Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled him.
And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
And some of them that stood by, when they heard [it], said, Behold, he calleth Elias.
And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put [it] on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down.
And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.
And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom.
And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.
There were also women looking on afar off among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;
And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead and calling [unto him] the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.
And when he knew [it] of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.
And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.
And Mary Magdalene and Mary [the mother] of Joses beheld where he was laid.
And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the [mother] of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.
And very early in the morning the first [day] of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.
And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?
And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away for it was very great.
And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted.
And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified he is risen; he is not here behold the place where they laid him.
But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.
And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed neither said they any thing to any [man]; for they were afraid.
Now when [Jesus] was risen early the first [day] of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.
[And] she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept.
And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not.
After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country.
And they went and told [it] unto the residue neither believed they them.
Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.
And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.
And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.
So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with [them], and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.
And again he entered into Capernaum after [some] days; and it was noised that he was in the house.
And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to receive [them], no, not so much as about the door and he preached the word unto them.
And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four.
And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was and when they had broken [it] up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.
But there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
Why doth this [man] thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only?
And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts?
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, [Thy] sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,)
I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house.
And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion.
And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them.
And as he passed by, he saw Levi the [son] of Alphæus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples for there were many, and they followed him.
And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?
When Jesus heard [it], he saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast and they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?
And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.
No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.
And no man putteth new wine into old bottles else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred but new wine must be put into new bottles.
And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.
And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?
And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him?
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him?
And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.
And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand.
And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him.
And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand forth.
And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their peace.
And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched [it] out and his hand was restored whole as the other.
And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judæa,
And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and [from] beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him.
And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.
For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues.
And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.
And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.
And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth [unto him] whom he would and they came unto him.
And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,
And Simon he surnamed Peter;
And James the [son] of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder
And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the [son] of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite,
And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him and they went into an house.
And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.
And when his friends heard [of it], they went out to lay hold on him for they said, He is beside himself.
And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.
And he called them [unto him], and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?
And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.
No man can enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house.
Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation
Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.
There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, calling him.
And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.
And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren?
And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.
And he began again to teach by the sea side and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.
And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,
Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow
But when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.
And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred.
And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable.
And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God but unto them that are without, all [these] things are done in parables
The sower soweth the word.
And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.
And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness;
And have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word’s sake, immediately they are offended.
And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word,
And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.
And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear the word, and receive [it], and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred.
And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?
For there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested; neither was any thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad.
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.
And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you and unto you that hear shall more be given.
And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground;
And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.
For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.
But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.
And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?
[It is] like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth
But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it.
And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear [it].
But without a parable spake he not unto them and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.
And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, Let us pass over unto the other side.
And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him other little ships.
And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full.
And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?
And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.
And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith?
And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?
And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,
Who had [his] dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains
Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces neither could any [man] tame him.
And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones.
But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him,
And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, [thou] Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not.
For he said unto him, Come out of the man, [thou] unclean spirit.
And he asked him, What [is] thy name? And he answered, saying, My name [is] Legion for we are many.
And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country.
Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding.
And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea.
And they that fed the swine fled, and told [it] in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done.
And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind and they were afraid.
And they that saw [it] told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil, and [also] concerning the swine.
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.
And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.
Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.
And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him and all [men] did marvel.
And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him and he was nigh unto the sea.
And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet,
And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death [I pray thee], come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live.
And [Jesus] went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him.
And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,
And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,
When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.
For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.
And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?
And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?
And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.
But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.
While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue’s [house certain] which said, Thy daughter is dead why troublest thou the Master any further?
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.
And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.
And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.
And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.
And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.
And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.
And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was [of the age] of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.
And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.
And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his disciples follow him.
And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue and many hearing [him] were astonished, saying, From whence hath this [man] these things? and what wisdom [is] this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.
But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.
And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed [them].
And he marvelled because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages, teaching.
And he called [unto him] the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits;
And commanded them that they should take nothing for [their] journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in [their] purse
But [be] shod with sandals; and not put on two coats.
And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place.
And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.
And they went out, and preached that men should repent.
And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed [them].
And king Herod heard [of him]; (for his name was spread abroad) and he said, That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.
Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.
But when Herod heard [thereof], he said, It is John, whom I beheaded he is risen from the dead.
For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife for he had married her.
For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.
Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him; but she could not
For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.
And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief [estates] of Galilee;
And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give [it] thee.
And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give [it] thee, unto the half of my kingdom.
And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.
And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was exceeding sorry; [yet] for his oath’s sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.
And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought and he went and beheaded him in the prison,
And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel and the damsel gave it to her mother.
And when his disciples heard [of it], they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.
And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.
And they departed into a desert place by ship privately.
And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him.
And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd and he began to teach them many things.
And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time [is] far passed
Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread for they have nothing to eat.
He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?
He saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.
And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.
And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.
And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave [them] to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all.
And they did all eat, and were filled.
And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.
And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.
And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.
And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray.
And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.
And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.
But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out
For they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he talked with them, and saith unto them, Be of good cheer it is I; be not afraid.
And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.
For they considered not [the miracle] of the loaves for their heart was hardened.
And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore.
And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew him,
And ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.
And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment and as many as touched him were made whole.
Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem.
And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault.
For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash [their] hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.
And [when they come] from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, [as] the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.
Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?
He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoureth me with [their] lips, but their heart is far from me.
For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, [as] the washing of pots and cups and many other such like things ye do.
And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition.
For Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death
But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, [It is] Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; [he shall be free].
And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother;
Making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered and many such like things do ye.
And when he had called all the people [unto him], he said unto them, Hearken unto me every one [of you], and understand
There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.
And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable.
And he saith unto them, Are ye so without understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, [it] cannot defile him;
Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?
And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man.
For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,
Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness
All these evil things come from within, and defile the man.
And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know [it] but he could not be hid.
For a [certain] woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet
The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.
But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be filled for it is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast [it] unto the dogs.
And she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs.
And he said unto her, For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter.
And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.
And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis.
And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.
And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue;
And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain.
And he charged them that they should tell no man but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published [it];
And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.
In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples [unto him], and saith unto them,
I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way for divers of them came from far.
And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these [men] with bread here in the wilderness?
And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.
And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before [them]; and they did set [them] before the people.
And they had a few small fishes and he blessed, and commanded to set them also before [them].
So they did eat, and were filled and they took up of the broken [meat] that was left seven baskets.
And they that had eaten were about four thousand and he sent them away.
And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.
And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation.
And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the other side.
Now [the disciples] had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf.
And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and [of] the leaven of Herod.
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, [It is] because we have no bread.
And when Jesus knew [it], he saith unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?
Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember?
When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve.
And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven.
And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand?
And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him.
And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw ought.
And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking.
After that he put [his] hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up and he was restored, and saw every man clearly.
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell [it] to any in the town.
And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Cæsarea Philippi and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I am?
And they answered, John the Baptist but some [say], Elias; and others, One of the prophets.
And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ.
And he charged them that they should tell no man of him.
And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and [of] the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
And he spake that saying openly. And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him.
But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.
And when he had called the people [unto him] with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel’s, the same shall save it.
For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.
And after six days Jesus taketh [with him] Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves and he was transfigured before them.
And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.
And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses and they were talking with Jesus.
And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.
And there was a cloud that overshadowed them and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son hear him.
And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves.
And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead.
And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean.
And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come?
And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought.
But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him.
And when he came to [his] disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them.
And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to [him] saluted him.
And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them?
And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit;
And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not.
He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me.
And they brought him unto him and when he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.
And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him? And he said, Of a child.
And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us.
Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things [are] possible to him that believeth.
And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.
When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, [Thou] dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.
And [the spirit] cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead.
But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.
And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?
And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.
And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know [it].
And he came to Capernaum and being in the house he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?
But they held their peace for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who [should be] the greatest.
And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, If any man desire to be first, [the same] shall be last of all, and servant of all.
And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them,
Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.
And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he followeth not us and we forbad him, because he followeth not us.
But Jesus said, Forbid him not for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.
For he that is not against us is on our part.
For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.
And whosoever shall offend one of [these] little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.
And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched
Salt [is] good but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren;
And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon;
And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;
And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her [that had been the wife] of Urias;
And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa;
And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias;
And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias;
And Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias;
And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon
And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;
And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor;
And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;
And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob;
And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David [are] fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon [are] fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ [are] fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.
Then Joseph her husband, being a just [man], and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.
But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS for he shall save his people from their sins.
Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,
Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife
And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son and he called his name JESUS.
And when he had called unto [him] his twelve disciples, he gave them power [against] unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James [the son] of Zebedee, and John his brother;
Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James [the son] of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus;
Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into [any] city of the Samaritans enter ye not
But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils freely ye have received, freely give.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,
Nor scrip for [your] journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves for the workman is worthy of his meat.
And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.
And when ye come into an house, salute it.
And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.
Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.
But beware of men for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues;
And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.
But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.
And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child and the children shall rise up against [their] parents, and cause them to be put to death.
And ye shall be hated of all [men] for my name’s sake but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.
But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.
The disciple is not above [his] master, nor the servant above his lord.
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more [shall they call] them of his household?
Fear them not therefore for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.
What I tell you in darkness, [that] speak ye in light and what ye hear in the ear, [that] preach ye upon the housetops.
And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven.
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth I came not to send peace, but a sword.
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
And a man’s foes [shall be] they of his own household.
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.
He that findeth his life shall lose it and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.
He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward.
And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold [water] only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples,
And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?
Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and see
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them.
And blessed is [he], whosoever shall not be offended in me.
And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft [clothing] are in kings’ houses.
But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.
For this is [he], of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
And if ye will receive [it], this is Elias, which was for to come.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows,
And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil.
The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified of her children.
Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not
Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.
At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.
Even so, Father for so it seemed good in thy sight.
All things are delivered unto me of my Father and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and [he] to whomsoever the Son will reveal [him.]
Come unto me, all [ye] that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
For my yoke [is] easy, and my burden is light.
At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn; and his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.
But when the Pharisees saw [it], they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day.
But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungred, and they that were with him;
But I say unto you, That in this place is [one] greater than the temple.
But if ye had known what [this] meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.
And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue
And, behold, there was a man which had [his] hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse him.
And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift [it] out?
How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.
Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched [it] forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other.
Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how they might destroy him.
But when Jesus knew [it], he withdrew himself from thence and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all;
And charged them that they should not make him known
He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.
And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.
Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.
And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David?
But when the Pharisees heard [it], they said, This [fellow] doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.
And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand
And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?
And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast [them] out? therefore they shall be your judges.
But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you.
Or else how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house.
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men but the blasphemy [against] the [Holy] Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.
And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the [world] to come.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt for the tree is known by [his] fruit.
O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.
But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.
For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.
Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.
But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas
For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas [is] here.
The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon [is] here.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.
Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth [it] empty, swept, and garnished.
Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there and the last [state] of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.
While he yet talked to the people, behold, [his] mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.
Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee.
But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?
And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.
The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side.
And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow;
And when he sowed, some [seeds] fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up
Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth
And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away.
And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them
But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.
Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables?
He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.
Therefore speak I to them in parables because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive
For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and [their] ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with [their] eyes, and hear with [their] ears, and should understand with [their] heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
But blessed [are] your eyes, for they see and your ears, for they hear.
For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous [men] have desired to see [those things] which ye see, and have not seen [them]; and to hear [those things] which ye hear, and have not heard [them.]
Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.
When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth [it] not, then cometh the wicked [one], and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which received seed by the way side.
But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it;
Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.
He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth [it]; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field
But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.
But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares?
He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.
Let both grow together until the harvest and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them but gather the wheat into my barn.
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field
Which indeed is the least of all seeds but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.
Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them
He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;
The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked [one];
The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.
As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.
The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity;
And shall cast them into a furnace of fire there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls
Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind
Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.
So shall it be at the end of the world the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just,
And shall cast them into the furnace of fire there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.
Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe [which is] instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man [that is] an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure [things] new and old.
And it came to pass, [that] when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence.
And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this [man] this wisdom, and [these] mighty works?
Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?
And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then hath this [man] all these things?
And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own house.
And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.
For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put [him] in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife.
For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.
And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.
But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod.
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask.
And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist’s head in a charger.
And the king was sorry nevertheless for the oath’s sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he commanded [it] to be given [her].
And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.
And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel and she brought [it] to her mother.
And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.
When Jesus heard [of it], he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart and when the people had heard [thereof], they followed him on foot out of the cities.
And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.
And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.
But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart; give ye them to eat.
And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.
He said, Bring them hither to me.
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to [his] disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
And they did all eat, and were filled and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and children.
And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray and when the evening was come, he was there alone.
But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves for the wind was contrary.
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea.
And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.
But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.
And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water.
And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.
But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.
And immediately Jesus stretched forth [his] hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God.
And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Gennesaret.
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased;
And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying,
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?
For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death.
But ye say, Whosoever shall say to [his] father or [his] mother, [It is] a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;
[Ye] hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying,
This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with [their] lips; but their heart is far from me.
But in vain they do worship me, teaching [for] doctrines the commandments of men.
And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.
Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?
But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.
Let them alone they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.
Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable.
And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding?
Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?
But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies
These are [the things] which defile a man but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.
Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, [thou] Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.
But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.
But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.
But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast [it] to dogs.
And she said, Truth, Lord yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.
Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great [is] thy faith be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.
And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.
And great multitudes came unto him, having with them [those that were] lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus’ feet; and he healed them
Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see and they glorified the God of Israel.
Then Jesus called his disciples [unto him], and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.
And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?
And Jesus saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes.
And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.
And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake [them], and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
And they did all eat, and were filled and they took up of the broken [meat] that was left seven baskets full.
And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children.
And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.
The Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.
He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, [It will be] fair weather for the sky is red.
And in the morning, [It will be] foul weather to day for the sky is red and lowring. O [ye] hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not [discern] the signs of the times?
A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed.
And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take bread.
Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, [It is] because we have taken no bread.
[Which] when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread?
Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
How is it that ye do not understand that I spake [it] not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?
Then understood they how that he bade [them] not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?
And they said, Some [say that thou art] John the Baptist some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.
He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?
And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona for flesh and blood hath not revealed [it] unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.
And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ.
From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.
Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord this shall not be unto thee.
But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan thou art an offence unto me for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any [man] will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whosoever will save his life shall lose it and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works.
Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.
And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,
And was transfigured before them and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.
And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.
Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.
While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.
And when the disciples heard [it], they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.
And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only.
And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.
But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them.
Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist.
And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a [certain] man, kneeling down to him, and saying,
Lord, have mercy on my son for he is lunatick, and sore vexed for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water.
And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.
Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.
And Jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him and the child was cured from that very hour.
Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out?
And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.
Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.
And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men
And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.
And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute [money] came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute?
He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children free.
Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money that take, and give unto them for me and thee.
At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.
But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and [that] he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!
Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast [them] from thee it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.
And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast [it] from thee it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.
How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?
And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that [sheep], than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.
Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.
Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
But if he will not hear [thee, then] take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell [it] unto the church but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.
Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?
Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times but, Until seventy times seven.
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take account of his servants.
And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents.
But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.
But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.
And his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
And he would not but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt.
So when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me
Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?
And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.
And it came to pass, [that] when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan;
And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.
The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made [them] at the beginning made them male and female,
And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife and they twain shall be one flesh?
Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?
He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives but from the beginning it was not so.
And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except [it be] for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.
His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with [his] wife, it is not good to marry.
But he said unto them, All [men] cannot receive this saying, save [they] to whom it is given.
For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from [their] mother’s womb and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive [it], let him receive [it.]
Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put [his] hands on them, and pray and the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
And he laid [his] hands on them, and departed thence.
And, behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?
And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? [there is] none good but one, [that is], God but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.
He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,
Honour thy father and [thy] mother and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up what lack I yet?
Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go [and] sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven and come [and] follow me.
But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful for he had great possessions.
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
When his disciples heard [it], they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
But Jesus beheld [them], and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.
Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?
And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.
But many [that are] first shall be last; and the last [shall be] first.
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,
And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born.
And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judaea for thus it is written by the prophet,
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found [him], bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.
When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.
When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying,
Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel for they are dead which sought the young child’s life.
And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee
And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.
For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man [that is] an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.
And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace,
And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way.
Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.
And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, [that] shall ye receive.
So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them [their] hire, beginning from the last unto the first.
And when they came that [were hired] about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.
But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.
And when they had received [it], they murmured against the goodman of the house,
Take [that] thine [is], and go thy way I will give unto this last, even as unto thee.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?
So the last shall be first, and the first last for many be called, but few chosen.
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them,
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify [him] and the third day he shall rise again.
Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s children with her sons, worshipping [him], and desiring a certain thing of him.
And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.
But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able.
And he saith unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but [it shall be given to them] for whom it is prepared of my Father.
And when the ten heard [it], they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.
But Jesus called them [unto him], and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them.
But it shall not be so among you but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister;
And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, [thou] Son of David.
And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, [thou] Son of David.
And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you?
They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
So Jesus had compassion [on them], and touched their eyes and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.
And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,
Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her loose [them], and bring [them] unto me.
And if any [man] say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and straightway he will send them.
All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set [him] thereon.
And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed [them] in the way.
And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David Blessed [is] he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.
And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?
And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.
And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves,
And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.
And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them.
And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased,
And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?
And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there.
Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.
And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.
And when the disciples saw [it], they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away!
Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this [which is done] to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done.
And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.
And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him?
But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; for all hold John as a prophet.
And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.
But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard.
He answered and said, I will not but afterward he repented, and went.
And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I [go], sir and went not.
Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.
For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not but the publicans and the harlots believed him and ye, when ye had seen [it], repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.
Hear another parable There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country
And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.
And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
Again, he sent other servants more than the first and they did unto them likewise.
But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.
But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.
And they caught him, and cast [him] out of the vineyard, and slew [him].
When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?
They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out [his] vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them.
But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.
And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said,
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,
And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding and they would not come.
Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner my oxen and [my] fatlings [are] killed, and all things [are] ready come unto the marriage.
But they made light of [it], and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise
And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew [them].
But when the king heard [thereof], he was wroth and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.
Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.
Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.
So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good and the wedding was furnished with guests.
And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment
And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast [him] into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
For many are called, but few [are] chosen.
Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in [his] talk.
And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any [man] for thou regardest not the person of men.
Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?
But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, [ye] hypocrites?
Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.
And he saith unto them, Whose [is] this image and superscription?
They say unto him, Cæsar’s. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s.
When they had heard [these words], they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.
The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him,
Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.
Now there were with us seven brethren and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother
Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.
And last of all the woman died also.
Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her.
Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.
But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying,
But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.
Then one of them, [which was] a lawyer, asked [him a question], tempting him, and saying,
Master, which [is] the great commandment in the law?
Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
And the second [is] like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any [man] from that day forth ask him any more [questions.]
Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,
Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat
All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, [that] observe and do; but do not ye after their works for they say, and do not.
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay [them] on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.
But all their works they do for to be seen of men they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,
And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.
But be not ye called Rabbi for one is your Master, [even] Christ; and all ye are brethren.
And call no [man] your father upon the earth for one is your Father, which is in heaven.
Neither be ye called masters for one is your Master, [even] Christ.
But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.
But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men for ye neither go in [yourselves], neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
Woe unto you, [ye] blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!
[Ye] fools and blind for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.
[Ye] fools and blind for whether [is] greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?
Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.
And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth therein.
And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier [matters] of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
[Ye] blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.
[Thou] blind Pharisee, cleanse first that [which is] within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead [men’s] bones, and of all uncleanness.
Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,
And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.
Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
[Ye] serpents, [ye] generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes and [some] of them ye shall kill and crucify; and [some] of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute [them] from city to city
That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [thou] that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under [her] wings, and ye would not!
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed [is] he that cometh in the name of the Lord.
And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple and his disciples came to [him] for to shew him the buildings of the temple.
And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what [shall be] the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.
And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars see that ye be not troubled for all [these things] must come to pass, but the end is not yet.
For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.
All these [are] the beginning of sorrows.
Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.
And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.
And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.
And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.
But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.
And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.
When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand)
Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains
Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house
Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes.
And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!
But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day
For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.
And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.
Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here [is] Christ, or there; believe [it] not.
For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if [it were] possible, they shall deceive the very elect.
Behold, I have told you before.
Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth behold, [he is] in the secret chambers; believe [it] not.
For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken
And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer [is] nigh
So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, [even] at the doors.
Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.
But of that day and hour knoweth no [man], no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.
But as the days of Noe [were], so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,
And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
Then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
Two [women shall be] grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
Watch therefore for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.
But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.
Therefore be ye also ready for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh.
Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?
Blessed [is] that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.
Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.
But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;
And shall begin to smite [his] fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken;
The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for [him], and in an hour that he is not aware of,
And shall cut him asunder, and appoint [him] his portion with the hypocrites there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
And five of them were wise, and five [were] foolish.
They that [were] foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.
Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.
But the wise answered, saying, [Not so]; lest there be not enough for us and you but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage and the door was shut.
Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.
But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.
For [the kingdom of heaven is] as a man travelling into a far country, [who] called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods.
And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.
Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made [them] other five talents.
And likewise he that [had received] two, he also gained other two.
But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord’s money.
After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.
And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.
His lord said unto him, Well done, [thou] good and faithful servant thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.
His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed
And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth lo, [there] thou hast [that is] thine.
His lord answered and said unto him, [Thou] wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed
Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and [then] at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.
Take therefore the talent from him, and give [it] unto him which hath ten talents.
For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.
And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory
And before him shall be gathered all nations and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth [his] sheep from the goats
And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world
For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink I was a stranger, and ye took me in
Naked, and ye clothed me I was sick, and ye visited me I was in prison, and ye came unto me.
Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed [thee]? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?
When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed [thee]?
Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?
And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done [it] unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done [it] unto me.
Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels
For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in naked, and ye clothed me not sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did [it] not to one of the least of these, ye did [it] not to me.
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment but the righteous into life eternal.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples,
Ye know that after two days is [the feast of] the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill [him].
But they said, Not on the feast [day], lest there be an uproar among the people.
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat [at meat].
But when his disciples saw [it], they had indignation, saying, To what purpose [is] this waste?
For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.
When Jesus understood [it], he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.
For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.
For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did [it] for my burial.
Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, [there] shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her.
Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,
And said [unto them], What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
Now the first [day] of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover.
Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.
And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?
And he answered and said, He that dippeth [his] hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.
The Son of man goeth as it is written of him but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.
Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said.
And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed [it], and brake [it], and gave [it] to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.
And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave [it] to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;
For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.
And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.
Peter answered and said unto him, Though all [men] shall be offended because of thee, [yet] will I never be offended.
Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.
Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.
Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death tarry ye here, and watch with me.
And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me nevertheless not as I will, but as thou [wilt].
And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation the spirit indeed [is] willing, but the flesh [is] weak.
He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.
And he came and found them asleep again for their eyes were heavy.
And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.
Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Rise, let us be going behold, he is at hand that doth betray me.
And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he hold him fast.
And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.
And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.
And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out [his] hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and smote off his ear.
Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.
But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.
And they that had laid hold on Jesus led [him] away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest’s palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.
Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;
But found none yea, though many false witnesses came, [yet] found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,
And said, This [fellow] said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.
And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what [is it which] these witness against thee?
But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.
Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.
What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.
Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands,
Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?
Now Peter sat without in the palace and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.
But he denied before [them] all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.
And when he was gone out into the porch, another [maid] saw him, and said unto them that were there, This [fellow] was also with Jesus of Nazareth.
And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.
And after a while came unto [him] they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art [one] of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.
Then began he to curse and to swear, [saying], I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.
And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.
When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death
And when they had bound him, they led [him] away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.
Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What [is that] to us? see thou [to that].
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself.
And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in.
Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value;
And gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.
And Jesus stood before the governor and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.
And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?
And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.
Now at [that] feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.
And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.
Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.
When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.
Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ? [They] all say unto him, Let him be crucified.
And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.
When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but [that] rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed [his] hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person see ye [to it].
Then answered all the people, and said, His blood [be] on us, and on our children.
Then released he Barabbas unto them and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered [him] to be crucified.
Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band [of soldiers].
And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.
And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put [it] upon his head, and a reed in his right hand and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.
And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify [him].
And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name him they compelled to bear his cross.
And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull,
They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall and when he had tasted [thereof], he would not drink.
And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.
And sitting down they watched him there;
And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left.
And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,
And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest [it] in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.
Likewise also the chief priests mocking [him], with the scribes and elders, said,
He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.
He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him for he said, I am the Son of God.
The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.
Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
Some of them that stood there, when they heard [that], said, This [man] calleth for Elias.
And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled [it] with vinegar, and put [it] on a reed, and gave him to drink.
The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him.
Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.
And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;
And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,
And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.
Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him
Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee’s children.
When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathæa, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus’ disciple
He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.
And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.
And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.
Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,
Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.
Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead so the last error shall be worse than the first.
Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch go your way, make [it] as sure as ye can.
So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.
In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first [day] of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.
And, behold, there was a great earthquake for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.
His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow
And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead [men].
And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.
He is not here for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.
And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him lo, I have told you.
And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.
And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.
Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.
Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done.
And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers,
Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him [away] while we slept.
And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you.
So they took the money, and did as they were taught and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.
Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
And when they saw him, they worshipped him but some doubted.
And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea,
And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.
Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan,
And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance
And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to [our] father for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and [with] fire
Whose fan [is] in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.
Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.
But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?
And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer [ it to be so] now for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him
And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil.
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungred.
And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.
But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,
And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee and in [their] hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.
Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;
And saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.
Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him.
Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed into Galilee;
And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea for they were fishers.
And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.
And they straightway left [their] nets, and followed him.
And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James [the son] of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them.
And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.
And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.
And his fame went throughout all Syria and they brought unto him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them.
And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and [from] Decapolis, and [from] Jerusalem, and [from] Judaea, and [from] beyond Jordan.
And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain and when he was set, his disciples came unto him
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,
Blessed [are] the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed [are] they that mourn for they shall be comforted.
Blessed [are] the meek for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed [are] they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be filled.
Blessed [are] the merciful for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed [are] the pure in heart for they shall see God.
Blessed [are] the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed [are] they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are ye, when [men] shall revile you, and persecute [you], and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad for great [is] your reward in heaven for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.
Ye are the salt of the earth but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid.
Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.
For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven but whosoever shall do and teach [them], the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed [the righteousness] of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment
But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;
Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery
But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast [it] from thee for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not [that] thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast [it] from thee for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not [that] thy whole body should be cast into hell.
It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement
But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.
Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths
But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God’s throne
Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King.
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.
But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.
Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth
But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have [thy] cloke also.
And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more [than others]? do not even the publicans so?
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.
Therefore when thou doest [thine] alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth
But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen [do] for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
Be not ye therefore like unto them for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.
After this manner therefore pray ye Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as [it is] in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;
But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
The light of the body is the eye if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.
But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great [is] that darkness!
No man can serve two masters for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?
Behold the fowls of the air for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?
And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin
And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, [shall he] not much more [clothe] you, O ye of little faith?
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day [is] the evil thereof.
Judge not, that ye be not judged.
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam [is] in thine own eye?
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them for this is the law and the prophets.
Enter ye in at the strait gate for wide [is] the gate, and broad [is] the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat
Because strait [is] the gate, and narrow [is] the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?
Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither [can] a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.
Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not for it was founded upon a rock.
And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell and great was the fall of it.
And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine
For he taught them as [one] having authority, and not as the scribes.
When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
And Jesus put forth [his] hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
And Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.
And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him,
And Jesus saith unto him, I will come and heal him.
The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me and I say to this [man], Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth [it].
When Jesus heard [it], he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.
And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, [so] be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour.
And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother laid, and sick of a fever.
And he touched her hand, and the fever left her and she arose, and ministered unto them.
When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils and he cast out the spirits with [his] word, and healed all that were sick
And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air [have] nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay [his] head.
And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
But Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead.
And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.
And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves but he was asleep.
And his disciples came to [him], and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us we perish.
And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.
But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!
And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.
So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.
And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils.
And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus and when they saw him, they besought [him] that he would depart out of their coasts.
And he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.
And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.
And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This [man] blasphemeth.
And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?
For whether is easier, to say, [Thy] sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.
And he arose, and departed to his house.
But when the multitudes saw [it], they marvelled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men.
And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom and he saith unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.
And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.
And when the Pharisees saw [it], they said unto his disciples, Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?
But when Jesus heard [that], he said unto them, They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.
But go ye and learn what [that] meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?
And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
Neither do men put new wine into old bottles else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.
While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.
And Jesus arose, and followed him, and [so did] his disciples.
And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind [him], and touched the hem of his garment
For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.
But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.
And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,
He said unto them, Give place for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.
And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.
And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, [Thou] Son of David, have mercy on us.
And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord.
Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.
And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See [that] no man know [it].
But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.
As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil.
And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils.
And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly [is] plenteous, but the labourers [are] few;
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest.
Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons
Grace [be] unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you,
Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.
For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and [in] all judgment;
So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all other [places];
And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.
Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good will
The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds
But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel.
What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
According to my earnest expectation and [my] hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but [that] with all boldness, as always, [so] now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether [it be] by life, or by death.
For to me to live [is] Christ, and to die [is] gain.
But if I live in the flesh, this [is] the fruit of my labour yet what I shall choose I wot not.
For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh [is] more needful for you.
And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith;
And in nothing terrified by your adversaries which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;
Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear [to be] in me.
If [there be] therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, [being] of one accord, of one mind.
[Let] nothing [be done] through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus
Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God
But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of [things] in heaven, and [things] in earth, and [things] under the earth;
And [that] every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ [is] Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of [his] good pleasure.
Do all things without murmurings and disputings
Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.
For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.
But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.
For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your state.
For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.
But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.
Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.
But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly.
Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.
For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick.
For indeed he was sick nigh unto death but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and hold such in reputation
Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.
Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed [is] not grievous, but for you [it is] safe.
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.
For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more
Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, [of] the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee;
Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.
Yea doubtless, and I count all things [but] loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them [but] dung, that I may win Christ,
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended but [this] one thing [I do], forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.
Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample.
(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, [that they are] the enemies of the cross of Christ
Whose end [is] destruction, whose God [is their] belly, and [whose] glory [is] in their shame, who mind earthly things.)
For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ
Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.
Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, [my] dearly beloved.
I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.
And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and [with] other my fellowlabourers, whose names [are] in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord alway [and] again I say, Rejoice.
Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord [is] at hand.
Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.
And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things [are] honest, whatsoever things [are] just, whatsoever things [are] pure, whatsoever things [are] lovely, whatsoever things [are] of good report; if [there be] any virtue, and if [there be] any praise, think on these things.
Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do and the God of peace shall be with you.
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak in respect of want for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, [therewith] to be content.
I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.
I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.
Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my affliction.
Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.
For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.
Not because I desire a gift but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.
But I have all, and abound I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things [which were sent] from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God.
But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.
Now unto God and our Father [be] glory for ever and ever. Amen.
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me greet you.
All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar’s household.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you all. Amen.
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy [our] brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer,
And to [our] beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in thy house
Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers,
For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother.
Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient,
Yet for love’s sake I rather beseech [thee], being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds
But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.
For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever;
Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord?
If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself.
If he hath wronged thee, or oweth [thee] ought, put that on mine account;
I Paul have written [it] with mine own hand, I will repay [it] albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides.
Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord refresh my bowels in the Lord.
Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say.
But withal prepare me also a lodging for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you.
There salute thee Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus;
Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with your spirit, Amen.
And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in the cloud.
And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.
And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground.
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat.
This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his tents.
And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.
And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness:
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.
And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.
And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
And he said unto them, This is that which the LORD hath said, To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the LORD: bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein.
And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the LORD: to day ye shall not find it in the field.
Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.
And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.
And the LORD said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?
See, for that the LORD hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.
And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
So the people rested on the seventh day.
And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commandeth, Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your generations.
As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.
Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no.
And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the LORD hath brought you out from the land of Egypt:
And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the LORD; for that he heareth your murmurings against the LORD: and what are we, that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be, when the LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD.
And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the LORD: for he hath heard your murmurings.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink.
So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi:
For he said, Because the LORD hath sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the LORD?
And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.
Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not?
Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD.
And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?
Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.
And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.
The LORD shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward:
But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.
And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night.
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the LORD looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians,
And took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the Egyptians.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them.
But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.
Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.
And Israel saw that great work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the LORD, and believed the LORD, and his servant Moses.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did so.
And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:
And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.
And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand.
But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the LORD, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.
The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.
Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O LORD, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.
Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O LORD, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.
The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.
For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.
The LORD is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father's God, and I will exalt him.
And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
And he cried unto the LORD; and the LORD shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,
And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that healeth thee.
And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.
The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.
The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.
Thy right hand, O LORD, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O LORD, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the LORD'S passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.
And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.
And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you.
And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever.
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.
This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.
Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.
Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
For the LORD will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.
And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the LORD will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.
And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?
That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the LORD'S passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass, that at midnight the LORD smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.
Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house:
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.
Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.
And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.
And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment:
And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.
And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.
And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.
And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.
And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.
Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.
And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt.
It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.
And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof:
But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.
A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.
Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats:
Thus did all the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.
And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.
And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.
And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,
That thou shalt set apart unto the LORD all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall be the LORD'S.
And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.
And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:
And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the LORD slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.
And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt.
And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:
But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.
Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.
And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
And the LORD went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:
He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.
And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
This day came ye out in the month Abib.
And it shall be when the LORD shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.
Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the LORD.
Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.
And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the LORD did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the LORD'S law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.
And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.
Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.
And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.
For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the LORD your God, and against you.
Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death only.
And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.
And the LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.
But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.
And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days:
They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.
And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.
And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God.
Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither.
But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.
And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.
And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.
And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.
Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the locusts into thy coast:
And they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:
And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?
And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shall go?
And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto the LORD.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.
And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.
Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.
And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.
And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:
And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.
And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.
But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the LORD doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.
And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father in law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt;
And Jethro said, Blessed be the LORD, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.
And Jethro, Moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father in law before God.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.
And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?
And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God:
When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.
And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good.
Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God:
Then Jethro, Moses' father in law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.
Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:
And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.
If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said.
And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.
And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.
And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he said, I have been an alien in a strange land:
And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:
And Jethro, Moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:
And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.
And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.
And Moses told his father in law all that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD delivered them.
And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the LORD had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.
In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes,
And be ready against the third day: for the third day the LORD will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.
And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death:
There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.
And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.
And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.
And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.
And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.
And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.
And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.
For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.
And the LORD came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the LORD called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish.
And let the priests also, which come near to the LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them.
And Moses said unto the LORD, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
And the LORD said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the LORD, lest he break forth upon them.
So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.
And Moses went up unto God, and the LORD called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;
Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself.
Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine:
And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.
And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the LORD commanded him.
And all the people answered together, and said, All that the LORD hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the LORD.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD.
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the LORD God of your fathers giveth you.
And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.
And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a voice.
And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone.
And the LORD commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it.
Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire:
Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female,
The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air,
The likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth:
And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD your God which I command you.
But the LORD hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as ye are this day.
Furthermore the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, and sware that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance:
But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.
Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the LORD your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, which the LORD thy God hath forbidden thee.
For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.
When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke him to anger:
I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.
And the LORD shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the LORD shall lead you.
And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
But if from thence thou shalt seek the LORD thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
Your eyes have seen what the LORD did because of Baalpeor: for all the men that followed Baalpeor, the LORD thy God hath destroyed them from among you.
When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the LORD thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;
(For the LORD thy God is a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.
For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?
Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?
Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the LORD he is God; there is none else beside him.
Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the LORD he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.
But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God are alive every one of you this day.
Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the earth, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, for ever.
Namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.
And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel:
And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;
From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is Hermon,
And all the plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.
Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the LORD my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.
Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the LORD our God is in all things that we call upon him for?
And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.
Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee.
Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work:
But the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.
And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the LORD thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the LORD thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.
Honour thy father and thy mother, as the LORD thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.
Thou shalt not kill.
Neither shalt thou commit adultery.
Neither shalt thou steal.
The LORD our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour's.
These words the LORD spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.
And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;
And ye said, Behold, the LORD our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.
Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shall die.
For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?
Go thou near, and hear all that the LORD our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that the LORD our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it.
And the LORD heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the LORD said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.
O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!
The LORD made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.
Go say to them, Get you into your tents again.
But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it.
Ye shall observe to do therefore as the LORD your God hath commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
Ye shall walk in all the ways which the LORD your God hath commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.
The LORD talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire,
(I stood between the LORD and you at that time, to shew you the word of the LORD: for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying,
I am the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
Thou shalt have none other gods before me.
Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath the earth:
And it shall be, when the LORD thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not,
And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;
Then beware lest thou forget the LORD, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name.
Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.
Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the LORD your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.
And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the LORD our God hath commanded you?
Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand:
And the LORD shewed signs and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before our eyes:
And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.
And the LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the LORD our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day.
And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the LORD our God, as he hath commanded us.
Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.
Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one LORD:
And thou shalt love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:
And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.
And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.
When the LORD thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;
And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.
Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.
Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the LORD thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.
And the LORD will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.
And thou shalt consume all the people which the LORD thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.
If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them?
Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but shalt well remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;
The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the LORD thy God brought thee out: so shall the LORD thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.
And when the LORD thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
Moreover the LORD thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.
Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the LORD thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible.
And the LORD thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
But the LORD thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.
And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.
The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the LORD thy God.
Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.
Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.
For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the LORD be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.
But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire.
For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth.
The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people:
But because the LORD loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the LORD brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations;
And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah.
But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.
And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.
And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will pass over to Gibeah.
And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.
And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.
And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.
And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.
And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou?
And he said unto him, We are passing from Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD; and there is no man that receiveth me to house.
Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.
And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four whole months.
And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.
So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.
Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.
And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.
Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.
But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go.
Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.
And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were upon the threshold.
And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered. Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him unto his place.
And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.
And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.
And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.
And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.
And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward go your way.
And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.
And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him: therefore he lodged there again.
And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart: and the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.
And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him, Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.
These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
The LORD your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
(The LORD God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)
How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.
And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do.
So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among your tribes.
And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him.
Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it.
And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.
And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us; and we came to Kadeshbarnea.
(There are eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.)
And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the LORD our God doth give unto us.
Behold, the LORD thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and possess it, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.
And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall come.
And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:
And they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.
And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a good land which the LORD our God doth give us.
Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the commandment of the LORD your God:
And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the LORD hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.
Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakims there.
Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.
The LORD your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;
And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the LORD thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.
And the LORD heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and sware, saying,
Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see that good land, which I sware to give unto your fathers,
Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children, because he hath wholly followed the LORD.
Also the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither.
But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it.
But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.
Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the LORD, we will go up and fight, according to all that the LORD our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hill.
And the LORD said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.
So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the commandment of the LORD, and went presumptuously up into the hill.
And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah.
And ye returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.
So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye abode there.
On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying,
The LORD our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount:
Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Euphrates.
Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.
And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone:
Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as the LORD spake unto me: and we compassed mount Seir many days.
The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;
Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.
The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his possession, which the LORD gave unto them.
Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.
And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as the LORD sware unto them.
For indeed the hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were consumed.
So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,
That the LORD spake unto me, saying,
Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:
And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any possession; because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession.
And the LORD spake unto me, saying,
(That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims;
A people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the LORD destroyed them before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead:
As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day:
And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.
This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.
And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
Let me pass through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left.
Ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.
But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.
And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.
Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz.
And the LORD our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left none to remain:
Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.
From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city too strong for us: the LORD our God delivered all unto us:
Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the LORD our God forbad us.
And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore:
Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.
Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.
For the LORD thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years the LORD thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked nothing.
And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.
And the LORD said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession.
Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.
And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.
Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashanhavothjair, unto this day.
And I gave Gilead unto Machir.
And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;
The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah eastward.
And I commanded you at that time, saying, The LORD your God hath given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all that are meet for the war.
But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have given you;
And the LORD said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
Until the LORD have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall ye return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.
And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that the LORD your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall the LORD do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.
Ye shall not fear them: for the LORD your God he shall fight for you.
And I besought the LORD at that time, saying,
O Lord GOD, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy might?
I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.
But the LORD was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the LORD said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto me of this matter.
Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.
So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.
So the LORD our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.
And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars; beside unwalled towns a great many.
And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city.
But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.
And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon;
(Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion; and the Amorites call it Shenir;)
But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him to go in.
And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us.
Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.
And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.
And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock.
And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands loosed from off his hands.
And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.
And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.
And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramathlehi.
And he was sore athirst, and called on the LORD, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?
But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof Enhakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.
And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.
And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.
And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two tails.
And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.
Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.
And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.
And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.
Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi.
And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines.
So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do.
And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.
And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of garments:
But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.
And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye called us to take that we have? is it not so?
And Samson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?
And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.
And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.
And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.
And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife.
But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.
Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.
But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD, that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.
Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him.
And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.
And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well.
And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion.
And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.
And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.
And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.
And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons.
And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.
Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my priest.
And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my son.
And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.
Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house of Micah.
And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.
And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.
And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place.
Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her.
And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound.
And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.
Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a thread.
And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.
And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.
And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.
And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death;
That he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother's womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.
And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.
And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.
And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shall kill him.
And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him.
But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison house.
Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.
Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.
And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.
And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him between the pillars.
And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I may lean upon them.
Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.
And Samson called unto the LORD, and said, O Lord GOD, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other with his left.
And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.
And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than they which he slew in his life.
Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.
And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him: and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.
And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.
And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.
Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.
Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.
Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.
And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witness between us, if we do not so according to thy words.
Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the LORD in Mizpeh.
And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land?
And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.
And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon:
And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:
But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh;
Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.
Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.
And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place.
And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.
But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.
And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.
So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it?
Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess.
And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them,
While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover them within that time?
Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.
Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him.
Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.
Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.
And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands,
Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the LORD'S, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.
So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands.
And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel.
And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.
And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and I cannot go back.
And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the LORD, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.
And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.
And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.
And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,
And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.
That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.
And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob:
And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.
And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?
And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver them before me, shall I be your head?
Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven,
And the LORD delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words, which the LORD spake with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the LORD gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant.
And the LORD said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.
Furthermore the LORD spake unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:
Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven: and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.
So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.
And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the LORD your God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the LORD had commanded you.
And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.
A people great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak!
And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.
And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that descended out of the mount.
And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye provoked the LORD to wrath.
Likewise when the LORD sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the LORD your God, and ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.
Ye have been rebellious against the LORD from the day that I knew you.
Thus I fell down before the LORD forty days and forty nights, as I fell down at the first; because the LORD had said he would destroy you.
I prayed therefore unto the LORD, and said, O Lord GOD, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin:
Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the wilderness.
Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.
Understand therefore this day, that the LORD thy God is he which goeth over before thee; as a consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the LORD hath said unto thee.
Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the LORD thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the LORD hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the LORD doth drive them out from before thee.
Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these nations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the LORD sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Understand therefore, that the LORD thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiffnecked people.
Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the LORD thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the LORD.
Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to wrath, so that the LORD was angry with you to have destroyed you.
When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat bread nor drink water:
Praise ye the LORD. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power.
Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent greatness.
Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and harp.
Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and organs.
Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.
Let every thing that hath breath praise the LORD. Praise ye the LORD.
And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.
Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.
And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.
And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun.
And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel.
And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.
And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands.
And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?
Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.
And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;
Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.
And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.
And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
And the angel of the LORD called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.
And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,
And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:
That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;
And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.
And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;
Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.
And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.
And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.
And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah.
And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,
Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,
My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.
And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure
Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.
And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.
And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.
And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,
Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.
And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.
And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?
And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.
And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.
So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.
For the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife.
But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?
Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.
Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had spoken.
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bowshot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.
And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.
And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.
For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:
Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.
And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.
And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.
Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware both of them.
Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God.
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.
And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.
And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.
And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD blessed him.
And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:
For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.
For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.
And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.
And the LORD appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:
And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.
And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.
And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.
And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's servants digged a well.
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?
Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;
And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beersheba unto this day.
And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:
Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.
And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:
And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.
And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.
And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife: and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.
And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I.
And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man:
My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me them.
And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.
And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:
And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck:
And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I; who art thou, my son?
And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy firstborn; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:
And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD thy God brought it to me.
And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau's hands: so he blessed him.
And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he drank.
And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.
And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the LORD hath blessed:
Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine:
Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.
Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison;
And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn Esau.
And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be blessed.
And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.
And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;
And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.
And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.
And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.
And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran;
And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away;
Until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?
And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.
And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the LORD before my death.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth:
And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things.
And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.
And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.
And he said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.
Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.
And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not.
And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;
And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the LORD.
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren.
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things.
And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.
And I will make thee swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.
And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men's feet that were with him.
And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.
And he said, I am Abraham's servant.
And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.
And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:
But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.
And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.
But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house:
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
And I came this day unto the well, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:
Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;
And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath appointed out for my master's son.
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.
And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.
And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken.
And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshipped the LORD, bowing himself to the earth.
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.
And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.
And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.
And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.
And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.
For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.
And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.
The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.
And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.
Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.
The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham:
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.
And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.
And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isaac:
And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.
And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was barren: and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD.
And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.
And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.
And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.
And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.
And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.
And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:
And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his birthright.
And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.
And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre;
And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
And, behold, the LORD stood above it, and said, I am the LORD God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;
And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.
And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the LORD is in this place; and I knew it not.
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that city was called Luz at the first.
Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the LORD be my God:
And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.
And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;
And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;
And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padanaram;
And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;
Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.
And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.
And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.
And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.
And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?
And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.
Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.
And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man: abide with me.
And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her.
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.
And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid.
And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.
Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also.
And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.
And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place.
And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.
And when the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren.
And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the LORD hath heard that I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also: and she called his name Simeon.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called Levi.
And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she called his name Judah; and left bearing.
And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they said, Of Haran are we.
And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and feed them.
And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we water the sheep.
And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep: for she kept them.
Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.
Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.
Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:
Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.
O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind.
As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire;
So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.
Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, O LORD.
Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish:
That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over all the earth.
For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head.
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones.
They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee:
The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarenes;
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre;
Assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of Lot. Selah.
Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison:
God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods.
How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah.
Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.
Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.
They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.
I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.
But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.
Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.
Sing aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.
I am the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me.
So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked in their own counsels.
Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways!
I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.
The haters of the LORD should have submitted themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever.
He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.
Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery.
Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.
For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.
This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.
I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots.
Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me;
There shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any strange god.
Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.
The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars.
She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river.
Why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck her?
The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it.
Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine;
And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and the branch that thou madest strong for thyself.
It is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.
So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.
Turn us again, O LORD God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and come and save us.
Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
O LORD God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
Thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears to drink in great measure.
Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh among themselves.
Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it.
Thou preparedst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land.
His foundation is in the holy mountains.
The LORD loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.
I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there.
And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her.
The LORD shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah.
As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my springs are in thee.
Bow down thine ear, O LORD, hear me: for I am poor and needy.
For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God alone.
Teach me thy way, O LORD; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.
I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify thy name for evermore.
For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell.
O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before them.
But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.
Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed: because thou, LORD, hast holpen me, and comforted me.
Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee.
Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.
Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.
Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my supplications.
In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer me.
Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are there any works like unto thy works.
All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; and shall glorify thy name.
LORD, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob.
Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven.
Yea, the LORD shall give that which is good; and our land shall yield her increase.
Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us in the way of his steps.
Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered all their sin. Selah.
Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger.
Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease.
Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?
Shew us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation.
I will hear what God the LORD will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.
Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our land.
How amiable are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!
For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
For the LORD God is a sun and shield: the LORD will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
O LORD of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.
My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the LORD: my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.
Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O LORD of hosts, my King, and my God.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee. Selah.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are the ways of them.
Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain also filleth the pools.
They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appeareth before God.
O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.
Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.
I will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.
The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.
The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name.
Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.
Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.
Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O LORD, in the light of thy countenance.
In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted.
For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our horn shall be exalted.
For the LORD is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our king.
Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people.
For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.
I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:
With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.
The enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness afflict him.
And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him.
But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted.
I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.
Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.
My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him.
His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.
I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant,
If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;
If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;
Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.
It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah.
But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine anointed.
Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned his crown by casting it to the ground.
Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah.
Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his strong holds to ruin.
All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbours.
Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice.
Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in the battle.
Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground.
The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him with shame. Selah.
How long, LORD? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire?
Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?
What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.
Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth?
And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O LORD: thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.
Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;
Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O LORD; wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
Blessed be the LORD for evermore. Amen, and Amen.
For who in the heaven can be compared unto the LORD? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the LORD?
God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him.
O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee?
Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them.
O LORD God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee:
Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? Selah.
Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
But unto thee have I cried, O LORD; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.
LORD, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?
I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted.
Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have cut me off.
They came round about me daily like water; they compassed me about together.
Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness.
Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;
For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave.
I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that hath no strength:
Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.
Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.
Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.
Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.
Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: LORD, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
I will love thee, O LORD, my strength.
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals of fire.
The LORD also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire.
Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them.
Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong for me.
They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my stay.
He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
The LORD is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me.
I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.
Therefore hath the LORD recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright;
With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself froward.
For thou wilt save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down high looks.
For thou wilt light my candle: the LORD my God will enlighten my darkness.
For by thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall.
I will call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.
As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.
For who is God save the LORD? or who is a rock save our God?
It is God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect.
He maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and setteth me upon my high places.
He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.
Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great.
Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip.
I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again till they were consumed.
I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen under my feet.
For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle: thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid.
Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy them that hate me.
They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the LORD, but he answered them not.
Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them out as the dirt in the streets.
Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shall serve me.
As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit themselves unto me.
The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.
The LORD liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted.
It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.
He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.
Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O LORD, among the heathen, and sing praises unto thy name.
The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me.
Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to his anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.
In my distress I called upon the LORD, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.
Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.
He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet.
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great reward.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, my strength, and my redeemer.
Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.
Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,
Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race.
His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
The law of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.
The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.
The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the LORD are true and righteous altogether.
And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying,
And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.
But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?
Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.
And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.
And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.
Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands;
(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian:
And ye are risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother;)
If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you:
Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.
But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.
And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.
When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel,
Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech:
That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his brethren.
And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech.
And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.
And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.
And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him?
And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.
And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.
And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.
And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thee.
Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lie in wait in the field:
And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.
And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.
And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from lying in wait.
And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.
And Gaal spake again and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.
Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with them.
And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.
And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him.
And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.
And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and they told Abimelech.
And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them.
And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew them.
And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.
And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.
And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.
And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.
And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.
And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.
Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.
But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them, and gat them up to the top of the tower.
And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's head, and all to brake his skull.
Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.
And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place.
Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren:
And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.
And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar that was in Shechem.
And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.
The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.
But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.
Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.
And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host: for the host was secure.
And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.
And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun was up,
And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.
And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?
And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.
And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.
Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children of a king.
And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.
And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.
Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels' necks.
Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian.
And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the LORD shall rule over you.
And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)
And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.
And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.
And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.
Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon.
And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.
God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.
And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives.
And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he called Abimelech.
And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baalberith their god.
And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side:
Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.
And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.
And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.
And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.
And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.
And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.
Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying,
Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.
They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the LORD go down to the gates.
Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.
Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty.
Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.
And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.
Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.
Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.
The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.
Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.
They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.
Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones.
Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty.
Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.
At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots?
Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,
Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD God of Israel.
Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?
So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.
LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.
The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from before the LORD God of Israel.
In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.
They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?
My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the LORD.
And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the LORD, when Ehud was dead.
And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.
Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.
And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.
And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.
And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.
And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.
But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.
Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle.
And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.
And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.
Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.
Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and weary. So he died.
And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples.
So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.
And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.
And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel.
And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.
And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?
And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.
And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.
And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the LORD shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.
Help, LORD; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men.
They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak.
The LORD shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things:
Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us?
For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the LORD; I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him.
The words of the LORD are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.
Thou shalt keep them, O LORD, thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever.
The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.
And I said unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.
And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.
And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him, The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.
And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites.
And the LORD looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?
And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.
And the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.
And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.
Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.
And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.
And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.
And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so.
Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his sight.
And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord GOD! for because I have seen an angel of the LORD face to face.
And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.
Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it:
And build an altar unto the LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou shalt cut down.
Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.
And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.
And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.
And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them;
Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it.
And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for himself, because one hath cast down his altar.
Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.
Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel.
But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him.
And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.
And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said,
Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said.
And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water.
And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.
And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.
For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.
And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the LORD.
And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD because of the Midianites,
That the LORD sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;
And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land;
The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth good.
The LORD looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God.
They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the LORD.
There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous.
Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the LORD is his refuge.
Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the LORD bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
LORD, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart.
He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.
In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that fear the LORD. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.
He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved.
And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushanrishathaim.
And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD.
And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.
So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the king of Moab.
But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.
And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a very fat man.
And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present.
But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.
And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat.
And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly:
And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.
Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them.
When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.
And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.
And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.
And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them.
And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the LORD hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.
And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.
Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.
So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years.
And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.
And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.
And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites:
And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and forgat the LORD their God, and served Baalim and the groves.
Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years.
And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.
And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you.
And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and served Baalim:
And they forsook the LORD God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger.
And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed.
Nevertheless the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them.
And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the LORD; but they did not so.
And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.
And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned, and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.
And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this?
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice;
Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.
Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you.
And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spake these words unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the LORD.
And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.
And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the LORD, that he did for Israel.
And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.
And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;
And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth.
Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a league with us.
This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:
And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.
And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the LORD.
And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.
And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them.
And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.
And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the princes.
But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them.
That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.
This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.
And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the princes had promised them.
And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when ye dwell among us?
Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.
And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the LORD thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this thing.
And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.
And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not.
And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.
And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai,
They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;
And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry and mouldy.
And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make ye a league with us.
And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we make a league with you?
And they said unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are ye? and from whence come ye?
And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land:
And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.
And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.
And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.
And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain; but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the city.
And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.
And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.
And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.
And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.
And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.
And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.
And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.
And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.
And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.
And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.
For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of the LORD which he commanded Joshua.
And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation unto this day.
And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto this day.
So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night.
Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD God of Israel in mount Ebal,
As Moses the servant of the LORD commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace offerings.
And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.
And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.
And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.
And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready:
And I, and all the people that are with me, will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them,
(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.
Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand.
And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set the city on fire: according to the commandment of the LORD shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.
Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel;
But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he burnt upon the altar; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.
And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron's sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.
And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.
And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt offering on the altar.
And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat, which was the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first.
And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to the manner.
And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof, and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.
He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the people: and Aaron's sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about,
And the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer them before the LORD.
And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar:
And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave offering before the LORD; as Moses commanded.
And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them, and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and peace offerings.
And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the people.
And there came a fire out from before the LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.
And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tabernacle of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood before the LORD.
And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD commanded that ye should do: and the glory of the LORD shall appear unto you.
And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself, and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an atonement for them; as the LORD commanded.
Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself.
And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar:
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein, and sanctified them.
And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them.
And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.
And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin offering.
And he slew it; and Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it.
And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar.
But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.
And he killed it; and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread;
And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.
And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour, and an offering made by fire unto the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.
And he slew it; and Moses took of the blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder:
And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the LORD, he took one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the fat, and upon the right shoulder:
And he put all upon Aaron's hands, and upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave offering before the LORD.
And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering before the LORD: for of the ram of consecration it was Moses' part; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire.
And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.
As he hath done this day, so the LORD hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for you.
Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the LORD, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.
So Aaron and his sons did all things which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.
And Moses did as the LORD commanded him; and the assembly was gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And Moses said unto the congregation, This is the thing which the LORD commanded to be done.
And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.
And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him therewith.
And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thummim.
And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel.
And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.
And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.
And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.
And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?
And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?
And the captain of the LORD'S host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.
At that time the LORD said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.
And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.
And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.
Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.
For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto whom the LORD sware that he would not shew them the land, which the LORD sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey.
And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.
And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.
And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.
And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.
The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out.
And this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, before the altar.
And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour, even the memorial of it, unto the LORD.
And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.
It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the sin offering, and as the trespass offering.
All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the offerings of the LORD made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the LORD, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour;
This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the LORD in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night.
In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the LORD; it shall be wholly burnt.
For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the LORD: it is most holy.
The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation.
Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place.
But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.
All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most holy.
Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein:
And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.
Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found,
Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering.
And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest:
And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt offering: It is the burnt offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.
And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity.
And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.
But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a sin offering.
Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the LORD: it is a sin offering.
And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the LORD a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering:
And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments of the LORD; though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.
And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.
It is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the LORD.
Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty.
Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.
Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.
And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing:
And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin.
And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the LORD; one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering.
And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder:
And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a sin offering.
Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.
And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.
So the ark of the LORD compassed the city, going about it once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.
And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the LORD.
And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the LORD, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.
And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the LORD hath given you the city.
And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.
And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.
But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are consecrated unto the LORD: they shall come into the treasury of the LORD.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.
So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.
And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.
But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.
And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp of Israel.
And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD.
And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.
So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all the country.
And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.
And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.
And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before him.
And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD.
And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the LORD.
And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on before the LORD, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them.
And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
Now after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD it came to pass, that the LORD spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying,
And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying,
Remember the word which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.
Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help them;
Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD'S servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.
And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.
According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the LORD thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.
Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel.
Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.
From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.
There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.
Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest.
This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.
Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.
And when any will offer a meat offering unto the LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon:
And that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.
No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the LORD, shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the LORD made by fire.
As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the LORD: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.
And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt.
And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the LORD, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.
And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is a meat offering.
And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD:
And the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.
And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.
Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat offering.
And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things unto the LORD: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar.
And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.
And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.
Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan.
Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.
And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap.
And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;
And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)
That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.
And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan.
And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the host;
And they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.
Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.
And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.
And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.
And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.
And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the LORD your God.
And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot's house, named Rahab, and lodged there.
For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the LORD your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.
Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my father's house, and give me a true token:
And that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.
And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our business. And it shall be, when the LORD hath given us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.
And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear.
Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father's household, home unto thee.
And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.
And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country.
And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.
And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window.
And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but found them not.
And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for they be come to search out all the country.
And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were:
And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.
But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.
And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.
And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;
And she said unto the men, I know that the LORD hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.
And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.
But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of the LORD appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the children of Israel.
And the LORD said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shewed among them?
I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.
And Moses said unto the LORD, Then the Egyptians shall hear it, (for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they have heard that thou LORD art among this people, that thou LORD art seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night.
Now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.
Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.
And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!
And the LORD said, I have pardoned according to thy word:
But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the LORD.
Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice;
Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me see it:
But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it.
(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) To morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.
Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the LORD, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you:
Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against me,
And wherefore hath the LORD brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.
But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness.
And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness.
After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.
I the LORD have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.
And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land,
Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the LORD.
But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.
And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly.
And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.
And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place which the LORD hath promised: for we have sinned.
And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the LORD? but it shall not prosper.
Go not up, for the LORD is not among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies.
For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the LORD, therefore the LORD will not be with you.
But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.
Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.
And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes:
And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.
If the LORD delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.
Only rebel not ye against the LORD, neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid.
According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.
All that are born of the country shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shall do.
One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the LORD.
One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land whither I bring you,
Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the LORD.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you,
Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall ye heave it.
Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the LORD an heave offering in your generations.
And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments, which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses,
Even all that the LORD hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD commanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations;
Then it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the LORD, with his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.
And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD, and their sin offering before the LORD, for their ignorance:
And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; seeing all the people were in ignorance.
And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she goat of the first year for a sin offering.
And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the LORD, to make an atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.
Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance, both for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them.
And will make an offering by fire unto the LORD, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a sweet savour unto the LORD, of the herd, or of the flock:
But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Because he hath despised the word of the LORD, and hath broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him.
And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.
And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.
And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him.
And the LORD said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.
And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:
And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the LORD, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring:
That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God.
I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God.
And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the LORD:
Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.
Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men:
And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?
For which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the LORD: and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?
And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not come up:
Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?
Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come up.
And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the LORD, Respect not thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.
And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow:
And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the LORD every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each of you his censer.
And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.
And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the congregation.
And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown:
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.
And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.
And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little children.
And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the LORD hath sent me to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.
If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then the LORD hath not sent me.
And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the LORD?
But if the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the LORD.
And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them:
And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.
They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also.
And there came out a fire from the LORD, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.
The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered them before the LORD, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.
And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a covering of the altar:
And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face:
To be a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer incense before the LORD; that he be not as Korah, and as his company: as the LORD said to him by the hand of Moses.
But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the LORD.
And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the LORD appeared.
And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And they fell upon their faces.
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone out from the LORD; the plague is begun.
And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.
And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.
Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.
And he spake unto Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the LORD will shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.
And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the plague was stayed.
This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company;
And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the LORD to morrow: and it shall be that the man whom the LORD doth choose, he shall be holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.
And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:
Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them?
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the LORD said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before the testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.
And Moses did so: as the LORD commanded him, so did he.
And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish.
Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the LORD shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?
Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon his rod.
And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.
And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony, where I will meet with you.
And it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you.
And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was among their rods.
And Moses laid up the rods before the LORD in the tabernacle of witness.
And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
And Moses brought out all the rods from before the LORD unto all the children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the LORD your God.
And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.
And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.
And they first took their journey according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah according to their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.
And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.
And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies: and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the other did set up the tabernacle against they came.
And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their armies: and over his host was Elishama the son of Ammihud.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.
And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ocran.
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.
Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to their armies, when they set forward.
And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses' father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the LORD said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the LORD hath spoken good concerning Israel.
And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.
And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.
And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the LORD shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.
And they departed from the mount of the LORD three days' journey: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them in the three days' journey, to search out a resting place for them.
And the cloud of the LORD was upon them by day, when they went out of the camp.
And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, LORD, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee.
And when it rested, he said, Return, O LORD, unto the many thousands of Israel.
And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.
When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts shall go forward.
When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.
And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations.
And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the LORD your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
And when the people complained, it displeased the LORD: and the LORD heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the LORD burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp.
Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the LORD was kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.
And Moses said unto the LORD, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
Have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?
Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.
I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee.
And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone.
And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the LORD, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us in Egypt: therefore the LORD will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.
Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;
And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the LORD, the fire was quenched.
But even a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the LORD which is among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?
And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.
Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
And the LORD said unto Moses, Is the LORD'S hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.
And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the LORD, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.
And the LORD came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease.
But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.
And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.
And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.
And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the LORD'S people were prophets, and that the LORD would put his spirit upon them!
And he called the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of the LORD burnt among them.
And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
And there went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the face of the earth.
And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague.
And he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah: because there they buried the people that lusted.
And the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth; and abode at Hazeroth.
And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.
And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdellium.
And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.
And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.
And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.
And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.
Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother's womb.
And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee.
And the LORD said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.
And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.
And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.
And they said, Hath the LORD indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the LORD heard it.
(Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth.)
And the LORD spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.
And the LORD came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth.
And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the LORD will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.
My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.
With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the LORD shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them; and he departed.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.
Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.
And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
And see the land, what it is; and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many;
And what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong holds;
Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them.
And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether there be wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe grapes.
So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.
And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)
And they came unto the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.
The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.
And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.
And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.
And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it.
Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the children of Anak there.
The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.
And Moses by the commandment of the LORD sent them from the wilderness of Paran: all those men were heads of the children of Israel.
And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.
But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up against the people; for they are stronger than we.
And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great stature.
And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.
And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.
Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.
Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.
And the LORD said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee.
And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the LORD, them have I given thee.
And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the LORD, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house shall eat of it.
Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.
Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they bring unto the LORD, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine: nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.
And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.
But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine.
All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the LORD, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt for ever before the LORD unto thee and to thy seed with thee.
And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the tabernacle of witness.
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.
And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.
But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children of Israel they have no inheritance.
But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an heave offering unto the LORD, I have given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an heave offering of it for the LORD, even a tenth part of the tithe.
And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the winepress.
Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the LORD of all your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof the LORD'S heave offering to Aaron the priest.
Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the LORD, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of it.
And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.
Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.
And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the congregation.
And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.
And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.
And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of Israel.
And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the LORD, to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's office for every thing of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your priest's office unto you as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.
This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever.
He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days.
He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him.
This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is unclean.
And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel:
And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave:
And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at even.
This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD: the water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.
And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.
And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.
And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times:
And one shall burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn:
And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.
And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.
And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation: it is a purification for sin.
Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the LORD thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.
And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the LORD thy God with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the LORD thy God, according as the LORD thy God hath blessed thee:
And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes.
Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine:
And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.
Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD shall choose: because the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.
Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the LORD thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the LORD empty:
Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thee.
Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.
Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.
Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the LORD thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the LORD shall choose to place his name there.
That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.
Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make thee.
Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the LORD thy God hateth.
Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.
And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the morning.
Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thee:
But at the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.
And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents.
Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work therein.
Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn.
These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the LORD spake with Moses in mount Sinai.
And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine;
Because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine shall they be: I am the LORD.
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.
And Moses numbered them according to the word of the LORD, as he was commanded.
And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families; Libni, and Shimei.
And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to the house of their fathers.
Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites.
Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.
And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.
And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.
And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites.
In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward.
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.
And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.
And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.
And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary.
Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these are the families of Merari.
And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred.
And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward.
And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto,
And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.
But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the LORD, throughout their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand.
And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, when they offered strange fire before the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in the sight of Aaron their father.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the LORD) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.
And Moses numbered, as the LORD commanded him, all the firstborn among the children of Israel.
And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am the LORD.
And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites;
Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:)
And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.
And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and above them that were redeemed by the Levites:
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of the LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses.
Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.
And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.
And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.
And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.
Of all clean birds ye shall eat.
But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,
The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan,
And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant,
And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.
And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they shall not be eaten.
But of all clean fowls ye may eat.
Ye shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.
Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.
And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God always.
And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the LORD thy God shall choose to set his name there, when the LORD thy God hath blessed thee:
Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD thy God shall choose:
And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household,
And the Levite that is within thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance with thee.
At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doest.
The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.
And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall eat.
Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore they are unclean unto you.
And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcase.
These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have fins and scales shall ye eat:
At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.
Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.
For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.
And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.
And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:
Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day.
And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with thee;
Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.
It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years: and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest.
All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.
And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the LORD'S release.
Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy God year by year in the place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy household.
And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD thy God.
Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.
Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it upon the ground as water.
Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is thine with thy brother thine hand shall release;
For the LORD thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.
If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:
But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.
Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the LORD against thee, and it be sin unto thee.
These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.
But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the LORD your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety;
Then there shall be a place which the LORD your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the LORD:
And ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.
Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:
But in the place which the LORD shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.
Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.
Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as water.
Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:
But thou must eat them before the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands unto.
Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth.
Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:
When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
If the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee, as I have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.
Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.
Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.
Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.
Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which the LORD shall choose:
And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the LORD thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.
Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the LORD thy God.
When the LORD thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;
And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place.
Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.
Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for every abomination to the LORD, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods.
What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.
Ye shall not do so unto the LORD your God.
But unto the place which the LORD your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:
And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks:
And there ye shall eat before the LORD your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy God hath blessed thee.
Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.
For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which the LORD your God giveth you.
And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them;
And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before the altar.
And the LORD said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering, each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.
And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:
And his offering was one silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer:
He offered for his offering one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered:
One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, did offer:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.
And they brought their offering before the LORD, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle.
On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, did offer:
His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon, did offer:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, offered:
His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim, offered:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
Take it of them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh:
His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.
On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin, offered:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan, offered:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, offered:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.
On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, offered:
His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:
One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:
Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty shekels.
All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.
And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This was the dedication of the altar, after that it was anointed.
And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.
But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders.
At that time the LORD said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.
And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days and forty nights; and the LORD hearkened unto me at that time also, and the LORD would not destroy thee.
And the LORD said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.
Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the LORD'S thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is.
Only the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this day.
He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.
Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.
Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.
He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.
Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons; and now the LORD thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.
And I made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables in mine hand.
And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which the LORD spake unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the LORD gave them unto me.
And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the LORD commanded me.
And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead.
From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.
At that time the LORD separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.
Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the LORD is his inheritance, according as the LORD thy God promised him.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shall be his.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man's wife go aside, and commit a trespass against him,
And a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken with the manner;
And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled:
Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the LORD:
And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the water:
And the priest shall set the woman before the LORD, and uncover the woman's head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse:
And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse:
Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead:
But if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thee beside thine husband:
Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman, The LORD make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the LORD doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell;
And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, amen.
And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out with the bitter water:
And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter.
Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman's hand, and shall wave the offering before the LORD, and offer it upon the altar:
And the priest shall take an handful of the offering, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.
And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people.
And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed.
Both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.
Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.
And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp: as the LORD spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the LORD, and that person be guilty;
Then they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed.
But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed unto the LORD, even to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.
And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And thou shalt bring the Levites before the LORD: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites:
And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the LORD for an offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the LORD.
And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, unto the LORD, to make an atonement for the Levites.
And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for an offering unto the LORD.
Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be mine.
And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for an offering.
For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the firstborn of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me.
For all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, both man and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of Israel.
And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.
Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.
And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel, did to the Levites according unto all that the LORD commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.
And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them as an offering before the LORD; and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them.
And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
This is it that belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:
And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more:
But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.
And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the LORD commanded Moses.
And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according unto the pattern which the LORD had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.
And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.
Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.
And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together:
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the LORD.
The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it.
But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among his people: because he brought not the offering of the LORD in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.
And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover unto the LORD; according to the ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land.
And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until the morning.
So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.
And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents.
At the commandment of the LORD the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the LORD they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents.
And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the LORD, and journeyed not.
Let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his appointed season.
And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the LORD they abode in their tents, and according to the commandment of the LORD they journeyed.
And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they journeyed.
At the commandment of the LORD they rested in the tents, and at the commandment of the LORD they journeyed: they kept the charge of the LORD, at the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.
And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the passover.
And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.
And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day:
And those men said unto him, We are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the LORD in his appointed season among the children of Israel?
And Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the LORD will command concerning you.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and his inheritance.
There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,
Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.
For all that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD: and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thee.
Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy God.
For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.
And the LORD said unto me, They have well spoken that which they have spoken.
I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.
And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.
Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.
But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.
And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the LORD hath not spoken?
When a prophet speaketh in the name of the LORD, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.
And this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.
The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.
For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever.
And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the place which the LORD shall choose;
Then he shall minister in the name of the LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which stand there before the LORD.
They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.
When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.
When the LORD thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;
But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:
Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.
Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.
Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.
One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established.
If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which is wrong;
Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;
And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother;
Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.
Thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it.
And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.
And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither.
And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither, that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past;
Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three cities for thee.
And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto thy fathers;
Hear the right, O LORD, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips.
They are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly.
They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth;
Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
Arise, O LORD, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword:
From men which are thy hand, O LORD, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes behold the things that are equal.
Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.
Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.
Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.
I have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, O God: incline thine ear unto me, and hear my speech.
Shew thy marvellous lovingkindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up against them.
Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me about.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.
Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.
And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.
For it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.
And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.
But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear his iniquity.
Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them; This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded, saying,
What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp,
And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people:
To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them for peace offerings unto the LORD.
And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.
And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice,
And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the LORD; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.
And the LORD spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the LORD, and died;
But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the LORD, to make an atonement with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.
And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself:
And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the LORD, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail:
And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not:
And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times.
Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat:
And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their uncleanness.
And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel.
And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the LORD, and make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about.
And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which is upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.
And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat:
And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness:
And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness.
And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there:
And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people.
And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.
And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp.
And the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.
And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.
Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.
It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever.
And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest's office in his father's stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments:
And he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.
And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year. And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.
He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.
And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.
And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.
And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for the scapegoat.
And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the LORD'S lot fell, and offer him for a sin offering.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying,
And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue, shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.
And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before the LORD unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest:
And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD for his issue.
And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.
And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.
The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even.
And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.
And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.
And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.
And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean.
And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.
Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation.
And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.
And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.
And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for her before the LORD for the issue of her uncleanness.
Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle that is among them.
This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled therewith;
And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.
Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.
And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.
And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall be unclean.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that is to be made clean, and those things, before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
And the priest shall take one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave offering before the LORD:
And he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering is the priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy:
And the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:
And the priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand:
And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the LORD:
And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering:
And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD.
And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering:
This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the priest:
And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.
And if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering, and a log of oil;
And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering.
And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the LORD.
And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the LORD:
And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:
And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand:
And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the LORD:
And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering:
And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for him before the LORD.
And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper;
And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get;
Even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the LORD.
This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
When ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;
And he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague in the house:
Then the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go in to see the house:
And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;
Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days:
And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house;
Then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:
Then the priest shall command that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city:
And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an unclean place:
And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall plaister the house.
And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plaistered;
Then the priest shall come and look, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house: it is unclean.
And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the even.
And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.
And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed.
And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:
And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel over running water:
And he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water:
And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times:
And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet:
But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shall be clean.
This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house,
And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot:
To teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.
As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water:
And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose into the open field.
And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.
But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,
And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw flesh in the rising;
It is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.
And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh;
Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned white: he is clean.
But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.
And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.
Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shall come unto the priest;
And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.
The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil, and is healed,
And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be shewed to the priest;
When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests:
And if, when the priest seeth it, behold, it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy broken out of the boil.
But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:
And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague.
But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white;
Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.
But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:
And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.
And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the burning.
If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;
And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.
Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a leprosy upon the head or beard.
And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of the scall seven days:
And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the skin;
He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:
And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and, behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;
Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is unclean.
But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots;
Then the priest shall look: and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.
If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven days:
And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet is he clean.
And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.
And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead.
Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising of the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh;
He is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.
And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.
All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be.
The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be a woollen garment, or a linen garment;
Whether it be in the warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin;
And if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto the priest:
And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:
And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up it that hath the plague seven days:
And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that is made of skin; the plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean.
He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.
And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin;
Then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:
And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.
And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof:
And if it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire.
And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.
This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.
And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of the priest again:
And if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.
When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto the priest;
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.
And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.
But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying threescore and six days.
And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
Who shall offer it before the LORD, and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is the law for her that hath born a male or a female.
And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them,
And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you:
They shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination.
Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be an abomination unto you.
And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
And the vulture, and the kite after his kind;
Every raven after his kind;
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,
And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.
All fowls that creep, going upon all four, shall be an abomination unto you.
Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth;
Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.
But all other flying creeping things, which have four feet, shall be an abomination unto you.
And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean until the even.
And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.
And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even.
And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.
These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind,
Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.
And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.
These are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.
And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it shall be cleansed.
And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.
Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean.
And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth shall be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall be broken down: for they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto you.
Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be unclean.
And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it shall be clean.
But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their carcase fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.
And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.
Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.
And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.
And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be an abomination; it shall not be eaten.
Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an abomination.
Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.
For I am the LORD your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
For I am the LORD that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.
This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth:
To make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten.
And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.
And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.
And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.
Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch; they are unclean to you.
These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall ye eat.
And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the LORD, which he commanded them not.
And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean;
And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.
And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar: for it is most holy:
And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of the LORD made by fire: for so I am commanded.
And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of peace offerings of the children of Israel.
The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering before the LORD; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a statute for ever; as the LORD hath commanded.
And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying,
Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the LORD?
Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.
And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before the LORD; and such things have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the LORD?
And there went out fire from the LORD, and devoured them, and they died before the LORD.
And when Moses heard that, he was content.
Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the LORD spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.
And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said.
And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the LORD hath kindled.
And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, saying,
Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations:
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.
And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.
Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.
Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.
Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the LORD.
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.
Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD.
Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.
Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the LORD your God am holy.
And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid, betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the LORD, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass offering.
And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before the LORD for his sin which he hath done: and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.
And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of.
But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise the LORD withal.
And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times.
Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard.
Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I am the LORD.
Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.
Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my sabbaths: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.
Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the LORD your God.
Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the LORD.
And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him.
But the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.
Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.
Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I am the LORD.
Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God.
And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD, ye shall offer it at your own will.
It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the fire.
And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it shall not be accepted.
Therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the LORD: and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is thine own nakedness.
The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she is thy father's near kinswoman.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister: for she is thy mother's near kinswoman.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she is thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedness.
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near kinswomen: it is wickedness.
Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.
Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the LORD your God.
Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife, to defile thyself with her.
And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.
Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination.
Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it is confusion.
Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you:
And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you:
For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is defiled;)
That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.
For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.
After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.
Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: I am the LORD your God.
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the LORD.
None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: I am the LORD.
The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.
The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedness.
The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.
Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night:
And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.
Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.
So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so much as one.
Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until there be not one small stone found there.
And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the LORD had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.
Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.
Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.
Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David.
Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which had a well in his court; whither they went down.
And the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth, and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.
And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only:
And when Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you.
Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan.
And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.
Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother.
So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.
And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all returned: so all the people shall be in peace.
And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.
Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.
And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after his saying? if not; speak thou.
And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given is not good at this time.
For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.
Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.
And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.
And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?
And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath bidden him.
It may be that the LORD will look on mine affliction, and that the LORD will requite me good for his cursing this day.
And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.
And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there.
And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.
And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king.
And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?
And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.
And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so will I be in thy presence.
And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba said, The asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink.
Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we shall do.
And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father's concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong.
So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.
And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.
And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.
Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.
And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.
And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.
And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial:
The LORD hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.
Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head.
And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.
But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.
And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.
And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom.
And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.
And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
And the king's servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.
And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.
And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried in a place that was far off.
And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.
Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou art a stranger, and also an exile.
And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.
Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.
And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be.
And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with him.
And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.
And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the city.
And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation:
But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.
The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there come word from you to certify me.
Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they tarried there.
And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.
And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.
And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.
And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head:
Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden unto me:
But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.
And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear.
So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.
Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice!
And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him.
And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.
And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the LORD, in Hebron.
For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the LORD shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the LORD.
And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.
Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom.
And the king said, Whosoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.
Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.
Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.
And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished.
For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.
Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his handmaid.
For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.
Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad: therefore the LORD thy God will be with thee.
Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.
And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid:
And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead:
To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth.
And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.
And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.
So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king's face.
But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king's weight.
And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.
So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's face.
Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he would not come.
And come to the king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.
Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire.
Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?
And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kill me.
So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.
And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.
And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I am indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.
And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and slew him.
And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.
And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee.
And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his throne be guiltless.
And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.
And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.
And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.
And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.
And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.
Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her.
Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.
And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her.
Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.
And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.
And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying.
And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any thing to her.
And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house.
But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.
And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.
And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king's sons.
And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with thy servant.
And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he would not go, but blessed him.
Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?
But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.
Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant.
And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled.
But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.
And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.
Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead.
But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill side behind him.
And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king's sons come: as thy servant said, so it is.
And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.
But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.
So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.
And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.
And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king's son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.
And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.
So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand.
Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress him meat.
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.
And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him.
And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.
Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.
Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.
And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the LORD. And Nathan said unto David, The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.
And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.
David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.
And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?
But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.
The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:
Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the LORD, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.
Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.
And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the child may live?
But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.
And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and the LORD loved him.
And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.
And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.
And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.
Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.
And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.
But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.
And he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.
And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brickkiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem.
And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.
And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die:
And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.
And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;
And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things.
Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the LORD, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.
And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.
And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?
And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.
And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.
And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.
And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.
And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.
And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.
And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.
Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;
And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king,
And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
And if so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?
Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had sent him for.
And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate.
And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.
And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband.
And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.
And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.
And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with child.
And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.
And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.
And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a mess of meat from the king.
But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.
And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.
And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon.
And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.
Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that which seemeth him good.
And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.
And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.
And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they gathered themselves together.
And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.
And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.
And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.
And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any more.
Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.
And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.
When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.
And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men.
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.
And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.
When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians:
And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom.
And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house.
Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king?
And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.
And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and all thy servants.
So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.
And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.
And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.
And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan;
And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.
And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.
For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD'S anointed?
And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel?
Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him.
And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in peace.
And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth?
And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.
And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine eyes.
For all of my father's house were but dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king?
And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.
And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.
And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house.
And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.
Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.
And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.
And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?
I am this day fourscore years old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?
Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?
Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee.
And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.
And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto his own place.
But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!
Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of Israel.
And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David's men with him, over Jordan?
And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king's cost? or hath he given us any gift?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.
And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;
In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.
Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.
Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent.
And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom.
And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.
And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak.
And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.
And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.
Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against me.
Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.
And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.
And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people.
And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent.
Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom's place.
Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies.
And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also.
And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king's son is dead.
Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.
Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?
But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.
And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone.
And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near.
And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.
And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.
And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be the LORD thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.
And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.
But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better that thou succour us out of the city.
And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.
And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee.
And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.
And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!
And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds and by thousands.
And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.
So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim;
Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.
For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.
And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.
Praise ye the LORD. Blessed is the man that feareth the LORD, that delighteth greatly in his commandments.
The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.
His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endureth for ever.
Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.
A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he will guide his affairs with discretion.
Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the LORD.
His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies.
He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honour.
Praise ye the LORD. Praise, O ye servants of the LORD, praise the name of the LORD.
Blessed be the name of the LORD from this time forth and for evermore.
From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the LORD'S name is to be praised.
The LORD is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.
Who is like unto the LORD our God, who dwelleth on high,
Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth!
He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the LORD.
The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
The LORD shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.
The LORD hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.
The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.
He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.
He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.
Praise ye the LORD. I will praise the LORD with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.
The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.
The works of the LORD are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth for ever.
He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the LORD is gracious and full of compassion.
He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his covenant.
He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.
The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure.
They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.
He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name.
I love the LORD, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications.
I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted:
I said in my haste, All men are liars.
What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the LORD.
I will pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of all his people.
Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his saints.
O LORD, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds.
I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the LORD.
I will pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of all his people,
In the courts of the LORD'S house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD.
Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.
Then called I upon the name of the LORD; O LORD, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.
Gracious is the LORD, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.
The LORD preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.
Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the LORD hath dealt bountifully with thee.
For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
I will walk before the LORD in the land of the living.
O praise the LORD, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.
For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the LORD endureth for ever. Praise ye the LORD.
When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language;
Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.
The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.
The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.
What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?
Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like lambs?
Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob;
Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters.
Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.
O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.
Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.
The LORD hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron.
He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.
The LORD shall increase you more and more, you and your children.
Ye are blessed of the LORD which made heaven and earth.
The heaven, even the heavens, are the LORD'S: but the earth hath he given to the children of men.
The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence.
But we will bless the LORD from this time forth and for evermore. Praise the LORD.
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased.
Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not:
They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not:
They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat.
They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them.
O Israel, trust thou in the LORD: he is their help and their shield.
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: because his mercy endureth for ever.
All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the LORD will I destroy them.
They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: but in the name of the LORD I will destroy them.
They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the name of the LORD I will destroy them.
Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the LORD helped me.
The LORD is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.
The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.
The right hand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.
I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the LORD.
The LORD hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death.
Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I will praise the LORD:
Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
This gate of the LORD, into which the righteous shall enter.
I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation.
The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.
This is the LORD'S doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.
This is the day which the LORD hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
Save now, I beseech thee, O LORD: O LORD, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.
Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORD: we have blessed you out of the house of the LORD.
God is the LORD, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee.
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
Let them now that fear the LORD say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
I called upon the LORD in distress: the LORD answered me, and set me in a large place.
The LORD is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me?
The LORD taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.
It is better to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in man.
It is better to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in princes.
ALEPH. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the LORD.
With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments.
I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.
I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word.
I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.
NUN. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according unto thy word.
Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me thy judgments.
My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.
Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.
The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts.
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end.
SAMECH. I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.
Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word.
Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments of my God.
Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope.
Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually.
Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehood.
Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies.
Blessed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes.
My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments.
AIN. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.
Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.
Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.
Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.
I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.
It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they have made void thy law.
Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold.
Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way.
PE. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them.
With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple.
I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.
Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.
Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes.
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law.
TZADDI. Righteous art thou, O LORD, and upright are thy judgments.
Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very faithful.
My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.
I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.
Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it.
I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.
Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the truth.
Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my delights.
The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding, and I shall live.
KOPH. I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O LORD: I will keep thy statutes.
I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.
I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.
Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word.
Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness: O LORD, quicken me according to thy judgment.
I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.
They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.
Thou art near, O LORD; and all thy commandments are truth.
Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever.
RESH. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.
Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.
Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.
Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me according to thy judgments.
Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies.
I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not thy word.
Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O LORD, according to thy lovingkindness.
I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.
Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever.
SCHIN. Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word.
I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.
I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.
Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments.
Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.
LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.
My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.
I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee.
TAU. Let my cry come near before thee, O LORD: give me understanding according to thy word.
GIMEL. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.
Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.
My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes.
My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteousness.
Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.
I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD; and thy law is my delight.
Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments help me.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy commandments.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart.
My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times.
Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy commandments.
Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy testimonies.
Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes.
Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.
DALETH. My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.
I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy wondrous works.
My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy word.
Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.
They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.
I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.
I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame.
I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart.
HE. Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.
Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I delight.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy way.
Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.
Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.
Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.
VAU. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD, even thy salvation, according to thy word.
So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word.
And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments.
So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.
And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.
I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed.
And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.
My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.
ZAIN. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope.
O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!
This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickened me.
The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law.
I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD; and have comforted myself.
Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy law.
Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
I have remembered thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have kept thy law.
This I had, because I kept thy precepts.
CHETH. Thou art my portion, O LORD: I have said that I would keep thy words.
I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according to thy word.
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.
I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.
The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.
At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous judgments.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.
The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.
TETH. Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O LORD, according unto thy word.
Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.
Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.
Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.
The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart.
I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments.
Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes.
The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver.
JOD. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.
They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have hoped in thy word.
I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me.
Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to thy word unto thy servant.
Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight.
Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.
Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known thy testimonies.
I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.
CAPH. My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.
Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?
For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy statutes.
How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.
All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully; help thou me.
They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy precepts.
Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth.
LAMED. For ever, O LORD, thy word is settled in heaven.
BETH. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word.
Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.
They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy servants.
Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction.
I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened me.
I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.
The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies.
I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.
MEM. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.
Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with me.
I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.
And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.
And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.
And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.
And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:
And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
Thus did Moses: according to all that the LORD commanded him, so did he.
And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.
And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.
And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD commanded Moses.
On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark:
And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.
And he set the bread in order upon it before the LORD; as the LORD had commanded Moses.
And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
And he lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail:
And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.
And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.
And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.
And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat:
When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.
Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys:
But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.
For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.
And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.
And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.
And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein.
And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.
And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.
O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph.
For the LORD most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth.
He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.
He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah.
God is gone up with a shout, the LORD with the sound of a trumpet.
Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises.
For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.
God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness.
The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.
The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;
Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.
There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most High.
God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early.
The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Come, behold the works of the LORD, what desolations he hath made in the earth.
He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire.
My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father's house;
So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord; and worship thou him.
And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift; even the rich among the people shall intreat thy favour.
The king's daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.
She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.
With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the king's palace.
Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth.
I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.
Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty.
And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; whereby the people fall under thee.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre.
Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.
All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.
Kings' daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old.
Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil for themselves.
Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat; and hast scattered us among the heathen.
Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price.
Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us.
Thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people.
My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me,
For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and avenger.
All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way;
Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death.
How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.
If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god;
Shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart.
Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter.
Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression?
For our soul is bowed down to the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the earth.
Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies' sake.
For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them.
Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances for Jacob.
Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us.
For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.
But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that hated us.
In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever. Selah.
But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies.
Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
For thou art the God of my strength: why dost thou cast me off? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.
Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God my God.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God.
As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God?
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.
My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God?
When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar.
Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
Yet the LORD will command his lovingkindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.
I will say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the LORD will deliver him in time of trouble.
But thou, O LORD, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite them.
By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.
And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.
Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen.
The LORD will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.
The LORD will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness.
I said, LORD, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.
Mine enemies speak evil of me, When shall he die, and his name perish?
And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.
All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my hurt.
An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he lieth he shall rise up no more.
Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.
I waited patiently for the LORD; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.
Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O LORD: let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.
For innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart faileth me.
Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me: O LORD, make haste to help me.
Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evil.
Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto me, Aha, aha.
Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as love thy salvation say continually, The LORD be magnified.
But I am poor and needy; yet the Lord thinketh upon me: thou art my help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, O my God.
He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the LORD.
Blessed is that man that maketh the LORD his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
Many, O LORD my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.
Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required.
Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me,
I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.
I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O LORD, thou knowest.
Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world:
For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others.
Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after their own names.
Nevertheless man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.
This their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah.
Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.
But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he shall receive me. Selah.
Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased;
For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him.
Though while he lived he blessed his soul: and men will praise thee, when thou doest well to thyself.
He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see light.
Both low and high, rich and poor, together.
Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.
My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.
I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying upon the harp.
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about?
They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches;
None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him:
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness.
According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.
Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.
Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the generation following.
For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death.
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.
God is known in her palaces for a refuge.
For, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.
They saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted away.
Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail.
Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the LORD of hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah.
We have thought of thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.
Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.
And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.
And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.
And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.
And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.
And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.
And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you:
Now then do it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.
And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.
And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;
So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.
And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.
And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.
When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.
Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?
Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest.
And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew it not.
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.
And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the LORD for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner:
Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.
And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;
So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.
And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.
And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.
And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool dieth?
Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.
And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.
And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.
For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.
And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.
And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;
And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.
And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul.
And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine?
Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?
And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron.
Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.
And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.
Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.
And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.
And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite.
Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am.
And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.
And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?
Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.
Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.
Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?
And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.
So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.
And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.
And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.
But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.
And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.
And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.
And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.
And now the LORD shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.
Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.
But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;
And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.
Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;
So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.
Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him:
And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.
And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.
And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the LORD'S anointed?
And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.
And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the LORD'S anointed.
And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son:
(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)
The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!
It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance.
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.
Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.
I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.
How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!
And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.
And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.
And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?
And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.
And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here am I.
And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.
He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.
And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD had given him rest round about from all his enemies;
And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:
But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.
And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.
Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said, Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?
And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?
That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.
And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy servant.
For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.
Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?
For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art become their God.
And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said.
And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.
For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.
And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:
Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.
And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart; for the LORD is with thee.
And it came to pass that night, that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying,
In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar?
Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:
And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.
Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.
So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obededom the Gittite.
And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed Obededom, and all his household.
And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath blessed the house of Obededom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom into the city of David with gladness.
And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.
And David danced before the LORD with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.
So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.
And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart.
And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.
And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts.
And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people departed every one to his house.
And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims.
Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!
And David said unto Michal, It was before the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel: therefore will I play before the LORD.
And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honour.
Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death.
And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.
And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.
And David and all the house of Israel played before the LORD on all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.
And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.
And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.
And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shall the ark of the LORD come to me?
Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was with him.
And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.
And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake.
And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.
And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,
Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.
But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.
The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand.
Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.
And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baalperazim.
And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.
And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees.
And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.
And David did so, as the LORD had commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.
So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they anointed David king over Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.
In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.
And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.
Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David.
And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.
So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.
And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.
When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:
How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?
And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.
And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin:
And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.)
And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.
And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay on a bed at noon.
And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.
For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.
And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.
And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?
Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the king's sons.
And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.
So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.
And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.
And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.
And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.
Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.
Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!
And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.
And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?
Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master's son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.
And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan.
And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:
For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,
So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.
And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants.
And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?
And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.
But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.
And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.
And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.
So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.
And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.
Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the LORD.
And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.
And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the LORD.
And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.
Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.
And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed thee king over Israel?
And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed.
Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD?
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt.
And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.
But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God in Gilgal.
And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.
For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, he hath also rejected thee from being king.
And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.
Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD.
And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.
And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.
And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is better than thou.
And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent.
Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.
Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD thy God.
So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD.
Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.
And Samuel said, As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.
Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.
And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.
And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.
And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.
And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.
And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt.
And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.
Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. But he told not his father.
But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign unto us.
And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.
And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.
And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him.
And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a yoke of oxen might plow.
And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.
And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another.
Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now, and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.
And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.
And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased: and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.
And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him were about six hundred men;
And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.
Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.
Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.
So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over unto Bethaven.
And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any food.
And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey upon the ground.
And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath.
But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.
Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food this day. And the people were faint.
Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey.
And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD'S priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.
How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?
And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint.
And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with the blood.
Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the LORD, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.
And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and slew them there.
And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first altar that he built unto the LORD.
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.
And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he answered him not that day.
And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people: and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.
For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people that answered him.
And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.
Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect lot. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.
And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.
Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.
And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.
And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.
Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the Philistines went to their own place.
So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.
And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.
Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua: and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:
The forefront of the one was situate northward over against Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.
And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.
And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.
And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him.
And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few.
And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.
Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and we will discover ourselves unto them.
If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.
Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.
And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together.
When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul.
And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.
And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.
But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.
And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days.
And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren;
And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.
Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.
And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.
And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for the battle.
For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army against army.
And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.
And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard them.
And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid.
And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.
And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?
And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that killeth him.
And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.
And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?
And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between them.
And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.
And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed them before Saul: and he sent for him.
And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.
And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.
And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him.
Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of the living God.
David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the LORD be with thee.
And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.
And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.
And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.
And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine.
And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went before him.
And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.
And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.
Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.
This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.
And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD'S, and he will give you into our hands.
And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet David, that David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.
And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.
And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.
So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of David.
Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.
And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.
And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.
And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.
And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.
And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.
And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.
And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders.
And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went before him.
And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.
If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us.
And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons.
Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these.
And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come hither.
And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.
But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the LORD troubled him.
And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thee.
Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.
And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me.
Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the LORD is with him.
Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David thy son, which is with the sheep.
And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the LORD.
And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.
And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer.
And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.
And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.
And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.
And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.
And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD'S anointed is before him.
But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the LORD looketh on the heart.
Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.
Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this.
Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabeshgilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.
Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.
And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.
And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.
And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel.
Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.
And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.
And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel: and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.
Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices, and wept.
And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh.
And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly.
And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD fell on the people, and they came out with one consent.
And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.
And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot, ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.
Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?
And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them.
And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?
And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.
And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye? And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no where, we came to Samuel.
And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you.
And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not.
And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh;
And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you:
And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and by your thousands.
When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.
Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold, he hath hid himself among the stuff.
And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.
And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the LORD hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, God save the king.
Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.
And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched.
But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents. But he held his peace.
Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands.
After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:
And the Spirit of the LORD will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.
And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.
And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass that day.
Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,
And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash;
Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering.
And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.
But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the LORD hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the LORD commanded thee.
And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six hundred men.
And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in Michmash.
And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual:
And another company turned the way to Bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.
Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:
Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.
So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.
And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of Michmash.
And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.
And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.
And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven.
When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.
And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.
And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.
And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.
And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.
And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.
And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe.
And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the LORD your God was your king.
Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you.
If ye will fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue following the LORD your God:
But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD be against you, as it was against your fathers.
Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the LORD will do before your eyes.
Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the LORD, and he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking you a king.
So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.
And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king.
And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before you from my childhood unto this day.
And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart;
And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are vain.
For the LORD will not forsake his people for his great name's sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people.
Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way:
Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.
Behold, here I am: witness against me before the LORD, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.
And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.
And he said unto them, The LORD is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witness.
And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the LORD of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to your fathers.
When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.
And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy people.
And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me? are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have an husband also to night, and should also bear sons;
Would ye tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your sakes that the hand of the LORD is gone out against me.
And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her.
And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.
And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:
Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then she left speaking unto her.
So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?
And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there.
And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.
I went out full, and the LORD hath brought me home again empty: why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the LORD hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath afflicted me?
So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest.
And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two sons.
And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten years.
And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband.
Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how that the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread.
Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah.
And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her mother's house: the LORD deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me.
The LORD grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept.
And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.
Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?
And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore.
The LORD recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the LORD God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.
Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.
And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left.
And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.
So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.
And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that she had reserved after she was sufficed.
And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.
And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.
And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the LORD, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen.
And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.
And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not in any other field.
So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.
And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.
And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The LORD be with you. And they answered him, The LORD bless thee.
Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this?
And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab:
And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she tarried a little in the house.
Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens:
Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn.
Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
And he said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.
And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman.
And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I.
Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth: lie down until the morning.
And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman came into the floor.
Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold it. And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her: and she went into the city.
And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.
And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.
Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day.
And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.
Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.
And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet, and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.
And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do.
And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that her mother in law bade her.
And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.
And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.
And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman.
Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and, behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down.
Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.
And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, We are witnesses. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:
And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD shall give thee of this young woman.
So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto her, the LORD gave her conception, and she bare a son.
And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the LORD, which hath not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel.
And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.
And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it.
And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of Jesse, the father of David.
Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,
And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab,
And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down.
And Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,
And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed,
And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.
And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelech's:
And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.
Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot redeem it.
Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in Israel.
Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew off his shoe.
And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi.
And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul's hand.
And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.
And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and was departed from Saul.
Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.
And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the LORD was with him.
Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.
But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.
And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD'S battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.
And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?
But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father's house.
And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.
And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the twain.
And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.
And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?
And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.
And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.
Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.
And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that Michal Saul's daughter loved him.
And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David's enemy continually.
Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.
Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.
And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.
And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.
And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick.
And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.
And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.
And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:
And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.
These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedness.
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.
And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.
And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of man.
Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.
And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.
And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;
And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;
And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.
And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.
And God spake unto Noah, saying,
Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.
And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him:
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;
And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.
While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.
And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.
And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:
And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
And the thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he slew him also.
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had covered her face.
And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?
And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?
And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.
And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.
And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not.
Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this place.
And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.
And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.
And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.
And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.
And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez.
And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.
And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called Zarah.
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.
And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.
And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.
And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD slew him.
And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.
In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of Israel.
When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth.
And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of war.
And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah: wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it is behind Kirjathjearim.
And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah.
Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.
And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.
And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war, which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.
And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons of war.
And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest unto them, What do ye?
And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel?
And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land: who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged there.
And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.
So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the carriage before them.
And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtook the children of Dan.
And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?
And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee?
And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.
And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.
And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire.
And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.
And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first.
When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?
And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.
And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.
And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest.
And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.
And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is your way wherein ye go.
Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no business with any man.
And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, What say ye?
And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to possess the land.
And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:
And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.
And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became David's servants. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.
And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;
And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers.
And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts.
David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.
And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.
Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.
And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.
When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,
Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I am the LORD your God.
And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new.
And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you.
And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people.
I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.
But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments;
And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant:
I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.
And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.
And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass:
Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.
And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.
And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your high ways shall be desolate.
And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;
Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.
And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.
And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me;
Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.
If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.
And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.
And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.
And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste.
Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.
As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.
And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.
And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.
And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.
And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.
Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.
If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me;
And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity:
Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.
The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.
And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the LORD their God.
But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.
These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the LORD made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.
And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.
And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.
And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.
For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.
And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the LORD, then he shall present the beast before the priest:
And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.
But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation.
And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the LORD, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.
And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be his.
And if a man shall sanctify unto the LORD some part of a field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver.
If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand.
But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy estimation.
And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be assured to him.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the LORD by thy estimation.
And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.
But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the priest's.
And if a man sanctify unto the LORD a field which he hath bought, which is not of the fields of his possession;
Then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto the LORD.
In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did belong.
And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the LORD'S firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is the LORD'S.
And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.
Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the LORD of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is most holy unto the LORD.
None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; but shall surely be put to death.
And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD'S: it is holy unto the LORD.
And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part thereof.
And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the LORD.
He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.
These are the commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai.
And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.
And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.
And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.
And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the LORD, all that any man giveth of such unto the LORD shall be holy.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp;
And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the LORD, and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:)
And they put him in ward, that the mind of the LORD might be shewed them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.
And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the LORD, shall be put to death.
And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.
And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.
And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him;
Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.
Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again.
And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death.
Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country: for I am the LORD your God.
And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the LORD commanded Moses.
Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning before the LORD continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your generations.
He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the LORD continually.
And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be in one cake.
And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the LORD.
And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the LORD continually, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.
And it shall be Aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the LORD made by fire by a perpetual statute.
And the LORD spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying,
And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.
A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed.
For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.
In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession.
And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy neighbour's hand, ye shall not oppress one another:
According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he shall sell unto thee:
According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.
Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I am the LORD your God.
Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.
And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the LORD.
And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase:
Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.
And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old store.
The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine; for ye are strangers and sojourners with me.
And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.
If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.
And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;
Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession.
But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession.
And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may he redeem it.
Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof;
And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the jubile.
But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.
Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time.
And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel.
But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it is their perpetual possession.
And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.
Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee.
Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.
I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.
And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the LORD: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.
But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile:
And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.
For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.
Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God.
Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.
Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.
And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.
And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family:
After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him:
Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or if he be able, he may redeem himself.
That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a year of rest unto the land.
And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.
If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for.
And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give him again the price of his redemption.
And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.
And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.
For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.
And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee,
And for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be meat.
And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.
Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of the priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.
But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of it, and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.
If the priest's daughter also be married unto a stranger, she may not eat of an offering of the holy things.
But if the priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father's meat: but there shall no stranger eat thereof.
And if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest with the holy thing.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the LORD for a burnt offering;
Ye shall offer at your own will a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.
Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those things which they hallow unto me: I am the LORD.
But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for you.
And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD to accomplish his vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.
Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the LORD, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD.
Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.
Ye shall not offer unto the LORD that which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof in your land.
Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day.
And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the LORD, offer it at your own will.
Say unto them, Whosoever he be of all your seed among your generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from my presence: I am the LORD.
On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I am the LORD.
Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the LORD.
Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I am the LORD which hallow you,
That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD.
What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose seed goeth from him;
Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath;
The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.
And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat of the holy things; because it is his food.
That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself therewith: I am the LORD.
They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the LORD do sanctify them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest:
And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.
And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the LORD.
And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the LORD for a sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth part of an hin.
And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto your God: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete:
Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the LORD.
Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals: they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the LORD.
And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for a burnt offering unto the LORD, with their meat offering, and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto the LORD.
Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my feasts.
And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits for a wave offering before the LORD, with the two lambs: they shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.
And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the LORD your God.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation.
Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before the LORD your God.
For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.
Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings.
And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his people.
Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the LORD.
On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a solemn assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.
These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, every thing upon his day:
Beside the sabbaths of the LORD, and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your freewill offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.
Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day shall be a sabbath.
These are the feasts of the LORD, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.
And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the LORD your God seven days.
And ye shall keep it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the year. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.
And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the LORD.
In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the LORD'S passover.
And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the LORD: seven days ye must eat unleavened bread.
In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD seven days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
And the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall be upon them.
If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.
And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast.
And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.
And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.
Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone him with stones.
And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.
And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue you not out.
And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and honey: I am the LORD your God, which have separated you from other people.
Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean.
And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the LORD am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.
A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them.
And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.
And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not:
Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with Molech, from among their people.
And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.
Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the LORD your God.
And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I am the LORD which sanctify you.
For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people:
And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes;
Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;
Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD.
And he shall take a wife in her virginity.
A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.
Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the LORD do sanctify him.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous,
Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,
But for his kin, that is near unto him, that is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother,
Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;
No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.
He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy.
Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the LORD do sanctify them.
And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel.
And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no husband; for her may he be defiled.
But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God: for the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and the bread of their God, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.
They shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto his God.
Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God: he shall be holy unto thee: for I the LORD, which sanctify you, am holy.
And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.
All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers.
When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the LORD thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.
Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:
Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;
And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;
Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the LORD thy God, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage;
Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;
Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;
And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.
But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.
And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the LORD thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
And thou shalt remember all the way which the LORD thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no.
As the nations which the LORD destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the LORD your God.
And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the LORD doth man live.
Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.
Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thee.
Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.
For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;
A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;
A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.
And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.
And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.
And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines?
The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.
Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver you no more.
Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.
And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.
And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.
Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.
And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir.
And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years.
And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the LORD, and served not him.
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon.
And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel: eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.
Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed.
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the other day.
And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I am.
And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order the child, and how shall we do unto him?
And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her beware.
She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all that I commanded her let her observe.
And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, I pray thee, let us detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.
And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the LORD. For Manoah knew not that he was an angel of the LORD.
And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, What is thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?
And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret?
So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did wondrously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.
And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.
For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces to the ground.
But the angel of the LORD did no more appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the LORD.
And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.
But his wife said unto him, If the LORD were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these.
And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the LORD blessed him.
And the Spirit of the LORD began to move him at times in the camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.
And the angel of the LORD appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.
Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing:
For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name:
But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death.
Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.
And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her.
And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;
But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.
And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:
And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.
And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.
Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven;
And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the LORD:
And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.
And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.
And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.
And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:
And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,
And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.
And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;
And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?
And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?
Is any thing too hard for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.
And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
And the LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;
Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,
And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD.
And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes:
Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.
And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.
And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:
And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty's sake.
And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten's sake.
And the LORD went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.
Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:
And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.
And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.
And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh.
And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.
So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.
But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel.
And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.
Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss.
And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.
And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said, Judah shall go up first.
And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah.
And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.
And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at Gibeah.
And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men.
And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in array the first day.
(And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up again to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD said, Go up against him.)
And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day.
And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.
Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the LORD, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.
And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.
(Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was this wickedness?
And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.
And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of Israel.
And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them from the city unto the highways.
And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.
And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near them.
And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.
So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.
And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up out of the city.
And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.
And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.
But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven.
And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.
Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.
Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.
And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were men of valour.
And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them.
So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.
But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.
And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set on fire all the cities that they came to.
And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead.
And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.
Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel.
And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.
But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will go up by lot against it;
Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.
And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children.
And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.
And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.
And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto them.
And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so they sufficed them not.
And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.
Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?
And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.
Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin.
Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.
And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore;
Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;
And see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.
And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be guilty.
And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt in them.
And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance.
In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
And said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.
And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.
And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.
How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?
And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.
For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.
After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.
And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.
And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.
And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.
And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;
And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.
And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.
And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:
The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?
And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.
And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.
And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousness.
And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?
And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.
And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;
And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.
And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.
And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.
And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.
And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.
And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God.
And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:
That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.
And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderness.
And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar.
And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;
With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.
Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.
Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the LORD exceedingly.
And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:
For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.
Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.
And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;
Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the LORD.
And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren.
Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee:
And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.
And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon:
Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.
And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.
The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.
And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife.
And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?
Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.
And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:
And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.
So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.
And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.
And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.
And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who appeared unto him.
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD.
And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.
And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:
And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:
And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:
And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:
And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:
And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.
And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.
And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:
And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:
And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.
And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.
But Sarai was barren; she had no child.
And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.
And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.
And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And the LORD came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.
And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech.
So the LORD scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.
Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the LORD did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah,
And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.
And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.
And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.
And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.
Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.
The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.
And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.
And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD.
O LORD, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be ashamed suddenly.
Have mercy upon me, O LORD; for I am weak: O LORD, heal me; for my bones are vexed.
My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O LORD, how long?
Return, O LORD, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies' sake.
For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?
I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears.
Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of all mine enemies.
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the LORD hath heard the voice of my weeping.
The LORD hath heard my supplication; the LORD will receive my prayer.
Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.
Then said Saul to his servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where the man of God was.
And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?
And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place:
As soon as ye be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find him.
And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place.
Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying,
To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.
And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.
Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.
And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.
And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.
And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?
And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?
And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, which were about thirty persons.
And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.
And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day.
And when they were come down from the high place into the city, Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.
And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.
And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.
And the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses.
And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.
And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.
And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go.
Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we?
And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God, to tell us our way.
(Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)
And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.
And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.
And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.
And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.
And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.
And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.
And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.
He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.
And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear you in that day.
Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us;
Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second, Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba.
That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.
And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the LORD.
And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his city.
And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment.
Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah,
And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.
But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD.
And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.
According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.
Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.
Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all ye lands.
Serve the LORD with gladness: come before his presence with singing.
Know ye that the LORD he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name.
For the LORD is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth to all generations.
And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Ebenezer unto Ashdod.
Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.
So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.
And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven.
When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.
And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.
Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.
But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the coasts thereof.
And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god.
They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about thither.
And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their secret parts.
And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.
And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.
And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.
And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.
Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim, that he could not see.
And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son?
And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.
And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.
And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.
And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines: and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.
And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not, neither did she regard it.
And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.
And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God is taken.
And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies.
So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth between the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.
And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp.
And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a thing heretofore.
Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness.
Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit yourselves like men, and fight.
And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD.
And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel.
And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.
Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped us.
So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.
And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD.
And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel lamented after the LORD.
And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the LORD with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the LORD, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the LORD only.
And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the LORD.
And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh.
And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.
And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt offering wholly unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for Israel; and the LORD heard him.
And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven months.
And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home:
And they laid the ark of the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.
And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Bethshemesh.
And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.
And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the LORD.
And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD.
And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.
And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;
And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Bethshemite.
And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.
And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, What shall we do to the ark of the LORD? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place.
And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy LORD God? and to whom shall he go up from us?
And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and fetch it up to you.
And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.
Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.
Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?
Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them:
And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.
And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that happened to us.
Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:
And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and wept sore.
And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head.
And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the LORD, that Eli marked her mouth.
Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.
And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee.
And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the LORD.
Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.
Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.
And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.
And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her.
And he had two wives; the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD.
And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.
But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever.
And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good; tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.
And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young.
And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.
And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD.
For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition which I asked of him:
Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD; as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the LORD. And he worshipped the LORD there.
And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there.
And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:
But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the LORD had shut up her womb.
And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret, because the LORD had shut up her womb.
And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.
Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee than ten sons?
So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the LORD.
Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged me when I was in distress; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.
O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.
But know that the LORD hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the LORD will hear when I call unto him.
Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah.
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the LORD.
There be many that say, Who will shew us any good? LORD, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, LORD, only makest me dwell in safety.
And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision.
And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.
And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.
In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.
For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.
And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.
And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.
Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here am I.
And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thee? I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.
And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the LORD: let him do what seemeth him good.
And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground.
And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see;
And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the LORD.
And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD.
And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep;
That the LORD called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.
And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.
And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered, I called not, my son; lie down again.
Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the LORD yet revealed unto him.
And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli perceived that the LORD had called the child.
Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in thy salvation.
The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the LORD shall judge the ends of the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed.
And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest.
Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD.
And the priests' custom with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand;
And he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.
Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.
And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will take it by force.
Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the LORD: for men abhorred the offering of the LORD.
But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.
Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God.
And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And they went unto their own home.
And the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the LORD.
Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people.
Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the LORD'S people to transgress.
If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the LORD, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD would slay them.
And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the LORD, and also with men.
And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house?
And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?
Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my people?
Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.
Wherefore the LORD God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.
And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever.
And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar, shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.
And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.
And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.
And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.
The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength.
They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.
The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.
The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up.
He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the LORD'S, and he hath set the world upon them.
He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.
Give ear to my words, O LORD, consider my meditation.
Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels; cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have rebelled against thee.
But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name be joyful in thee.
For thou, LORD, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield.
Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God: for unto thee will I pray.
My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O LORD; in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.
The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of iniquity.
Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the LORD will abhor the bloody and deceitful man.
But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.
Lead me, O LORD, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy way straight before my face.
For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with their tongue.
Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?
Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD, and against his anointed, saying,
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.
He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.
Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.
Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.
I will declare the decree: the LORD hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.
LORD, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise up against me.
Many there be which say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.
But thou, O LORD, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.
I cried unto the LORD with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill. Selah.
I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the LORD sustained me.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about.
Arise, O LORD; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
Salvation belongeth unto the LORD: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.
Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
But his delight is in the law of the LORD; and in his law doth he meditate day and night.
And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
For the LORD knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish.
And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.
And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.
And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he said, Thus saith the LORD, With these shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them.
And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the king's hand.
And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak that which is good.
And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, what the LORD saith unto me, that will I speak.
So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand of the king.
And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the LORD?
And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, as sheep that have not a shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no master: let them return every man to his house in peace.
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?
And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.
And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
And the LORD said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on that manner.
And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and said, I will persuade him.
And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so.
Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thee.
But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee?
And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;
And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I come in peace.
And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the LORD hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you.
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramothgilead.
And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria?
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.
But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.
And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.
And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his own country.
So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.
And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the word of the LORD which he spake.
Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go with me to battle to Ramothgilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.
And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD: nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.
And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And the remnant of the sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he took out of the land.
There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.
Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships were broken at Eziongeber.
Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.
And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD to day.
And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years over Israel.
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin:
For he served Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the LORD God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.
And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him?
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Hasten hither Micaiah the son of Imlah.
And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he may die.
And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.
They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.
And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.
Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead.
And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.
And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.
And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it.
And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.
And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.
And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the LORD.
Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel,
And will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.
And of Jezebel also spake the LORD, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.
Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.
But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the LORD, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.
And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all things as did the Amorites, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.
And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.
And Naboth said to Ahab, The LORD forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.
And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.
But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?
And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.
And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his city, dwelling with Naboth.
And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people:
And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together: and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.
And Benhadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.
And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.
And it came to pass, when Benhadad heard this message, as he was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array against the city.
And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou seen all this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.
And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Even by the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall order the battle? And he answered, Thou.
Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered all the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.
And they went out at noon. But Benhadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that helped him.
And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first; and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come out of Samaria.
And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.
So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the city, and the army which followed them.
And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said unto him, Thus saith Benhadad,
And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and Israel pursued them: and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse with the horsemen.
And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.
And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him, Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.
And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.
And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in their rooms:
And number thee an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so.
And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Benhadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.
And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present, and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them like two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.
Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.
And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.
And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Benhadad, saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;
Yet I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away.
Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief: for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.
And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not unto him, nor consent.
Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and brought him word again.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not prevailed against me.
The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.
The LORD is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.
Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.
Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth afore it groweth up:
Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom.
Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the LORD be upon you: we bless you in the name of the LORD.
Blessed is every one that feareth the LORD; that walketh in his ways.
For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.
Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table.
Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the LORD.
The LORD shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children, and peace upon Israel.
Except the LORD build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the LORD keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.
It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows: for so he giveth his beloved sleep.
Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD: and the fruit of the womb is his reward.
As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth.
Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.
When the LORD turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The LORD hath done great things for them.
The LORD hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.
Turn again our captivity, O LORD, as the streams in the south.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
They that trust in the LORD shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round about his people from henceforth even for ever.
For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.
Do good, O LORD, unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.
As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the LORD shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, now may Israel say;
If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, when men rose up against us:
Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul:
Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.
Blessed be the LORD, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth.
Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth.
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the LORD our God, until that he have mercy upon us.
Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.
I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the LORD.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:
Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the LORD.
For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.
Because of the house of the LORD our God I will seek thy good.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help.
My help cometh from the LORD, which made heaven and earth.
He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber.
Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.
The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand.
The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
The LORD shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.
The LORD shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore.
In my distress I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me.
Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.
What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.
Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!
My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.
I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.
And he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.
Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.
And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver.
And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver.
And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.
And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.
This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.
And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD commanded Moses.
And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.
All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.
And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.
And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass.
And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.
And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.
And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to be places for the staves.
And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.
And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.
And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits:
And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.
And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.
And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.
And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold.
And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.
And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate.
And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.
And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward.
And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.
And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.
And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.
And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.
And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates;
A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
And a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen,
And a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needlework; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.
And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO TH
And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the LORD commanded Moses.
Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.
And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets,
And the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering,
The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,
The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door,
The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,
They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together.
The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation,
The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.
According to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.
And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the LORD had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.
And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.
And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.
And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it.
And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the LORD.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.
This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the LORD.
Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering unto the LORD.
The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.
And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.
For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:
A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.
When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the LORD:
So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.
Moreover the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels,
And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin:
And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.
And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony,
And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense,
And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.
And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.
Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you.
Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:
And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy:
And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.
And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the LORD.
Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.
And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.
And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.
And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations.
Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office,
And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you.
Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the LORD: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.
It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.
See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:
And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.
And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee;
The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle,
And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot,
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.
And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, LORD, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.
And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.
And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.
And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.
And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear.
And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.
And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me.
And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?
And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief.
For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:)
Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the LORD'S side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
And he said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.
And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the LORD, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.
And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the LORD; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.
And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.
Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.
And the LORD plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.
And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the LORD.
And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:
They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And the LORD said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:
And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.
And the LORD spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.
And Moses said unto the LORD, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight.
Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.
And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.
And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.
For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.
And the LORD said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.
And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.
And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the LORD before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.
And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.
And the LORD said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:
And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by:
And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.
For the LORD had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.
And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.
And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, that every one which sought the LORD went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp.
And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.
And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the LORD talked with Moses.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.
And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.
Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:
But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves:
For thou shalt worship no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:
Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;
And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.
The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.
All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.
And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.
But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.
Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.
And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.
Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel.
For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the LORD thy God thrice in the year.
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning.
And he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.
And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.
And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.
And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the LORD had spoken with him in mount Sinai.
And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.
But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.
And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.
And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.
And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD.
And the LORD passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.
And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.
And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.
And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said unto them, These are the words which the LORD hath commanded, that ye should do them.
And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the LORD hath commanded;
The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets,
The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering,
The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,
The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light,
And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle,
The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,
The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court,
The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,
The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the LORD: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the LORD'S offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.
And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto the LORD.
And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers' skins, brought them.
Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the LORD'S offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it.
And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.
And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats' hair.
And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;
And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the LORD, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the LORD had commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.
Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.
And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the LORD hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;
And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;
And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.
And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.
And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD commanded, saying,
Take ye from among you an offering unto the LORD: whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the LORD; gold, and silver, and brass,
And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,
And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,
And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the LORD had commanded.
And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled one unto another.
And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.
Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.
And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.
And he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.
The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.
And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
And he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it:
And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up.
The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.
One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward:
And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner, he made twenty boards,
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.
And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.
And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.
And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.
And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.
And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.
And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework;
And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of brass.
And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made;
And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the LORD commanded to make.
And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.
The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.
And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:
And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof:
And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.
And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.
Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.
And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold.
And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:
And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof:
Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick.
And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.
And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers:
And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.
Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold.
And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, of pure gold.
Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.
And he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.
And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.
And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.
And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.
And he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat;
One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.
Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's son.
The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him.
For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper.
He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy.
He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight.
And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daily shall he be praised.
There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon: and they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.
Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things.
And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled with his glory; Amen, and Amen.
He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.
The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness.
He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.
They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.
He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.
In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.
He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.
They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust.
Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.
Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them.
And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the most High?
Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches.
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency.
For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.
If I say, I will speak thus; behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children.
When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;
Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.
Surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into destruction.
How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors.
But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped.
As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image.
Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.
So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.
Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand.
Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.
My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
For, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.
But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord GOD, that I may declare all thy works.
For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.
They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued like other men.
Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment.
Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart could wish.
They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily.
They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.
Make haste, O God, to deliver me; make haste to help me, O LORD.
Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.
Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha, aha.
Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.
But I am poor and needy: make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer; O LORD, make no tarrying.
In thee, O LORD, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion.
For mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together,
Saying, God hath forsaken him: persecute and take him; for there is none to deliver him.
O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help.
Let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that seek my hurt.
But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.
My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers thereof.
I will go in the strength of the Lord GOD: I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.
O God, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works.
Now also when I am old and grayheaded, O God, forsake me not; until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come.
Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who hast done great things: O God, who is like unto thee!
Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear unto me, and save me.
Thou, which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the earth.
Thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.
I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God: unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel.
My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed.
My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt.
Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my fortress.
Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man.
For thou art my hope, O Lord GOD: thou art my trust from my youth.
By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mother's bowels: my praise shall be continually of thee.
I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.
Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honour all the day.
Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not when my strength faileth.
In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.
Vow, and pay unto the LORD your God: let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.
He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the earth.
In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion.
There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah.
Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.
The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found their hands.
At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.
Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?
Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,
When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and he gave ear unto me.
And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High.
I will remember the works of the LORD: surely I will remember thy wonders of old.
I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.
Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?
Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the people.
Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they were afraid: the depths also were troubled.
The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also went abroad.
The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.
Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known.
In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.
Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. Selah.
Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart: and my spirit made diligent search.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more?
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore?
Hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah.
O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?
Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.
For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.
Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.
The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun.
Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.
Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O LORD, and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name.
O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.
Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt.
Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.
O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy name.
Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily.
Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increaseth continually.
Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations; even all that the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.
Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns for signs.
A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.
But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and hammers.
They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.
They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land.
We see not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is there among us any that knoweth how long.
Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.
All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted.
When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.
The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. Selah.
I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn:
Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.
For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south.
But God is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another.
For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.
But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law;
And forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them.
Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through; and he made the waters to stand as an heap.
In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire.
He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great depths.
He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.
And they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most High in the wilderness.
And they tempted God in their heart by asking meat for their lust.
Yea, they spake against God; they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?
I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:
Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?
Therefore the LORD heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel;
Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation:
Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven,
And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn of heaven.
Man did eat angels' food: he sent them meat to the full.
He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he brought in the south wind.
He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea:
And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their habitations.
So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire;
Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.
They were not estranged from their lust. But while their meat was yet in their mouths,
The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.
For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works.
Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.
When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after God.
And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer.
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues.
But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath.
For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again.
We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the praises of the LORD, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he hath done.
How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert!
Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.
They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy.
How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan:
And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could not drink.
He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and frogs, which destroyed them.
He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their labour unto the locust.
He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore trees with frost.
He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them.
For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children:
He made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence;
And smote all the firstborn in Egypt; the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Ham:
But made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this mountain, which his right hand had purchased.
He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies:
But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel:
That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born; who should arise and declare them to their children:
So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men;
And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand.
He gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with his inheritance.
The fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not given to marriage.
Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation.
Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine.
And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual reproach.
Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim:
But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved.
And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever.
That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments:
He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:
From following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.
And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.
The children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle.
O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed.
Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die;
And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.
So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations.
The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.
Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them.
We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.
How long, LORD? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.
O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.
Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake.
And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David.
And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the javelin; but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.
Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.
So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped.
And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.
And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.
And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.
And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.
And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?
So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.
But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself:
And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.
And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they prophesied also.
Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.
And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.
And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good:
For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?
And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the LORD liveth, he shall not be slain.
And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in times past.
And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from him.
And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.
And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth.
And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.
Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.
And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.
And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.
And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?
And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.
And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.
Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.
And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die.
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.
And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us.
And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:
And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:
And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;
It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.
Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.
For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father.
And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.
And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.
And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:
And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.
And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.
And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.
And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him.
And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;
And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.
Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.
And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.
And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,
And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not.
And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:
And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.
For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.
And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:
And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.
And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zerah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.
And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.
And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.
And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.
The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.
And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.
And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.
And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.
And the sons of Dan; Hushim.
And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.
All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and six;
And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.
And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.
And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation:
And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive.
And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation?
That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him:
His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.
And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.
And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, according to their families.
And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.
And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.
And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.
And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's.
And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.
Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.
Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.
And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.
And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.
And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part; except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's.
And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.
And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:
And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers.
But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.
And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head.
They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:
The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying,
And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.
And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.
And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.
And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.
And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.
Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker:
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.
And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow:
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.
And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:
And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:
And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:
And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.
And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.
The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one.
And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.
And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;
And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.
And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.
And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art:
And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.
Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.
And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number.
And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.
And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.
And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.
And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.
And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.
And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the earth: And Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands.
And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.
And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.
And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.
Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:
Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.
We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies.
And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies:
Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.
And he put them all together into ward three days.
And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God:
If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses:
And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.
But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.
And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter.
And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.
And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.
And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.
And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?
And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying,
And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.
And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:
We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone:
And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.
And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.
And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.
And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.
And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.
And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:
And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:
Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:
And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.
And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon.
And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph's house.
And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they communed with him at the door of the house,
And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:
And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.
And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.
And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.
And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.
And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there.
And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.
And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?
And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.
And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.
And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.
And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.
If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:
But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.
And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.
I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:
And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.
And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.
And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.
And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.
And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.
And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.
And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.
And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.
And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.
And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem.
And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?
And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.
The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.
Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:
His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.
Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.
Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.
I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD.
Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.
Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.
Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.
Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:
The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:
But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)
Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:
The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.
Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.
And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:
In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.
The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth.
And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.
Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.
O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle, thou and thy men.
And Saul sware to her by the LORD, saying, As the LORD liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.
Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.
And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.
And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.
And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself.
And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.
Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the LORD is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?
And the LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David:
Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thee this day.
Moreover the LORD will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: the LORD also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.
And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever.
Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.
Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.
But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.
And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof:
And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.
Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.
And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.
And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.
Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor.
And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.
And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?
Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.
Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.
So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.
And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.
Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?
And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men?
Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless the lords favour thee not.
Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.
And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.
And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?
Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father answer thee roughly?
And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.
And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and, behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee, and shew it thee;
The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with thee, as he hath been with my father.
And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of the LORD, that I die not:
But also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.
So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let the LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies.
And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him: for he loved him as he loved his own soul.
Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.
And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.
And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so.
And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I shot at a mark.
And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no hurt; as the LORD liveth.
But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thee away.
And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, the LORD be between thee and me for ever.
So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat meat.
And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place was empty.
Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.
And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?
And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem:
And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.
And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.
Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedness?
For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely die.
And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?
And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.
So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame.
And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.
And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.
And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the arrow beyond thee?
And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.
But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the matter.
Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee.
And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go, carry them to the city.
And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded.
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.
And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.
If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.
Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?
And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?
Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone, and no man with thee?
And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.
And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such a place.
Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of bread in mine hand, or what there is present.
And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have kept themselves at least from women.
And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out, and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.
So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.
And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.
And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me.
David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him.
And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nob: and they came all of them to the king.
And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord.
And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?
Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?
Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more.
And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.
And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn, and slay the priests of the LORD; because their hand also is with David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the LORD.
And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.
And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.
And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.
And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.
And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the LORD'S priests.
And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house.
Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.
And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.
And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold.
And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth.
When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;)
Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds;
That all of you have conspired against me, and there is none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?
Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.
Then said David, O LORD God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.
Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come down, as thy servant hath heard? O LORD God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And the LORD said, He will come down.
Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And the LORD said, They will deliver thee up.
Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go forth.
And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand.
And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.
And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God.
And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.
And they two made a covenant before the LORD: and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.
Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?
Therefore David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the LORD said unto David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.
Now therefore, O king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.
And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the LORD; for ye have compassion on me.
Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he dealeth very subtilly.
See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah.
And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon.
Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David: wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them.
But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have invaded the land.
Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that place Selahammahlekoth.
And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at Engedi.
And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?
Then David enquired of the LORD yet again. And the LORD answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into thine hand.
So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.
And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.
And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.
And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.
And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.
And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderness of Engedi.
Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the LORD had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the LORD'S anointed.
Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it.
The LORD judge between me and thee, and the LORD avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.
The LORD therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.
And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.
And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.
And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not.
For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the LORD reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.
Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.
And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.
Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house.
And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold.
And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.
And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the LORD said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.
And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
And he said unto his men, The LORD forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the LORD'S anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the LORD.
So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way.
David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.
And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?
And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.
And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break away every man from his master.
Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be?
So David's young men turned their way, and went again, and came and told him all those sayings.
And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the stuff.
But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he railed on them.
But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we were in the fields:
They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.
Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household: for he is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.
Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.
And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.
And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert of the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against her; and she met them.
Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.
So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.
Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.
Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing the LORD hath withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.
And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.
I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the LORD will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the battles of the LORD, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.
Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of the middle of a sling.
Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.
And it shall come to pass, when the LORD shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;
That this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the LORD shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thine handmaid.
And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me:
And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.
For in very deed, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.
And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.
And it came to pass about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, that he died.
And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.
And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.
And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.
And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.
David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of them his wives.
But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.
And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:
And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that thou hast.
And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.
Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David.
And when David's young men came, they spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.
And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?
David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish.
The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the LORD'S anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.
So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the LORD was fallen upon them.
Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space being between them:
And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the king?
And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.
This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD'S anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.
And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.
And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?
Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the LORD have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods.
Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.
Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.
And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it.
The LORD render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness: for the LORD delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD'S anointed.
And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.
Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.
And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in very deed.
And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him.
Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.
So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.
Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.
And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD'S anointed, and be guiltless?
And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.
And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.
And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the Philistines.
And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.
And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.
And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him.
And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?
Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.
And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.
And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.
And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.
Why standest thou afar off, O LORD? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?
He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones.
He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten: he hideth his face; he will never see it.
Arise, O LORD; O God, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.
Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not require it.
Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherless.
Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: seek out his wickedness till thou find none.
The LORD is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land.
LORD, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear:
To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more oppress.
The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined.
For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the LORD abhorreth.
The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts.
His ways are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of his sight: as for all his enemies, he puffeth at them.
He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in adversity.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue is mischief and vanity.
He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor.
He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth in wait to catch the poor: he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into his net.
In the LORD put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?
For, lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.
If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
The LORD is in his holy temple, the LORD'S throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.
The LORD trieth the righteous: but the wicked and him that loveth violence his soul hateth.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.
For the righteous LORD loveth righteousness; his countenance doth behold the upright.
Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host:
And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that were in the host.
And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude.
And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.
And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.
And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.
And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.
And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do.
When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon.
So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.
And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.
And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon.
And they stood every man in his place round about the camp: and all the host ran, and cried, and fled.
And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath.
And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites.
And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan.
And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.
Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand.
And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.
So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.
And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.
And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people go every man unto his place.
So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the valley.
And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand.
How long wilt thou forget me, O LORD? for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?
Consider and hear me, O LORD my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved.
But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
I will sing unto the LORD, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.
Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight against them?
And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher:
And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou?
And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people.
And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.
Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.
And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron.
And the LORD said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.
And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak.
And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.
And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the LORD was with them.
And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.)
And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.
And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family.
And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day.
Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.
Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.
And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.
Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.
Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:
But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out.
Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.
And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley:
But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.
And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim, from the rock, and upward.
And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.
But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died.
Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.
And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the valley.
Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.
For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
O my soul, thou hast said unto the LORD, Thou art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee;
But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god: their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.
The LORD is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.
The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.
I will bless the LORD, who hath given me counsel: my reins also instruct me in the night seasons.
I have set the LORD always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth: my flesh also shall rest in hope.
And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath driven thee,
For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off.
It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.
See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;
In that I command thee this day to love the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the LORD thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.
But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them;
I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.
I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:
And shalt return unto the LORD thy God, and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;
That thou mayest love the LORD thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.
That then the LORD thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath scattered thee.
If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from thence will the LORD thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee:
And the LORD thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
And the LORD thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.
And the LORD thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.
And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the LORD, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.
And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.
And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
When all Israel is come to appear before the LORD thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do all the words of this law:
And that their children, which have not known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the congregation.
And the LORD appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.
Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God is not among us?
And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are turned unto other gods.
Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.
And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: also the LORD hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my covenant.
And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have brought them into the land which I sware.
Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of Israel.
And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.
And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,
That Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, saying,
Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.
For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the LORD; and how much more after my death?
Gather unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.
For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.
The LORD thy God, he will go over before thee, and he will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them: and Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the LORD hath said.
And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended.
And the LORD shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.
And the LORD shall give them up before your face, that ye may do unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded you.
Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with this people unto the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.
And the LORD, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed.
And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and unto all the elders of Israel.
Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.
As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.
He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;
Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.
But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger.
They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.
Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.
And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.
My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass:
And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.
They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.
I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.
They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.
The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.
I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men:
Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the LORD hath not done all this.
For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them.
O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
Because I will publish the name of the LORD: ascribe ye greatness unto our God.
How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the LORD had shut them up?
For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.
For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.
Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?
To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.
For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left.
And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted,
Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.
See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.
He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.
For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.
If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.
I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.
Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.
And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.
And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.
For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
And the LORD spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying,
Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:
They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.
And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:
Because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel.
Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.
Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee?
Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.
When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.
For the LORD'S portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.
And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.
Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.
And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in safety by him; and the LORD shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.
And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,
And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the moon,
And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,
And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren.
His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.
And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents.
They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.
And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.
And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.
And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments with Israel.
And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.
And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the LORD: possess thou the west and the south.
And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.
Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.
The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.
Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.
Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.
Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.
Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.
And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.
Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.
And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, LORD, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.
And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;
Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.
And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan,
And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face,
In all the signs and the wonders, which the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed in the sight of all Israel.
And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea,
And the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.
And the LORD said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither.
So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD.
And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.
And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.
And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD commanded Moses.
Likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most holy.
And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.
And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the LORD.
If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried.
Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.
And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an heave offering unto the LORD, and it shall be the priest's that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.
And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten:
But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.
And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.
And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.
In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about upon the altar.
But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain unto the LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.
Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain unto the LORD, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat.
And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD, even the soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his people.
Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings.
Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the LORD shall bring his oblation unto the LORD of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.
And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,
His own hands shall bring the offerings of the LORD made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before the LORD.
And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron's and his sons'.
And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.
He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.
For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel.
This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister unto the LORD in the priest's office;
Which the LORD commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for ever throughout their generations.
This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings;
Which the LORD commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai.
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away:
And the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a trespass offering.
Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it is most holy.
As the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have it.
And the priest that offereth any man's burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he hath offered.
And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's that offereth it.
And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying,
For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the people hasted and passed over.
And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the LORD passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.
And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them:
About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the LORD unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.
On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.
Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan.
And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his banks, as they did before.
And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.
Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.
And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones?
Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over:
That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the LORD, that it is mighty: that ye might fear the LORD your God for ever.
And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.
Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man:
And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel:
That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones?
Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.
And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the LORD spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.
And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this day.
But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?
Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.
Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.
Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for thus saith the LORD God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.
In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shall come according to the families thereof; and the family which the LORD shall take shall come by households; and the household which the LORD shall take shall come man by man.
And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought folly in Israel.
So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken:
And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the LORD God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide it not from me.
And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven, on the east side of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai.
And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done:
When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.
So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the LORD.
And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of Achor.
And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.
And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the LORD turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.
And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but few.
So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai.
And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.
And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the LORD until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.
And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord GOD, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!
O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies!
For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
As it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of the burnt offering.
And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung,
Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.
And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the LORD concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty;
When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation.
And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the LORD: and the bullock shall be killed before the LORD.
And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock's blood to the tabernacle of the congregation:
And the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, even before the vail.
And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before the LORD, that is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar.
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall do against any of them:
And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.
And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the congregation.
When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance against any of the commandments of the LORD his God concerning things which should not be done, and is guilty;
Or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish:
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the LORD: it is a sin offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt offering.
And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty;
Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.
If the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the LORD for a sin offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.
And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the LORD; and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.
And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:
And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the LORD: and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.
And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock's head, and kill the bullock before the LORD.
And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock's blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation:
And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the LORD, before the vail of the sanctuary.
And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the LORD, which is in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away,
And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the LORD.
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the LORD.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the LORD'S.
It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the LORD be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before the LORD.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.
And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,
And the LORD called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,
And if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without blemish.
And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar.
And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar:
But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the LORD be of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons.
And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar:
And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes:
And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an offering unto the LORD, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock.
If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD.
And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.
And he shall kill the bullock before the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.
And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire:
And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar:
But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the LORD came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; and I will send rain upon the earth.
As the LORD thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.
And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the Spirit of the LORD shall carry thee whither I know not; and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me: but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth.
Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of the LORD, how I hid an hundred men of the LORD'S prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shall slay me.
And Elijah said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day.
So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to meet Elijah.
And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel?
And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou hast followed Baalim.
Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table.
And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore famine in Samaria.
So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.
And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.
Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under:
And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the LORD: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.
And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.
And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made.
And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.
And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.
And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.
And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly:
And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that was broken down.
And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came, saying, Israel shall be thy name:
And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the LORD: and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.
And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.
And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time.
And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water.
And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.
Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the LORD God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.
Then the fire of the LORD fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.
And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The LORD, he is the God; the LORD, he is the God.
For it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)
And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.
And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain.
So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees,
And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.
And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.
And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel.
And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.
And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the beasts.
So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.
And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord Elijah?
And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?
And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
And he said, I have been very jealous for the LORD God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.
And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake:
And after the earthquake a fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.
And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah?
And he said, I have been very jealous for the LORD God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.
And the LORD said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria:
And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.
And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.
Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.
So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.
Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to morrow about this time.
And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee. And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?
And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him.
And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.
But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers.
And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.
And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again.
And the angel of the LORD came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee.
And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.
And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah?
And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.
And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father's loins.
And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.
So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.
And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old men's counsel that they gave him;
And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.
Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause was from the LORD, that he might perform his saying, which the LORD spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents.
But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;)
And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.
And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying,
Thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the LORD, and returned to depart, according to the word of the LORD.
Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel.
And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David:
If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.
Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan.
That they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying,
And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan.
And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.
And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and he offered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places which he had made.
So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.
Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.
And he said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to me. And the people departed.
And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that I may answer this people?
And they spake unto him, saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.
But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him:
And he said unto them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter?
And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the LORD unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.
So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Bethel.
Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel; and his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Bethel: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told also to their father.
And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons had seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.
And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled him the ass: and he rode thereon,
And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.
Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.
And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee: neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:
For it was said to me by the word of the LORD, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou camest.
He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel spake unto me by the word of the LORD, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied unto him.
So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water.
And he cried against the altar in the word of the LORD, and said, O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD; Behold, a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee.
And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of the LORD came unto the prophet that brought him back:
And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the LORD, and hast not kept the commandment which the LORD thy God commanded thee,
But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of the which the LORD did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water; thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.
And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom he had brought back.
And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him: and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion also stood by the carcase.
And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the LORD: therefore the LORD hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake unto him.
And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they saddled him.
And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the carcase, nor torn the ass.
And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the city, to mourn and to bury him.
And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the LORD hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.
And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother!
And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones:
For the saying which he cried by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel, and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.
After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests of the high places.
And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.
And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of God, which had cried against the altar in Bethel, that he put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to him.
The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the LORD.
And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now the face of the LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. And the man of God besought the LORD, and the king's hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.
And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.
And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place:
For so was it charged me by the word of the LORD, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that thou camest.
And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the LORD, she came to prove him with hard questions.
And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious stones.
And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of the LORD, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.
And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.
And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of gold went to one target.
And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold.
The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat, and two lions stood beside the stays.
And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.
And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.
And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.
For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom.
And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.
And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at Jerusalem.
And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for abundance.
And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.
And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring them out by their means.
And Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing hid from the king, which he told her not.
And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon's wisdom, and the house that he had built,
And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her.
And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.
Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel: because the LORD loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.
But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites;
Wherefore the LORD said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one tribe to thy son for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.
And the LORD stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he was of the king's seed in Edom.
That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.
And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and gave him land.
And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.
Of the nations concerning which the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.
And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh's household among the sons of Pharaoh.
And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.
Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he answered, Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.
And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:
And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when David slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.
And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, beside the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.
And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up his hand against the king.
And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his father.
And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.
And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in the field:
And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.
And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces:
And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:
(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:)
Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his father.
Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:
But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes.
And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen me to put my name there.
And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.
And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.
And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.
For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father.
Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.
And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.
For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
And Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fully after the LORD, as did David his father.
Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon.
And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods.
Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,
And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.
And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.
Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.
And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.
And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.
And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died,
For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.
Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins;
Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half followed Omri.
But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned.
In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.
And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria.
But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the LORD, and did worse than all that were before him.
For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities.
Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.
And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.
Behold, I will take away the posterity of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD above all that were before him.
And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.
And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him.
In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.
Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.
Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead.
And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the LORD against Baasha, and against his house, even for all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam; and because he killed him.
In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.
And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.
And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, As the LORD God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.
So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.
And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.
And she said, As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.
And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son.
For thus saith the LORD God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the LORD sendeth rain upon the earth.
And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days.
And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Elijah.
And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.
And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?
And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.
And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying,
And he cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?
And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again.
And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.
And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth.
And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth.
Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.
And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
So he went and did according unto the word of the LORD: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.
And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up, because there had been no rain in the land.
And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying,
Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.
At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone.
Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the LORD hath spoken it.
Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.
And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the LORD God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
Moreover the LORD shall raise him up a king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.
For the LORD shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking the LORD to anger.
And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.
And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died;
And they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the prophet.
And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me that I should be king over this people.
And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years: and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.
And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD did choose out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.
And Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all that their fathers had done.
For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on every high hill, and under every green tree.
And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the LORD cast out before the children of Israel.
And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem:
And he took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept the door of the king's house.
And it was so, when the king went into the house of the LORD, that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard chamber.
Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the child.
And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.
And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.
And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age.
And the LORD said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in, that she shall feign herself to be another woman.
And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy tidings.
Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my people Israel,
And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes;
But hast done evil above all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:
Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned Abijam over Judah.
And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.
And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did David his father.
And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron.
But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa's heart was perfect with the LORD all his days.
And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the LORD, silver, and gold, and vessels.
And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,
There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.
Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.
So Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelbethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
And it came to pass, when Baasha heard thereof, that he left off building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.
Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead.
And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.
And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon.
Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him, and reigned in his stead.
And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as the heart of David his father.
Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.
Nevertheless for David's sake did the LORD his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:
Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.
And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah.
And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.
And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;
And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,
And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;
And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.
And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to their families.
And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,
And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,
And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;
And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.
And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.
And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath;
And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,
And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon;
And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib:
Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.
The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali according to their families.
And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.
And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.
And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Irshemesh,
And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,
And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages.
When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:
And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,
According to the word of the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.
These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.
And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:
Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:
And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.
And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son.
And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son.
And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's mandrakes.
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.
And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.
And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and she called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.
And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.
And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach:
And she called his name Joseph; and said, The LORD shall add to me another son.
And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.
And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the LORD hath blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.
And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.
For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?
And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock:
I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.
And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.
And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.
And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's cattle.
And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.
But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.
And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.
And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.
And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son.
And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.
The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes.
O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me.
There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not be able to rise.
For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful.
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off to be wise, and to do good.
He deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.
Thy mercy, O LORD, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds.
Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep: O LORD, thou preservest man and beast.
How excellent is thy lovingkindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.
Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity.
For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.
But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.
The Lord shall laugh at him: for he seeth that his day is coming.
The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.
Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.
A little that a righteous man hath is better than the riches of many wicked.
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the LORD upholdeth the righteous.
The LORD knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be for ever.
They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the LORD shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.
The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth.
For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth; and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the LORD: and he delighteth in his way.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the LORD upholdeth him with his hand.
I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
He is ever merciful, and lendeth; and his seed is blessed.
Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.
For the LORD loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.
Trust in the LORD, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.
The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment.
The law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps shall slide.
The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.
The LORD will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
Wait on the LORD, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.
I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree.
Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.
But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off.
But the salvation of the righteous is of the LORD: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
Delight thyself also in the LORD; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
And the LORD shall help them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.
Commit thy way unto the LORD; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass.
And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.
Rest in the LORD, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself in any wise to do evil.
For evildoers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the LORD, they shall inherit the earth.
I will bless the LORD at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth.
The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the LORD shall not want any good thing.
Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good?
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
The eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.
The face of the LORD is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.
The righteous cry, and the LORD heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.
The LORD is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the LORD delivereth him out of them all.
My soul shall make her boast in the LORD: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.
He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken.
Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate.
The LORD redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.
O magnify the LORD with me, and let us exalt his name together.
I sought the LORD, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.
They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.
This poor man cried, and the LORD heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
The angel of the LORD encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.
O taste and see that the LORD is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in him.
O fear the LORD, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.
Plead my cause, O LORD, with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me.
All my bones shall say, LORD, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?
False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
They rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul.
But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.
I behaved myself as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother.
But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not:
With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.
Lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.
I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among much people.
Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.
Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.
For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land.
Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath seen it.
This thou hast seen, O LORD: keep not silence: O Lord, be not far from me.
Stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord.
Judge me, O LORD my God, according to thy righteousness; and let them not rejoice over me.
Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not say, We have swallowed him up.
Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves against me.
Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the LORD be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the day long.
Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.
Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let the angel of the LORD chase them.
Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the LORD persecute them.
For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they have digged for my soul.
Let destruction come upon him at unawares; and let his net that he hath hid catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.
And my soul shall be joyful in the LORD: it shall rejoice in his salvation.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the LORD, mercy shall compass him about.
Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart.
Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. Selah.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the LORD; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.
Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.
I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye.
Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.
Rejoice in the LORD, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright.
The LORD bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he maketh the devices of the people of none effect.
The counsel of the LORD standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD; and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.
The LORD looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men.
From the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth.
He fashioneth their hearts alike; he considereth all their works.
There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.
An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.
Behold, the eye of the LORD is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy;
To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
Praise the LORD with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument of ten strings.
Our soul waiteth for the LORD: he is our help and our shield.
For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name.
Let thy mercy, O LORD, be upon us, according as we hope in thee.
Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud noise.
For the word of the LORD is right; and all his works are done in truth.
He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the LORD.
By the word of the LORD were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap: he layeth up the depth in storehouses.
Let all the earth fear the LORD: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
For he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.
I will extol thee, O LORD; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.
Hear, O LORD, and have mercy upon me: LORD, be thou my helper.
Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent. O LORD my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
O LORD my God, I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.
O LORD, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
Sing unto the LORD, O ye saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.
For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.
And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.
LORD, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled.
I cried to thee, O LORD; and unto the LORD I made supplication.
What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?
In thee, O LORD, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness.
For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.
I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without fled from me.
I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.
For I have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.
But I trusted in thee, O LORD: I said, Thou art my God.
My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies' sake.
Let me not be ashamed, O LORD; for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.
Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.
Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee; which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men!
Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for an house of defence to save me.
Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
Blessed be the LORD: for he hath shewed me his marvellous kindness in a strong city.
For I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee.
O love the LORD, all ye his saints: for the LORD preserveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer.
Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the LORD.
For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name's sake lead me, and guide me.
Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength.
Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O LORD God of truth.
I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the LORD.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities;
And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set my feet in a large room.
Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.
O LORD, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me.
My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my kinsmen stand afar off.
They also that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.
But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.
Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.
For in thee, O LORD, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God.
For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.
For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.
For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.
But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied.
For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.
They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing that good is.
Forsake me not, O LORD: O my God, be not far from me.
Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.
There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.
For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.
I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.
For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundness in my flesh.
I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.
I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.
When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah.
Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more.
I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my sorrow was stirred.
My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue,
LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am.
Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah.
Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.
And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.
Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the foolish.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.
Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
And the LORD'S anger was kindled the same time, and he sware, saying,
And the LORD'S anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed.
And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward Israel.
For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.
And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones:
But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward.
The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying,
And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the LORD to war,
And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him,
And the land be subdued before the LORD: then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the LORD, and before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the LORD.
But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the LORD: and be sure your sin will find you out.
Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.
And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead:
But thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my lord saith.
So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel:
And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every man armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be subdued before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession:
But if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.
And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying, As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.
We will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be ours.
And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts, even the cities of the country round about.
And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
And Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.
And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim,
And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.
And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.
And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.
And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof, and called them Havothjair.
And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name.
Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.
And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?
And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the LORD hath given them?
Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land.
For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the LORD had given them.
And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.
And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.
And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded.
But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.
And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe.
As the LORD commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD commanded Moses.
So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;
Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.
Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle.
And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,
For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the LORD commanded Moses.
And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.
There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.
So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war.
And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.
And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.
And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.
So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.
And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.
And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.
And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD hath commanded.
And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath;
And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the LORD shall forgive her.
Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.
But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day that he heard them.
But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard them; then he shall bear her iniquity.
These are the statutes, which the LORD commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father's house.
If a man vow a vow unto the LORD, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.
If a woman also vow a vow unto the LORD, and bind herself by a bond, being in her father's house in her youth;
And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.
But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the LORD shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul;
And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it; then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the LORD shall forgive her.
But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire.
And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of beasts.
And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho.
And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.
And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the battle.
And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the LORD in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation of the LORD.
Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.
But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.
Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.
And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.
And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD commanded Moses;
Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make go through the water.
And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation:
And divide the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who went out to battle, and between all the congregation:
And levy a tribute unto the LORD of the men of war which went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep:
Take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the LORD.
And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the LORD of Midian.
And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,
And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with him.
And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred sheep:
And the LORD'S tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.
And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the LORD'S tribute was threescore and twelve.
And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the LORD'S tribute was threescore and one.
Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.
And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the LORD'S tribute was thirty and two persons.
And Moses gave the tribute, which was the LORD'S heave offering, unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD commanded Moses.
And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided from the men that warred,
(Now the half that pertained unto the congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
And thirty and six thousand beeves,
And thirty thousand asses and five hundred,
And sixteen thousand persons;)
Even of the children of Israel's half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:
And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.
So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
We have therefore brought an oblation for the LORD, what every man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the LORD.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all wrought jewels.
And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.
(For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the LORD.
And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.
And they warred against the Midianites, as the LORD commanded Moses; and they slew all the males.
And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.
And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods.
And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel:
Even as the LORD commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad:
For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's brothers' sons:
And they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
These are the commandments and the judgments, which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
And they said, The LORD commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.
And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance.
And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.
And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of the LORD, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.
This is the thing which the LORD doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.
So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.
Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to Shepham:
And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward:
And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.
And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the LORD commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe:
For the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance:
The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
These are the names of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.
And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance.
And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan; (this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:)
And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli.
The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
These are they whom the LORD commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.
Then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea eastward:
And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and pass on to Azmon:
And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.
And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border: this shall be your west border.
And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall point out for you mount Hor:
From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the border shall be to Zedad:
And the border shall go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall be at Hazarenan: this shall be your north border.
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.
And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment.
And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for refuge.
Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.
These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.
And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he meeteth him, he shall slay him.
Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round about them.
But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;
Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.
But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon him any thing without laying of wait,
Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, that he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm:
Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood according to these judgments:
And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.
But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge, whither he was fled;
And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:
Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.
So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their beasts.
Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die.
Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to death.
And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell: for I the LORD dwell among the children of Israel.
And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty and two cities.
So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.
And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many; but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he inheriteth.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six thousand and five hundred.
And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank.
Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.
On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred.
Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.
And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shall go forward in the third rank.
The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.
Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.
And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of Judah.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go hindmost with their standards.
These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families, according to the house of their fathers.
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.
And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the children of Issachar.
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be captain of the children of Zebulun.
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies. These shall first set forth.
Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any bullock, or sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an abomination unto the LORD thy God.
And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee:
According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.
And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the LORD thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.
And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the LORD thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.
But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites:
If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the LORD thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness in the sight of the LORD thy God, in transgressing his covenant,
And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded;
And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel:
Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till they die.
At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.
The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put the evil away from among you.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the LORD thy God shall choose;
And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.
Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.
These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.
And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their names:
And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
As the LORD commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of their names, every male by their polls;
And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand and five hundred.
Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.
Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.
Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
From twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.
Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred.
Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers.
Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.
Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers.
So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel;
Even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.
For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, saying,
Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel:
And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.
But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their hosts.
But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of testimony.
And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.
Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head that same day.
And he shall consecrate unto the LORD the days of his separation, and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but the days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was defiled.
And this is the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
And he shall offer his offering unto the LORD, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peace offerings,
And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings.
And the priest shall bring them before the LORD, and shall offer his sin offering, and his burnt offering:
And he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the sacrifice of the peace offerings.
And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his separation is shaven:
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the LORD:
And the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the LORD: this is holy for the priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his offering unto the LORD for his separation, beside that that his hand shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them,
The LORD bless thee, and keep thee:
The LORD make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:
The LORD lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.
And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them.
He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.
All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.
All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth himself unto the LORD, he shall be holy, and shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow.
All the days that he separateth himself unto the LORD he shall come at no dead body.
He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the consecration of his God is upon his head.
All the days of his separation he is holy unto the LORD.
And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.
If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder,
And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the LORD thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.
Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you;
Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.
And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shall be an heap for ever; it shall not be built again.
And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;
Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
Ye shall walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.
And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee.
Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:
But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar.
And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put to the staves thereof:
And they shall take all the instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put them on a bar:
And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon:
And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.
And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation.
And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites:
But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families;
From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for burdens:
And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all that is made for them: so shall they serve.
At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their families, by the house of their fathers;
From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets thereof,
And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments, and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the instruments of the charge of their burden.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation:
And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These were they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by the house of their fathers,
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, about the most holy things:
Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the LORD.
And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers,
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation,
Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.
According to the commandment of the LORD they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one according to his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of him, as the LORD commanded Moses.
And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it:
And shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.
And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon:
And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves thereof.
And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it:
Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.
For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:
But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven:
A land which the LORD thy God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.
And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the LORD your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full.
Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;
And then the LORD'S wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you.
Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.
And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the LORD your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the LORD your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;
Then will the LORD drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than yourselves.
Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.
There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the LORD your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.
Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse;
A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I command you this day:
And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known.
And it shall come to pass, when the LORD thy God hath brought thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.
And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land;
Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?
For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.
And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.
And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the LORD hath destroyed them unto this day;
And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came into this place;
And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:
But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the LORD which he did.
I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise unto thee.
I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.
In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O LORD, when they hear the words of thy mouth.
Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the LORD: for great is the glory of the LORD.
Though the LORD be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off.
Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.
The LORD will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O LORD, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.
O LORD, thou hast searched me, and known me.
Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.
Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my mother's womb.
I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.
My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.
How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them!
If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake, I am still with thee.
Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye bloody men.
Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off.
For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in vain.
Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee?
I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.
Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts:
And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.
Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.
For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O LORD, thou knowest it altogether.
Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.
Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.
If thou, LORD, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.
I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.
My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.
Let Israel hope in the LORD: for with the LORD there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
LORD, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.
Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.
Let Israel hope in the LORD from henceforth and for ever.
A Song of degrees. LORD, remember David, and all his afflictions:
For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed.
The LORD hath sworn in truth unto David; he will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.
If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore.
For the LORD hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation.
This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.
I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.
I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.
There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed.
His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown flourish.
How he sware unto the LORD, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob;
Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed;
I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,
Until I find out a place for the LORD, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood.
We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.
Arise, O LORD, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.
Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints shout for joy.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!
It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments;
As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there the LORD commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.
Behold, bless ye the LORD, all ye servants of the LORD, which by night stand in the house of the LORD.
Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the LORD.
The LORD that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.
Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the name of the LORD; praise him, O ye servants of the LORD.
Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings;
Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan:
And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.
Thy name, O LORD, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O LORD, throughout all generations.
For the LORD will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning his servants.
The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;
They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths.
They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them.
Bless the LORD, O house of Israel: bless the LORD, O house of Aaron:
Ye that stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the house of our God,
Bless the LORD, O house of Levi: ye that fear the LORD, bless the LORD.
Blessed be the LORD out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD.
Praise the LORD; for the LORD is good: sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant.
For the LORD hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure.
For I know that the LORD is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.
Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places.
He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries.
Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.
Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endureth for ever:
And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever:
With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever:
And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever:
But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:
And slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:
Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever:
O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for ever.
And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:
And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever:
Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever.
Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever:
And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever.
Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.
O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever.
O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever.
To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever:
The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever:
The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever.
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion.
We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.
How shall we sing the LORD'S song in a strange land?
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.
O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.
Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.
Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.
Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Return, O LORD, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.
O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.
Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children.
And let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.
Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night.
Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in the morning they are like grass which groweth up.
In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth.
For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.
Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that is told.
And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,
And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
And thou shalt kill the bullock before the LORD, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.
And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.
But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.
Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.
And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.
And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.
And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the LORD: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.
And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration:
And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the LORD:
And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the LORD.
And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the LORD: it is an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the LORD: and it shall be thy part.
And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons:
And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the LORD.
And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons' after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.
And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place.
And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.
And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.
And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.
Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.
Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day continually.
The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:
And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.
And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.
And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.
This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.
And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.
And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest's office.
And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
And they shall know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am the LORD their God.
And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:
And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.
And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.
And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.
And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.
With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.
And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a memorial.
And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.
Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.
And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.
And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.
And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings.
And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure gold.
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.
And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it.
And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward.
And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.
And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD continually.
And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.
And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD continually.
And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.
And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.
And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:
A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about.
And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die not.
And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO TH
And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.
And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.
And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.
And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.
And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.
And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.
And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach:
And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.
And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.
And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.
It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.
And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:
He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling.
For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet.
Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.
He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him.
With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.
I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust.
Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence.
He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.
Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day;
Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.
Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked.
Because thou hast made the LORD, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation;
Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.
And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:
But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.
Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.
And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.
Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:)
And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.
Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord GOD.
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.
The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.
Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment:
Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.
But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.
For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.
Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.
And ye shall serve the LORD your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.
There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.
I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.
And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.
Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.
By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.
And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.
Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.
If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.
If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.
Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked.
And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.
If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:
Then shall an oath of the LORD be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.
And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall not make good that which was torn.
And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.
But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.
And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.
If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.
Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.
If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him.
He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the LORD only, he shall be utterly destroyed.
Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;
And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.
If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down:
For that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.
Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.
Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.
If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.
And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.
If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.
If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution.
If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.
If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour's goods.
For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.
Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.
If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.
And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.
He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.
And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.
But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.
And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.
And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.
And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:
If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.
If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.
Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money.
If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.
And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.
And if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.
If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.
But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.
If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.
If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.
Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.
If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein;
The owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the dead beast shall be his.
And if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide.
Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.
If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.
And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free:
Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever.
And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.
If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.
And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.
And God spake all these words, saying,
But the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:
For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.
Thou shalt not kill.
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Thou shalt not steal.
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.
And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.
And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.
I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.
And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold.
An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.
Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.
Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:
Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;
And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:
And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits.
And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.
And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.
And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.
All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.
The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.
All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass.
And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.
And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.
In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the LORD: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.
And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.
And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.
And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.
And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with brass.
And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.
Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.
And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side:
Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.
And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.
And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.
And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers' skins.
And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.
Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board.
Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.
And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.
And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards:
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.
And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.
And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.
The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.
And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver.
And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.
And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.
And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.
And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.
And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.
Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.
And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.
And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.
The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one measure.
And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.
And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.
The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.
And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.
And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.
And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.
And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.
And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.
Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.
Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.
And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.
And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them.
And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,
And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.
And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.
And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side:
Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.
And in the candlestick shall be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers.
And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick.
Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be one beaten work of pure gold.
And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.
And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.
Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.
And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount.
And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,
Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,
Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.
And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.
According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.
And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the LORD, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.
And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.
And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.
And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.
And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.
And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.
And the glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
And the sight of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.
And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.
And Moses alone shall come near the LORD: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.
And Moses came and told the people all the words of the LORD, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the LORD hath said will we do.
And Moses wrote all the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the LORD.
And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the LORD hath said will we do, and be obedient.
And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD hath made with you concerning all these words.
Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:
The LORD reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the cherubims; let the earth be moved.
The LORD is great in Zion; and he is high above all the people.
Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.
The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name; they called upon the LORD, and he answered them.
He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.
Thou answeredst them, O LORD our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the LORD our God is holy.
Praise ye the LORD. Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise in the congregation of saints.
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful in their King.
Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the timbrel and harp.
For the LORD taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with salvation.
Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a twoedged sword in their hand;
To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people;
To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron;
To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the LORD.
Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the LORD from the heavens: praise him in the heights.
Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:
Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the earth:
Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children:
Let them praise the name of the LORD: for his name alone is excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven.
He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the LORD.
Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.
Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light.
Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of the LORD: for he commanded, and they were created.
He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree which shall not pass.
Praise the LORD from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps:
Fire, and hail; snow, and vapour; stormy wind fulfilling his word:
Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars:
I will extol thee, my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.
All thy works shall praise thee, O LORD; and thy saints shall bless thee.
They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power;
To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.
The LORD upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that be bowed down.
The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their meat in due season.
Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
The LORD is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.
He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them.
Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
The LORD preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked will he destroy.
My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.
One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.
I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works.
And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy greatness.
They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.
The LORD is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy.
The LORD is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.
Blessed be the LORD my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight:
It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword.
Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood:
That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace:
That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets:
That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our streets.
Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people, whose God is the LORD.
My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under me.
LORD, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son of man, that thou makest account of him!
Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth away.
Bow thy heavens, O LORD, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.
Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them.
I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery and an instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.
Praise ye the LORD: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.
He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man.
The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.
Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.
For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee.
He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.
He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly.
He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes.
He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?
He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.
He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.
The LORD doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.
He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the LORD.
He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.
He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names.
Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.
The LORD lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the ground.
Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God:
Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.
He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.
Praise ye the LORD. Praise the LORD, O my soul.
The LORD shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the LORD.
While I live will I praise the LORD: I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.
Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.
Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the LORD his God:
Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keepeth truth for ever:
Which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to the hungry. The LORD looseth the prisoners:
The LORD openeth the eyes of the blind: the LORD raiseth them that are bowed down: the LORD loveth the righteous:
The LORD preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.
LORD, I cry unto thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee.
Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal escape.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.
Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.
When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words; for they are sweet.
Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.
But mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the Lord: in thee is my trust; leave not my soul destitute.
Keep me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the gins of the workers of iniquity.
Let burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.
Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.
I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor.
Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence.
They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders' poison is under their lips. Selah.
Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.
The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah.
I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O LORD.
O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in the day of battle.
Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. Selah.
As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.
Hear my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.
Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God: thy spirit is good; lead me into the land of uprightness.
Quicken me, O LORD, for thy name's sake: for thy righteousness' sake bring my soul out of trouble.
And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.
And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life down to the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead.
Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within me is desolate.
I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on the work of thy hands.
I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land. Selah.
Hear me speedily, O LORD: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.
Cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning; for in thee do I trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my soul unto thee.
Deliver me, O LORD, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.
I cried unto the LORD with my voice; with my voice unto the LORD did I make my supplication.
I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed before him my trouble.
When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewest my path. In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.
I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul.
I cried unto thee, O LORD: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the living.
Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with me.
And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's hath he gotten all this glory.
And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.
And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.
For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padanaram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father's.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before.
And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?
Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.
And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.
With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.
And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched, but found not the images.
And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.
This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.
And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.
And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.
And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.
And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;
And Mizpah; for he said, The LORD watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.
And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.
If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness betwixt me and thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee;
This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.
Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.
Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.
And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.
And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.
And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.
And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron.
And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.
And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:
And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:
And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south coast.
And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.
And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.
Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,
And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel,
Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,
And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers hath given you?
Give out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come again to me.
And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.
Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.
But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.
And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the LORD in Shiloh.
And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.
And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.
Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.
And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.
And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.
And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.
So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city.
And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred pieces of money.
And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
And he erected there an altar, and called it Elelohe-Israel.
And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.
Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.
And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.
And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children.
And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.
And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother;
Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,
Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.
And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?
Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.
And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.
And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.
So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.
And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.
And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.
And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.
And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now:
And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.
And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;
And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.
And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee:
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.
And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;
And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.
And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.
And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel.
And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.
And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.
And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin.
And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments:
And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.
And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:
The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:
And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram.
And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.
And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.
And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.
And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.
And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and blessed him.
And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.
And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:
And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised;
Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.
But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.
And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.
And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father.
And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.
And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,
These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.
Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.
And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.
And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.
They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.
And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come.
And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.
And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter; which thing ought not to be done.
And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.
And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.
And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.
And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.
And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.
And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.
These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.
Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him.
And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.
And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him;
And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it.
And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?
Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.
Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.
And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.
And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?
And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;
And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son's coat or no.
And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.
And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.
And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:
For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.
And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.
Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.
These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife.
And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.
And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.
And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.
And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.
Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister was Timna.
And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.
And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.
These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,
And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.
And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.
And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.
And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;
And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the father of the Edomites.
And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.
For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.
And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.
And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.
And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within.
And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.
And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,
That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice:
And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.
And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.
And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:
And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out.
And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.
And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.
But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.
The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the LORD was with him, and that which he did, the LORD made it to prosper.
And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.
And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the LORD blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.
And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly person, and well favoured.
And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.
But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;
There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
Now it came to pass, when Adonizedek king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them;
And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up to Bethhoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.
And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Bethhoron, that the LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.
Then spake Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.
And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.
And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the LORD fought for Israel.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.
And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.
And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to keep them:
And stay ye not, but pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them into your hand.
That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty.
And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities.
And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.
Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.
And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.
And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.
And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.
And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.
Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah:
Wherefore Adonizedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,
And the LORD delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.
And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it:
And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.
Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.
And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it:
And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.
And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:
And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:
And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.
Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.
So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of Israel commanded.
And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.
And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.
And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us.
So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valour.
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.
Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night.
Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.
And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;
And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;
All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.
Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.
Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he said unto them.
And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance according to their families.
And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;
Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,
And Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,
And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley,
This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,
And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth,
And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.
Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.
And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.
And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad according to their families.
And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;
And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;
And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.
And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.
From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, threescore cities:
And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the children of Machir by their families.
These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.
But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.
From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:
And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.
All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.
Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them;
From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;
Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:
The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;
The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;
The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;
The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.
And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah:
And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.
The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.
And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.
And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to their families.
And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.
And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.
And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher.
And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou?
Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.
And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh southward:
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.
And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah,
And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:
And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:
Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,
And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:
Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
From thence it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.
And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages:
Ekron, with her towns and her villages:
From Ekron even unto the sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages:
Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof:
And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,
And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir,
And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan:
And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:
Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:
And the border went up to Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:
Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:
In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,
And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages.
As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.
And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel:
And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:
And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.
And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses, while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.
As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.
Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD will be with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the LORD said.
And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.
Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed the LORD God of Israel.
And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.
By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.
For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.
For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their substance.
As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land.
Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Kadeshbarnea.
Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in mine heart.
Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the LORD my God.
And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God.
There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.
And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, even three countries.
Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them out.
And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me hitherto?
And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.
And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and they who are of the valley of Jezreel.
And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot only:
But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.
There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.
But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.
And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan;
Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead.
And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.
Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim;
And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:
And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel,
And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.
And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.
So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;
And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.
The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.
And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.
And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the LORD,
So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had filled the house of the LORD.
Then spake Solomon, The LORD said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever.
And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)
And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel.
And the LORD said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in thine heart.
Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name.
And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.
And the LORD hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel.
And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
And Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven:
And he said, LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is this day.
Therefore now, LORD God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked before me.
And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.
But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded?
Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:
That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make toward this place.
And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.
And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.
If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house:
Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this house:
Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest unto their fathers.
When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:
Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.
If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be;
What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:
And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.
Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.
If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the LORD toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy name:
Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness;
And so return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:
Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their cause,
And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.
And forgive thy people that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before them who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them:
For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee.
For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.
And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to heaven.
And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying,
Blessed be the LORD, that hath given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant.
The LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us:
That he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.
And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at all times, as the matter shall require:
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims.
That all the people of the earth may know that the LORD is God, and that there is none else.
Let your heart therefore be perfect with the LORD our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.
And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the LORD.
And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the LORD.
The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD: for there he offered burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brasen altar that was before the LORD was too little to receive the burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings.
And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven days, even fourteen days.
On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the LORD had done for David his servant, and for Israel his people.
For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.
And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen without: and there they are unto this day.
There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the LORD, and the king's house, and all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do,
And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the LORD, and the king's house,
(Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him; and they pleased him not.
And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day.
And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.
And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to build the house of the LORD, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.
For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon's wife.
And Solomon built Gezer, and Bethhoron the nether,
And Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land,
And all the cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
That the LORD appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.
And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of Israel,
Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.
But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.
These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that wrought in the work.
But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David unto her house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Millo.
And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the LORD, and he burnt incense upon the altar that was before the LORD. So he finished the house.
And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.
And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.
And the LORD said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.
And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:
Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people:
And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house?
And they shall answer, Because they forsook the LORD their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath the LORD brought upon them all this evil.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High:
But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.
Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.
The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shall flourish in the courts of our God.
They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing;
To shew that the LORD is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night,
Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn sound.
For thou, LORD, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.
A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.
When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever:
But thou, LORD, art most high for evermore.
For, lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
The LORD reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the LORD is clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world also is stablished, that it cannot be moved.
Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.
The floods have lifted up, O LORD, the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up their waves.
The LORD on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves of the sea.
Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, O LORD, for ever.
O LORD God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself.
He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?
The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
For the LORD will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.
But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in heart shall follow it.
Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
Unless the LORD had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.
When I said, My foot slippeth; thy mercy, O LORD, held me up.
In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.
Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law?
They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.
But the LORD is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge.
And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the LORD our God shall cut them off.
LORD, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves?
They break in pieces thy people, O LORD, and afflict thine heritage.
They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.
Yet they say, The LORD shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.
Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see?
O come, let us sing unto the LORD: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways:
Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with psalms.
For the LORD is a great God, and a great King above all gods.
In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is his also.
The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.
O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the LORD our maker.
For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his voice,
Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness:
When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.
O sing unto the LORD a new song: sing unto the LORD, all the earth.
Say among the heathen that the LORD reigneth: the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof.
Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice
Before the LORD: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.
Sing unto the LORD, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from day to day.
Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.
For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.
For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the LORD made the heavens.
Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
Give unto the LORD, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the LORD glory and strength.
Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come into his courts.
O worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all the earth.
The LORD reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof.
Ye that love the LORD, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous; and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.
Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.
His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.
The hills melted like wax at the presence of the LORD, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his glory.
Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols: worship him, all ye gods.
Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced because of thy judgments, O LORD.
For thou, LORD, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all gods.
O sing unto the LORD a new song; for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.
The LORD hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.
He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all the earth: make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.
Sing unto the LORD with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a psalm.
With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the LORD, the King.
Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.
Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together
Before the LORD; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.
Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat.
But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not.
Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?
Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.
Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?
Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy words.
And Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the king.
And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the king said, What wouldest thou?
And she said unto him, My lord, thou swarest by the LORD thy God unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.
And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou knowest it not:
And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.
Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat.
And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.
And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also came in.
And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, God save king Adonijah.
But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.
Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?
Then king David answered and said, Call me Bathsheba. And she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.
And the king sware, and said, As the LORD liveth, that hath redeemed my soul out of all distress,
So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
Even as I sware unto thee by the LORD God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.
Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever.
And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.
The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon:
And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon.
Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen: the LORD God of my lord the king say so too.
As the LORD hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.
So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to Gihon.
And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people said, God save king Solomon.
And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered to him: but the king knew her not.
And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.
And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an uproar?
And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came: and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.
And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king.
And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:
And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.
And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.
And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed.
And also thus said the king, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it.
And all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.
Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.
And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me to day that he will not slay his servant with the sword.
And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die.
So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house.
And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother bare him after Absalom.
And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.
But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.
And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's sons, and all the men of Judah the king's servants:
Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying,
So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David.
And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.
Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.
And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.
He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said, Say on.
And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother's: for it was his from the LORD.
And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said unto him, Say on.
And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.
And Bathsheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.
Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.
I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew thyself a man;
Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee, say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I will not say thee nay.
And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.
And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.
Then king Solomon sware by the LORD, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.
Now therefore, as the LORD liveth, which hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.
And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him that he died.
And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the Lord GOD before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.
So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the LORD; that he might fulfil the word of the LORD, which he spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the tabernacle of the LORD; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.
And keep the charge of the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself:
And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the LORD, and said unto him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.
And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood, which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.
And the LORD shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.
Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever from the LORD.
So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.
And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.
And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither.
For it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.
And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good: as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.
And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath.
That the LORD may continue his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel.
And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath.
And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.
And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I not make thee to swear by the LORD, and protested unto thee, saying, Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word that I have heard is good.
Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the LORD, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?
The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the LORD shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head;
And king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the LORD for ever.
So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went out, and fell upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.
Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.
Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.
But shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.
And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the LORD, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword.
Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.
And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the LORD, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment;
Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.
And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.
And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days.
And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.
Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.
And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.
And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.
And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid it.
Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the name of the LORD, until those days.
And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.
And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear.
And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spake before the king.
Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.
And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king.
And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.
Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.
Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.
And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment.
And Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.
And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.
In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.
And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.
And now, O LORD my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in.
And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?
So king Solomon was king over all Israel.
The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:
The son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo, and all Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Bethshean to Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:
The son of Geber, in Ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brasen bars:
Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:
Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth:
Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar:
Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin:
Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only officer which was in the land.
And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok the priest,
Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.
And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.
And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal,
Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.
For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river, from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river: and he had peace on all sides round about him.
And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon.
And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in his month: they lacked nothing.
Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his charge.
And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.
Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.
And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.
For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five.
And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.
And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:
And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, and the king's friend:
And Ahishar was over the household: and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute.
And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year made provision.
And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim:
The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elonbethhanan:
And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.
So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all his desire.
And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.
And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together.
And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.
And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was over the levy.
And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains;
Beside the chief of Solomon's officers which were over the work, three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.
And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.
And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.
And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,
Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the LORD his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the LORD put them under the soles of his feet.
But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.
And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name.
Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.
And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the LORD this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.
And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.
My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.
And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD.
And then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.
And the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying,
Concerning this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake unto David thy father:
And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.
So Solomon built the house, and finished it.
And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, both the floor of the house, and the walls of the cieling: and he covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.
And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the floor and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built them for it within, even for the oracle, even for the most holy place.
And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits long.
And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.
And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the LORD.
And the house which king Solomon built for the LORD, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits.
And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of cedar.
So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it with gold.
And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with gold.
And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each ten cubits high.
And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.
And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of one measure and one size.
The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other cherub.
And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and they stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house.
And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.
And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, within and without.
And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.
And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without.
And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree: the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.
The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees.
So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a fourth part of the wall.
And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.
And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.
And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams.
In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the LORD laid, in the month Zif:
And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.
And for the house he made windows of narrow lights.
And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of the oracle: and he made chambers round about:
The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.
The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber, and out of the middle into the third.
So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with beams and boards of cedar.
But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished all his house.
And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.
And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones, and cedars.
And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the house of the LORD, and for the porch of the house.
And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.
For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.
And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter was five cubits:
And nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.
And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.
And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of lily work in the porch, four cubits.
He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.
And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also above, over against the belly which was by the network: and the pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter.
And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.
And upon the top of the pillars was lily work: so was the work of the pillars finished.
And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
And under the brim of it round about there were knops compassing it, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops were cast in two rows, when it was cast.
It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.
And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two thousand baths.
And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height of it.
And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders, and the borders were between the ledges:
And on the borders that were between the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the ledges there was a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen were certain additions made of thin work.
And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty five pillars, fifteen in a row.
And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver were undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.
And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit: but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round.
And under the borders were four wheels; and the axletrees of the wheels were joined to the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.
And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, were all molten.
And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base: and the undersetters were of the very base itself.
And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders thereof were of the same.
For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the proportion of every one, and additions round about.
After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one casting, one measure, and one size.
Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten bases one laver.
And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward over against the south.
And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light in three ranks.
And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for the house of the LORD:
The two pillars, and the two bowls of the chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars;
And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the pillars;
And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases;
And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;
And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the LORD, were of bright brass.
In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan.
And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.
And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of the LORD: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread was,
And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs of gold,
And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and light was against light in three ranks.
And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the temple.
So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the LORD. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the LORD.
And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was before them: and the other pillars and the thick beam were before them.
Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the floor to the other.
And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch, which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.
All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.
Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul.
When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.
I made sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb to them.
They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the drunkards.
But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O LORD, in an acceptable time: O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.
Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.
Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
Hear me, O LORD; for thy lovingkindness is good: turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.
And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hear me speedily.
Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies.
Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are all before thee.
I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me.
Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.
They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap.
Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins continually to shake.
Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold of them.
Let their habitation be desolate; and let none dwell in their tents.
For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded.
Add iniquity unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy righteousness.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.
But I am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.
I am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.
I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving.
This also shall please the LORD better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs.
The humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God.
For the LORD heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.
Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moveth therein.
For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah: that they may dwell there, and have it in possession.
The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name shall dwell therein.
They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away.
O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee.
Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord GOD of hosts, be ashamed for my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.
Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face.
I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children.
For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.
Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him flee before him.
Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodness for the poor.
The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it.
Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home divided the spoil.
Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.
When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.
The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan; an high hill as the hill of Bashan.
Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God desireth to dwell in; yea, the LORD will dwell in it for ever.
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.
Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the LORD God might dwell among them.
Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah.
As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto GOD the Lord belong the issues from death.
But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.
The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again from the depths of the sea:
That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same.
They have seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary.
The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; among them were the damsels playing with timbrels.
Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their council, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.
Thy God hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us.
Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents unto thee.
But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God: yea, let them exceedingly rejoice.
Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war.
Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.
Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the Lord; Selah:
To him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old; lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.
Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds.
O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.
Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him.
A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
God setteth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which are bound with chains: but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.
O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness; Selah:
The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary.
Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed.
Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the springing thereof.
Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness.
They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice on every side.
The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.
O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.
By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea:
Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being girded with power:
Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people.
They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens: thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it.
Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.
The righteous shall be glad in the LORD, and shall trust in him; and all the upright in heart shall glory.
Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insurrection of the workers of iniquity:
Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words:
That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall see them?
They search out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart, is deep.
But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded.
So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them shall flee away.
And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his doing.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon us; Selah.
That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.
O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.
Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.
Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall bless us.
God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands:
For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.
Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst affliction upon our loins.
Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.
I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams; I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soul.
I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me:
But verily God hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice of my prayer.
Sing forth the honour of his name: make his praise glorious.
Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.
All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they shall sing to thy name. Selah.
Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men.
He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on foot: there did we rejoice in him.
He ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard:
Which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moved.
Hear my cry, O God; attend unto my prayer.
From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.
I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah.
For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name.
Thou wilt prolong the king's life: and his years as many generations.
He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him.
So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows.
O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased; O turn thyself to us again.
Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O God, which didst not go out with our armies?
Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.
Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh.
Thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment.
Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear me.
God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia, triumph thou because of me.
Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?
Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan.
And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul;
All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.
And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul's sons.
And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers.
Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.
And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him.
So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together.
And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people.
Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation.
Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them.
God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that power belongeth unto God.
Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every man according to his work.
He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved.
How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.
They only consult to cast him down from his excellency: they delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.
My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him.
He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall not be moved.
In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.
Trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity.
These are the words of the covenant, which the LORD commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.
Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;
But with him that standeth here with us this day before the LORD our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day:
For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye passed by;
And ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them:)
Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the LORD our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;
And it come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:
And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land;
The LORD will not spare him, but then the anger of the LORD and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the LORD shall blot out his name from under heaven.
And the LORD shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this book of the law:
So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the sicknesses which the LORD hath laid upon it;
And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:
Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?
Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt:
For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them:
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
And the LORD rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as it is this day.
The secret things belong unto the LORD our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.
The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles:
Yet the LORD hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.
And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot.
Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink: that ye might know that I am the LORD your God.
And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote them:
And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.
Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.
And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the LORD thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:
And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the LORD; and they shall be afraid of thee.
And the LORD shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
The LORD shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow.
But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:
Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.
Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out.
And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God.
The LORD shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.
The LORD shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.
The LORD shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.
The LORD shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
The LORD shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.
And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.
The LORD will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.
The LORD shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:
And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.
Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field.
Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.
Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.
Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long: and there shall be no might in thine hand.
The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway:
So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
The LORD shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.
The LORD shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.
And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the LORD shall lead thee.
Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather but little in; for the locust shall consume it.
Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat them.
Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his fruit.
Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shall go into captivity.
All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.
The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shalt come down very low.
He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.
Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:
And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.
Because thou servedst not the LORD thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;
Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the LORD shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.
And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.
And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the LORD thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee:
So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave:
So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates.
The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.
If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, TH
Then the LORD will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.
Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.
Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.
Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will the LORD bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the LORD thy God.
And it shall come to pass, that as the LORD rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the LORD will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it.
And the LORD shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone.
And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the LORD shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind:
And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life:
In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
And the LORD shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.
The LORD shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.
The LORD shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.
The LORD shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, and walk in his ways.
He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD.
If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:
But it shall be, when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.
Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:
And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:
For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thee:
He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.
There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these are abomination unto the LORD thy God.
Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury:
A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the LORD.
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it.
When thou shalt vow a vow unto the LORD thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.
But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.
That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform; even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the LORD thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.
When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.
When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn.
Nevertheless the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the LORD thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the LORD thy God loved thee.
Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days for ever.
Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.
The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the LORD in their third generation.
When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing.
Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother.
Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.
Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and linen together.
Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.
If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,
And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid:
Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate:
And the damsel's father shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;
And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the cloth before the elders of the city.
And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him;
And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.
And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it to him again.
But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel:
Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you.
If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.
If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her;
Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.
But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:
But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter:
For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.
If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;
Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.
In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself.
A man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his father's skirt.
Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again.
The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are abomination unto the LORD thy God.
If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam with the young:
But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days.
When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.
Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled.
If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him:
When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,
And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife;
Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;
And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.
And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her.
If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated:
Then it shall be, when he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indeed the firstborn:
But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn is his.
If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:
Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;
Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain:
And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard.
And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.
And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree:
His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.
And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke;
And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer's neck there in the valley:
And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the LORD; and by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried:
And all the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley:
And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.
Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD.
When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.
And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.
And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:
And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword:
But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thee.
Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.
But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:
When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege:
And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,
Only the trees which thou knowest that they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee, until it be subdued.
And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;
For the LORD your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.
And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it.
And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.
And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.
And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well as his heart.
And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall make captains of the armies to lead the people.
And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.
Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.
And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,
These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:
And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,
Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the LORD, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.
Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.
And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister:
Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife; because he uncovereth his father's skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say, Amen.
Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen.
And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over, that thou mayest go in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thee.
Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.
And there shalt thou build an altar unto the LORD thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.
Thou shalt build the altar of the LORD thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the LORD thy God:
And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and rejoice before the LORD thy God.
And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.
And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the LORD thy God.
And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein;
And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O LORD, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy God:
And thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the LORD thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you.
When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled;
Then thou shalt say before the LORD thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them:
I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.
Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.
This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:
And the LORD hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;
And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the LORD thy God, as he hath spoken.
That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name there.
And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am come unto the country which the LORD sware unto our fathers for to give us.
And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.
And thou shalt speak and say before the LORD thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous:
And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:
And when we cried unto the LORD God of our fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression:
And the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders:
And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.
If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.
And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.
When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets:
Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.
Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.
Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.
Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of Egypt;
How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.
Therefore it shall be, when the LORD thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not forget it.
And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.
Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.
Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.
If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.
And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.
And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.
Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her;
Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother's house.
When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.
When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.
Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.
And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the LORD thy God.
Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates:
At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the LORD, and it be sin unto thee.
The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge:
But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.
When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's wife.
When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.
And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.
When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.
No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh a man's life to pledge.
If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.
Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.
Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt.
And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The LORD hath not appeared unto thee.
And Moses said unto the LORD, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
And the LORD said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the LORD?
Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.
And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.
And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.
And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.
And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life.
And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod.
And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
And the LORD said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.
And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is my son, even my firstborn:
And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.
And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill him.
Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me.
So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.
And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.
And Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him.
And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel:
And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.
And Aaron spake all the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.
And the people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.
And the LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.
And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.
And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.
So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.
And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.
And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore?
Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?
There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine own people.
But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the LORD.
Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.
And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task.
And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither will I let Israel go.
And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:
And they said unto them, The LORD look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.
And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.
And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the LORD our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.
And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.
And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.
And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,
Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.
And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words.
Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
And Moses spake before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the families of Reuben.
And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.
And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.
The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.
And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three years.
And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to their generations.
And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD:
And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.
And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.
And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korhites.
And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.
And it came to pass on the day when the LORD spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,
That the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, I am the LORD: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.
And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.
And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?
And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.
And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.
Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments:
And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the LORD.
And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.
And the LORD said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the LORD had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments.
For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.
Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.
And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.
Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.
And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone.
Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land.
And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the LORD had said.
And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.
And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.
And seven days were fulfilled, after that the LORD had smitten the river.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.
And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded them, so did they.
And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.
Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.
Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land.
Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.
And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:
And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.
And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:
And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.
But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive.
And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?
And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.
And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.
Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.
And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them.
Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we:
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.
And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.
And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.
Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.
Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.
And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.
And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to day?
And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.
And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.
And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.
And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.
And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.
And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them.
And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.
And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.
And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.
And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother.
And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.
Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.
And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?
And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.
And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt:
And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.
And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.
And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.
And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:
But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.
And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.
Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.
And the LORD said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;
And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD our God.
And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.
And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.
And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.
And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.
But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said.
And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:
And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.
And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth.
And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.
And the LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.
And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.
And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as he shall command us.
And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me.
And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.
And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD.
And the LORD did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.
And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.
And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD.
And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only?
Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.
And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.
For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.
And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.
As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.
Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.
For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still,
He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses:
And he that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his cattle in the field.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.
Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.
And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the earth is the LORD'S.
Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.
But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the LORD God.
And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.
But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up.
And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the LORD: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses.
And the LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the children's of Israel.
And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the LORD shall do this thing in the land.
And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.
O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is;
They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.
But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.
Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.
Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.
My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips:
When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.
Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.
My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.
But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth.
And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;
But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.
And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.
And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.
We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.
And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this company.
And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.
And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and David rescued his two wives.
And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered all.
And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.
And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave before those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.
And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them.
Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.
Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand.
For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike.
And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.
And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD;
To them which were in Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were in Jattir,
And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa,
And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,
So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.
And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,
And to them which were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt.
Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD his God.
And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.
And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.
So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.
And David spake unto the LORD the words of this song in the day that the LORD had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul:
He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under his feet.
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind.
And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.
Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.
The LORD thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice.
And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them.
And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuking of the LORD, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;
He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me.
They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my stay.
And he said, The LORD is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.
For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.
I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine iniquity.
Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me according to my righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.
With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.
With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.
And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.
For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the LORD will lighten my darkness.
The God of my rock; in him will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.
For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped over a wall.
As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.
For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a rock, save our God?
God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.
He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high places.
He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.
Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy gentleness hath made me great.
Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not slip.
I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them.
And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.
I will call on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.
For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.
Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.
They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but he answered them not.
Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.
Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not shall serve me.
Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear, they shall be obedient unto me.
Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their close places.
The LORD liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation.
It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me,
And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.
When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men made me afraid;
Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O LORD, among the heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name.
He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.
The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the snares of death prevented me;
In my distress I called upon the LORD, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry did enter into his ears.
Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved and shook, because he was wroth.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.
Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,
He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the LORD wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil.
And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.
But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought a great victory.
And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.
And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!
And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD.
And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty men.
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and slew them, and had the name among three.
Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.
The Spirit of the LORD spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.
These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among three mighty men.
He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,
Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite,
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah,
Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite,
Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.
And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.
Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.
But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands:
But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.
These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away:
And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.
But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And one of Joab's men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.
And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.
When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him.
And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.
Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.
And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou Joab? And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.
Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the matter.
I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?
So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.
And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.
The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.
Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites:
And Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder:
And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:
And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.
And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.
Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days, and be thou here present.
So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.
And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.
And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.
Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David enquired of the LORD. And the LORD answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.
And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.
And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them from the street of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa:
And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.
And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was intreated for the land.
Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint.
And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel.
And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant.
And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)
And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.
And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea the brother of David slew him.
These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the LORD?
And the Gibeonites said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that will I do for you.
And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel,
Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, whom the LORD did choose. And the king said, I will give them.
But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the LORD'S oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:
And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the LORD: and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.
And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.
And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David said unto the LORD, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.
For when David was up in the morning, the word of the LORD came unto the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,
Go and say unto David, Thus saith the LORD, I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.
So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.
And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are great: and let me not fall into the hand of man.
So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.
And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David spake unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father's house.
And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar unto the LORD in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the LORD commanded.
For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the people.
And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on his face upon the ground.
And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people.
And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen for wood.
All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king, The LORD thy God accept thee.
And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the LORD my God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So the LORD was intreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.
And Joab said unto the king, Now the LORD thy God add unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing?
Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.
And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward Jazer:
Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon,
And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even to Beersheba.
So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.
And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.
And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them.
And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:
Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.
So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden.
And the LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.
The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;
And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.
And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.
And the LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.
And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:
But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.
And the LORD God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.
And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.
And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;
And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.
And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens,
And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.
But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.
And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.
And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the third day.
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.
And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.
And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.
And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.
And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.
And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.
And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.
And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life.
And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in.
And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:
All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
And Noah did according unto all that the LORD commanded him.
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,
There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.
And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,
And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.
And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.
But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female.
That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.
Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.
And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.
Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
And the LORD said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.
There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown.
And GOD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.
And the LORD said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD.
These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;
And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.
And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel:
And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.
And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:
And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.
And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:
And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:
Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.
And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.
And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:
And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.
And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech:
And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.
And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:
And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the LORD hath cursed.
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:
And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.
And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters:
And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:
And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:
And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:
And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD.
And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground.
And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.
And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.
And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.
And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.
And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.
And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.
And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.
And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.
And Zillah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.
If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.
And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.
And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the LORD.
And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering:
But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.
And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?
If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.
And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.
And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?
I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O LORD, will I sing.
I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.
I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.
A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.
Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.
He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.
I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the LORD.
O LORD my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me:
My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart.
God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.
If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready.
He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.
Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood.
He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.
His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.
I will praise the LORD according to his righteousness: and will sing praise to the name of the LORD most high.
Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.
O LORD my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands;
If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:)
Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah.
Arise, O LORD, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded.
So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes therefore return thou on high.
The LORD shall judge the people: judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.
Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end; but establish the just: for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins.
Bless the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.
As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
Like as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pitieth them that fear him.
For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.
As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more.
But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children;
To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them.
The LORD hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all.
Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:
Bless the LORD, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.
Bless ye the LORD, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure.
Bless the LORD, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the LORD, O my soul.
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases;
Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies;
Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.
The LORD executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.
He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.
The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.
Hear my prayer, O LORD, and let my cry come unto thee.
Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down.
My days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered like grass.
But thou, O LORD, shalt endure for ever; and thy remembrance unto all generations.
Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come.
For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof.
So the heathen shall fear the name of the LORD, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
When the LORD shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.
He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.
This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall praise the LORD.
For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven did the LORD behold the earth;
Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble; incline thine ear unto me: in the day when I call answer me speedily.
To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death;
To declare the name of the LORD in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;
When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the LORD.
He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.
I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are throughout all generations.
Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands.
They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed:
But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.
For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as an hearth.
My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; so that I forget to eat my bread.
By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin.
I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert.
I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.
Mine enemies reproach me all the day; and they that are mad against me are sworn against me.
For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,
O give thanks unto the LORD; call upon his name: make known his deeds among the people.
And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant:
Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance:
When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it.
When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people;
Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staff of bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant:
Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:
Until the time that his word came: the word of the LORD tried him.
Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works.
The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:
To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger than their enemies.
He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with his servants.
He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.
They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not against his word.
He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.
Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the LORD.
Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their kings.
He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts.
He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He smote their vines also and their fig trees; and brake the trees of their coasts.
He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that without number,
And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground.
He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.
He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble person among their tribes.
Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.
He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the night.
Seek the LORD, and his strength: seek his face evermore.
The people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the dry places like a river.
For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.
And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness:
And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the people;
That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the LORD.
He is the LORD our God: his judgments are in all the earth.
He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.
Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac;
Bless the LORD, O my soul. O LORD my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty.
He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their thirst.
By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches.
He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;
And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.
The trees of the LORD are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;
Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are her house.
The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the conies.
He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.
Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:
Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.
The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.
The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens.
Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.
O LORD, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.
So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.
There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein.
These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season.
That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.
Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.
Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.
The glory of the LORD shall endure for ever: the LORD shall rejoice in his works.
He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.
I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.
My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the LORD.
Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bless thou the LORD, O my soul. Praise ye the LORD.
Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:
Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.
Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains.
At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.
They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast founded for them.
Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.
O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.
Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron;
Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the most High:
Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they fell down, and there was none to help.
Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.
He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder.
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!
For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.
Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.
Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near unto the gates of death.
Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saveth them out of their distresses.
Let the redeemed of the LORD say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy;
He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions.
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!
And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing.
They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters;
These see the works of the LORD, and his wonders in the deep.
For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof.
They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul is melted because of trouble.
They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits' end.
Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses.
He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.
And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south.
Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them unto their desired haven.
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!
Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the elders.
He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the watersprings into dry ground;
A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into watersprings.
And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city for habitation;
And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase.
He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly; and suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow.
They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in.
He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the wilderness, where there is no way.
Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him families like a flock.
The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the lovingkindness of the LORD.
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses.
And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation.
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!
For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul with goodness.
Praise ye the LORD. O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.
And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.
Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.
They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:
But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.
And he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their soul.
They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the LORD.
The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.
And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up the wicked.
They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.
Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD? who can shew forth all his praise?
Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.
Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word:
But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD.
They joined themselves also unto Baalpeor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them.
Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth righteousness at all times.
Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was stayed.
And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore.
They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the LORD commanded them:
But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.
And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.
Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils,
And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was polluted with blood.
Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions.
Remember me, O LORD, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation;
Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.
And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them.
Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand.
Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.
Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry:
And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies.
He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.
Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.
Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the LORD.
That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.
We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.
Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea.
Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known.
He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the depths, as through the wilderness.
Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise;
Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places.
Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the strangers spoil his labour.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.
Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let their name be blotted out.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the LORD; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Let them be before the LORD continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth.
Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.
As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him.
As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.
Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually.
For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.
Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the LORD, and of them that speak evil against my soul.
But do thou for me, O GOD the Lord, for thy name's sake: because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.
For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the locust.
My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.
I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me they shaked their heads.
Help me, O LORD my God: O save me according to thy mercy:
That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, LORD, hast done it.
Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.
They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against me without a cause.
I will greatly praise the LORD with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude.
For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn his soul.
For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer.
And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand.
When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become sin.
Let his days be few; and let another take his office.
Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.
Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?
Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?
Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.
Awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.
I will praise thee, O LORD, among the people: and I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth;
That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me.
God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe; over Philistia will I triumph.
O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens.
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?
For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.
Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:
All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;
The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.
O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
I will praise thee, O LORD, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all thy marvellous works.
And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, LORD, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
Sing praises to the LORD, which dwelleth in Zion: declare among the people his doings.
When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he forgetteth not the cry of the humble.
Have mercy upon me, O LORD; consider my trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:
That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in thy salvation.
The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid is their own foot taken.
The LORD is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.
For the needy shall not alway be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever.
Arise, O LORD; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in thy sight.
I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou most High.
Put them in fear, O LORD: that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.
When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy presence.
For thou hast maintained my right and my cause; thou satest in the throne judging right.
Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou hast put out their name for ever and ever.
O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast destroyed cities; their memorial is perished with them.
But the LORD shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment.
And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness.
The LORD also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.
Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.
Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.
For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul: they have not set God before them. Selah.
Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.
He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.
I will freely sacrifice unto thee: I will praise thy name, O LORD; for it is good.
For he hath delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies.
Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my supplication.
Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it.
Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her streets.
For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him:
But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.
We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.
Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.
As for me, I will call upon God; and the LORD shall save me.
Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice.
He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me.
God shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old. Selah. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.
Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise;
He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he hath broken his covenant.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.
Cast thy burden upon the LORD, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.
But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in thee.
Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.
My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.
Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.
And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest.
Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.
I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.
Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
Be merciful unto me, O God: for man would swallow me up; he fighting daily oppresseth me.
In God will I praise his word: in the LORD will I praise his word.
In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.
Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.
For thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?
Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most High.
What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.
In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.
Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil.
They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps, when they wait for my soul.
Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God.
Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know; for God is for me.
Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me: for my soul trusteth in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast.
For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the earth.
I will cry unto God most high; unto God that performeth all things for me.
He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.
My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above all the earth.
They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. Selah.
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.
Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.
I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among the nations.
The mighty God, even the LORD, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.
For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.
I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field are mine.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.
Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most High:
And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.
But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?
Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.
When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers.
Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.
Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.
Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son.
These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.
Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.
He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.
Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself. Selah.
Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against thee: I am God, even thy God.
I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt offerings, to have been continually before me.
I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.
Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.
For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.
Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.
Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest.
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.
Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.
Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.
Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God endureth continually.
Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working deceitfully.
Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.
Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.
The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:
Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.
But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.
I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.
The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good.
God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God.
Every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread: they have not called upon God.
There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put them to shame, because God hath despised them.
Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?
The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.
Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of your hands in the earth.
The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies.
Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear;
Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely.
Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the young lions, O LORD.
Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.
As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away: like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.
Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.
Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up against me.
The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.
Slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord our shield.
For the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.
Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah.
And at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city.
Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.
But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble.
Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defence, and the God of my mercy.
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.
For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O LORD.
They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me, and behold.
Thou therefore, O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.
They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city.
Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear?
But thou, O LORD, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have all the heathen in derision.
Because of his strength will I wait upon thee: for God is my defence.
The king shall joy in thy strength, O LORD; and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!
Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.
Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.
Be thou exalted, LORD, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.
Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and hast not withholden the request of his lips. Selah.
For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head.
He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever.
His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him.
For thou hast made him most blessed for ever: thou hast made him exceeding glad with thy countenance.
For the king trusteth in the LORD, and through the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved.
Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.
Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the LORD shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them.
The LORD hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend thee;
Send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion;
Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice; Selah.
Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.
We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our banners: the LORD fulfil all thy petitions.
Now know I that the LORD saveth his anointed; he will hear him from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.
Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the LORD our God.
They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.
Save, LORD: let the king hear us when we call.
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.
He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the LORD for ever.
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring?
I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mother's belly.
Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help.
Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.
They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion.
I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.
My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death.
For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet.
I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.
They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.
But be not thou far from me, O LORD: O my strength, haste thee to help me.
O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest not; and in the night season, and am not silent.
Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog.
Save me from the lion's mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.
Ye that fear the LORD, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him; and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.
For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard.
My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear him.
The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the LORD that seek him: your heart shall live for ever.
All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the LORD: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.
For the kingdom is the LORD'S: and he is the governor among the nations.
All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that go down to the dust shall bow before him: and none can keep alive his own soul.
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.
A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.
They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he hath done this.
Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them.
They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.
But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.
All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying,
He trusted on the LORD that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.
But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother's breasts.
Unto thee, O LORD, do I lift up my soul.
All the paths of the LORD are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.
For thy name's sake, O LORD, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.
What man is he that feareth the LORD? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.
His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.
The secret of the LORD is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.
Mine eyes are ever toward the LORD; for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and afflicted.
The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses.
Look upon mine affliction and my pain; and forgive all my sins.
Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with cruel hatred.
O my God, I trust in thee: let me not be ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over me.
O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I put my trust in thee.
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which transgress without cause.
Shew me thy ways, O LORD; teach me thy paths.
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day.
Remember, O LORD, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness' sake, O LORD.
Good and upright is the LORD: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.
The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.
The earth is the LORD'S, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.
Who is this King of glory? The LORD of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.
For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the LORD? or who shall stand in his holy place?
He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.
He shall receive the blessing from the LORD, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in.
Who is this King of glory? The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in battle.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in.
The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the LORD is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
When my father and my mother forsake me, then the LORD will take me up.
Teach me thy way, O LORD, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies.
Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the LORD in the land of the living.
Wait on the LORD: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the LORD.
When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.
One thing have I desired of the LORD, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD, and to enquire in his temple.
For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.
And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me: therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the LORD.
Hear, O LORD, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me.
When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, LORD, will I seek.
Hide not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.
Judge me, O LORD; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the LORD; therefore I shall not slide.
In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes.
But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto me.
My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the LORD.
Examine me, O LORD, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.
For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.
I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.
I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit with the wicked.
I will wash mine hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, O LORD:
That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.
LORD, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.
Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:
Give unto the LORD, O ye mighty, give unto the LORD glory and strength.
The LORD sitteth upon the flood; yea, the LORD sitteth King for ever.
The LORD will give strength unto his people; the LORD will bless his people with peace.
Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name; worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness.
The voice of the LORD is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth: the LORD is upon many waters.
The voice of the LORD is powerful; the voice of the LORD is full of majesty.
The voice of the LORD breaketh the cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh the cedars of Lebanon.
He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn.
The voice of the LORD divideth the flames of fire.
The voice of the LORD shaketh the wilderness; the LORD shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh.
The voice of the LORD maketh the hinds to calve, and discovereth the forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.
Unto thee will I cry, O LORD my rock; be not silent to me: lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.
Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle.
Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts.
Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to them their desert.
Because they regard not the works of the LORD, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.
Blessed be the LORD, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications.
The LORD is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song will I praise him.
The LORD is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and lift them up for ever.
And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.
A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
One kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink offerings.
And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD seven days:
And ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish:
And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams,
And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs:
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:
And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their drink offerings.
And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish;
And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:
And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram,
And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.
And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.
On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work therein:
But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:
And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.
These things ye shall do unto the LORD in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.
And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the LORD commanded Moses.
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an atonement for you:
Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.
And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work therein:
But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD for a sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish:
And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram,
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
This is the burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.
And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot;
And three tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.
And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.
And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the LORD shall be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.
And in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of the LORD.
And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
In the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work therein:
But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire for a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you without blemish:
Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season.
And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram;
A several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
And one goat for a sin offering, to make an atonement for you.
Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.
After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.
And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.
Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat offering unto the LORD, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work:
But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year;
And their meat offering of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two tenth deals unto one ram,
A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs;
And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the LORD; two lambs of the first year without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.
And one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you.
Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their drink offerings.
The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even;
And a tenth part of an ephah of flour for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil.
It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.
And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the LORD for a drink offering.
And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.
And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof:
And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:
And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.
Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites.
And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.
And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the LORD against the sun, that the fierce anger of the LORD may be turned away from Israel.
And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto Baalpeor.
And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand;
And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.
And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.
And when Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times.
Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath kept thee back from honour.
And now, behold, I go unto my people: come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter days.
And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:
He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:
I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.
And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.
Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city.
And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.
And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that he perish for ever.
And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.
Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God doeth this!
And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall perish for ever.
And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak also went his way.
And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:
He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!
As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the trees of lign aloes which the LORD hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.
He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.
He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee.
Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.
And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father's brethren.
And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the LORD commanded Moses.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of Israel.
And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.
For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.
And Moses spake unto the LORD, saying,
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;
And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight.
And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,
And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.
And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the LORD: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
And Moses did as the LORD commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.
Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and had no sons.
Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our father.
And Moses brought their cause before the LORD.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.
And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.
And it came to pass after the plague, that the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became a sign.
Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.
The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred.
The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
These are the families of the children of Gad according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.
The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are able to go to war in Israel.
And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.
And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
These are the families of Judah according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:
Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
These are the families of Issachar according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.
Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.
The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and Ephraim.
Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,
These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:
And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:
And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.
These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families.
The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the LORD commanded Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt.
And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred.
These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their families.
All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.
Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.
These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:
Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:
These are the families of Naphtali according to their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four hundred.
These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be given according to those that were numbered of him.
Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between many and few.
And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram.
And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the LORD.
And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.
These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
For the LORD had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.
And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove against the LORD:
And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners.
And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.
And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrising.
From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.
From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.
Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the LORD, What he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon,
And at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab.
And from thence they went to Beer: that is the well whereof the LORD spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them water.
Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:
The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah:
And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:
And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.
And from Bamoth in the valley, that is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward Jeshimon.
And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for the border of the children of Ammon was strong.
And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.
Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built and prepared:
For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon.
Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites.
And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place Hormah.
We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.
Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.
And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the battle at Edrei.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.
And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way.
And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light bread.
And the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died.
Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD, and against thee; pray unto the LORD, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.
And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.
Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.
And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?
And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.
This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel strove with the LORD, and he was sanctified in them.
And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us:
How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers:
And when we cried unto the LORD, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border:
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wells: we will go by the king's high way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders.
And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword.
And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only, without doing any thing else, go through on my feet.
And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.
Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him.
And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom, saying,
Aaron shall be gathered unto his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah.
Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor:
And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son: and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there.
And Moses did as the LORD commanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.
And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we had died when our brethren died before the LORD!
And why have ye brought up the congregation of the LORD into this wilderness, that we and our cattle should die there?
And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink.
And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon their faces: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto them.
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying,
Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.
And Moses took the rod from before the LORD, as he commanded him.
And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.
Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed them altogether.
And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which the LORD hath put in my mouth?
And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not see them all: and curse me them from thence.
And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet the LORD yonder.
And the LORD met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balak, and say thus.
And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the LORD spoken?
And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor:
God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock and a ram.
Behold, I have received commandment to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it.
He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the LORD his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them.
God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!
Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the slain.
And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.
But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee, saying, All that the LORD speaketh, that I must do?
And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence.
And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh toward Jeshimon.
And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go: peradventure the LORD will come to meet me: and whatsoever he sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to an high place.
And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.
And the LORD put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.
And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt sacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab.
And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.
How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the LORD hath not defied?
For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.
And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.
And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your land: for the LORD refuseth to give me leave to go with you.
And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuseth to come with us.
And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they.
And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do less or more.
Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what the LORD will say unto me more.
And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.
And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.
And God's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the LORD stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.
And the ass saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into the way.
But the angel of the LORD stood in a path of the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.
And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall: and he smote her again.
And the angel of the LORD went further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
And when the ass saw the angel of the LORD, she fell down under Balaam: and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a staff.
And the LORD opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?
And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I kill thee.
And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many: and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.
And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.
Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face.
And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand thee, because thy way is perverse before me:
And the ass saw me, and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me, surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.
And Balaam said unto the angel of the LORD, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back again.
And the angel of the LORD said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in the utmost coast.
And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour?
And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.
And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.
And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time.
And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see the utmost part of the people.
And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spake unto him the words of Balak.
And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again, as the LORD shall speak unto me: and the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.
And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?
And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.
But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed you still: so I delivered you out of his hand.
And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.
And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.
Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD.
And if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the LORD.
And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the LORD, to serve other gods;
For the LORD our God, he it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all the people through whom we passed:
And the LORD drave out from before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land: therefore will we also serve the LORD; for he is our God.
And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the LORD: for he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins.
And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods.
If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the LORD.
And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve him. And they said, We are witnesses.
Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD God of Israel.
And the people said unto Joshua, The LORD our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey.
So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the sanctuary of the LORD.
And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny your God.
So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.
And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old.
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill of Gaash.
And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel.
And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.
And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim.
And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.
And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea.
And when they cried unto the LORD, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season.
And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from before you.
Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:
And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.
And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.
And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days:
Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler.
But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:
For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:
And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The three baskets are three days:
Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.
And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand:
But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.
And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward.
And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.
And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they were sad.
And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?
And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.
And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;
Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;
Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.
And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.
But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.
Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,
And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,
And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.
And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,
Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.
All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.
And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,
And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,
Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathrimmon with her suburbs; four cities.
And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.
All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained.
And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,
Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim with her suburbs; four cities.
And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD, these cities and their suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,
Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.
All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,
Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,
Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in all.
And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.
So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.
All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.
These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were all these cities.
And the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.
And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand.
There failed not ought of any good thing which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.
And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.
And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.
And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,
Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.
And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.
And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.
And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,
And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.
And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,
Thus saith the whole congregation of the LORD, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the LORD?
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the LORD,
But that ye must turn away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.
Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the LORD, wherein the LORD'S tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the LORD our God.
And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:
Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel,
The LORD God of gods, the LORD God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the LORD, (save us not this day,)
That we have built us an altar to turn from following the LORD, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the LORD himself require it;
And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye to do with the LORD God of Israel?
For the LORD hath made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no part in the LORD: so shall your children make our children cease from fearing the LORD.
Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice:
But that it may be a witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the service of the LORD before him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the LORD.
Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again, Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made, not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness between us and you.
God forbid that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn this day from following the LORD, to build an altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the LORD our God that is before his tabernacle.
Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the LORD your God.
And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we perceive that the LORD is among us, because ye have not committed this trespass against the LORD: now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD.
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.
And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt.
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the LORD is God.
And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan.
But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.
So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents.
Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,
And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.
And it came to pass a long time after that the LORD had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old and stricken in age.
One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the LORD your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.
Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD your God.
Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you:
Know for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof.
Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so shall the LORD bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you.
When ye have transgressed the covenant of the LORD your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the LORD be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath given unto you.
And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said unto them, I am old and stricken in age:
And ye have seen all that the LORD your God hath done unto all these nations because of you; for the LORD your God is he that hath fought for you.
Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.
And the LORD your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the LORD your God hath promised unto you.
Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left;
That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves unto them:
But cleave unto the LORD your God, as ye have done unto this day.
For the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto this day.
These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.
And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.
And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.
And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.
And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.
And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibrothhattaavah.
And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.
And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.
And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez.
And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of the LORD: and these are their journeys according to their goings out.
And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah.
And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.
And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.
And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.
And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.
And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.
And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.
And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.
And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.
And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.
And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians.
And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.
And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan.
And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad.
And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.
And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.
And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber.
And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh.
And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.
And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth month.
And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he died in mount Hor.
For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the LORD had smitten among them: upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments.
And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.
And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.
And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.
And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.
And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the border of Moab.
And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad.
And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim.
And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.
And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto Abelshittim in the plains of Moab.
And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth.
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places:
And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein: for I have given you the land to possess it.
And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.
But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.
Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I thought to do unto them.
And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.
And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth, which is before Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol.
And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.
And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they pitched there.
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.
This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.
He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.
And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!
And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.
And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.
And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.
And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.
And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.
And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.
Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.
And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
And she called the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?
Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.
And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.
And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.
And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.
And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee.
But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.
And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.